


THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF TITVS LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the said Booke.
THe comming of Aeneas into Italic, and his acts there; the reigne of Alcanius in Alba: of Silvius Aeneas, and so forth of other Sylvij, kings thereof, are contained in the first booke. The daughter of Numitor with child by Ma^s. Romulus and Remus are borne.Romulus. ^^ Amulius killed. The cittie of Rome built by Romulus. The Senat by him chosen. He made wore with the Sabines. He presented unto Iupiter Feretrius the ro^al spoiles of their king, whom he slew with his own hands. He divided the people into Centuries, vanquished the Fidenates and Veientians,Numa Pompilius. 2. and was cannonifed a god. Numa Pompilius taught the rites and ceremonies of sacrifice and divine service, erected a temple to L^nus, and was the first that shut the doves thereof, after he had made peace with all the nations thereabout: and faining that hee had secret companie and conference by night with the goddesse Aegeria,Tullus Hostilius. 3. won the ^tout and fierce hearts of the people to religion. Tullus Hostilius warred upon the Albanes, whereupon ensued the combat of the three brethren, twins on both sides. Horatius was acquit for killing his sister. The execution of Metius Suffetius. Albarased and destroied. The Albanes made free deni^ens of Rome, and there dwelt. War denounced against the Sabines.Ancus Martius. 4. Finally, Tullus was consumed with lightening. Ancus Martius renued the ceremonies by Numa first ordained. Vnto the Latines being conquered and made citizens of Rome, he assigned the mount Aventine to inhabite. He won againe by force, a towne of the Latines called Politorium, which the old Latines had surprised and possessed themselues of, and utterly destroied it. He made the Sublician or wooden bridge over Tybris, and adioined to the cittie the hill Ianiculum. He enlarged the bounds of the Empire, built ^tia, and reigned three and thirtie yeares. In the time of his reigne, Luci^no the sonne of Demaratus a Corinthian, removed from Tarquins, a cittie of Tuscane, and came to Rome:Tarquinius Pri^cus. 5. and there entring into mitie with Ancus, began to beare the name of Tarquinius, and so to be called: and after the death of Ancus to^ke the kingdome upon him. He ^ncreased the number of the Senator, by one hundred, subdued the Latines, appointed the Circus or Theatre, set forth the publicke games and plates: and being warred upon by the Sabines, he augmented the centuries of the horsemen. And for to make proofe and triall of Accius Nauius the Augur his cunning, be demanded of him, as they say, whether that which he conceived in his mind, were possible to be effected: and when he made answere that it was, he commanded him to cut a whetstone in two with a rasour, which out of hand was by Accius done. Moreover, he wan the field of the Sabines, and deffeited them, ^lled the cittie about, made the vaulted sinkes: and when he had raigned eight and thirtie yeares, was murdered by the sonnes of Ancus. There succeeded after him Seruius Tullius,Seruius Tullius. 6. the sonne of a captive, a noble lady of Corniculum, who being a child, and lying swadled in the cradle, had a flame of fire (as thereport goeth) burning about his head. He discomfited the Veientes and Tuscanes in battell: He was the first that numbred the people of Rome, valued their goods, and instituted the Lustrum every five years, in which were reported to have been numbered eightie thousand citizens. Hee described the Classes and Centuries: set out further the bounds of the Pomaerie, without and within the cittie wals: and put to the cittie, the hils Quirinalis, Viminalis, and Esquilinus. He together with the Latines, founded the temple of Diana in mount Aventine, and when hee had reigned foure and thirtie yeares, hee was with the privitie and by the counsell of his daughter Tullia,Tarquinius Superbus. 7; murdered by L.T. Tarquinius, the sonne of Priscus. After him L. Tarquinius Superbus usurped the kingdome, without the election, either of the Senators or the people. On which day Tullia (most wicked and cu^sed wretch that sore w^s) caused her coach to bee driven over the corps of her father, lying dead on the ground. Hee had about him a troupe of armed men for the guard of his person. By a subtile wile he put to death Turnus Herdonius. He had warre with the Volscians, and of their spoiles edisied a temple to Iupiter, on the hill Capitol, where the god Terminus and goddesse Iuventas, agreed not to be displaced, whose alters could not be stirred nor remooved, as the others. By the fraudulent practice of his son Sex. Tarquinius, he brought the Gabians to his obeysance. Vnto his other two sonnes, being gone to Delphi, and consulting there the Oracle, whether of them should be king of Rome, answere was made, That be should reigne who first kissed his mother: which answer they enterpreting wrong, Iunius Brutus, who accompanied therin

(...) caught a fall, and kissed the ground, the mother indeed of all: which proved true on  (...) but in the end. For when as Tarqumius Superbas by his prowd tyrannicall demeanure, had incured the (...) he at last upon the f^cible outrage and villanie done by Sex. Tarquinius (his sonne) in the night (...) who sending for her father Tricipitinus, and her husband Collatinus, besought them (...) to see her death unrevenged and (...) with a knife killed herselfe: he I say, by the meanes of Brutus, especially was (...) out of Rome, when he had raigned five and twentie years. Then were the Consuls first created, Lu(...) (...) and Lu, Tarquinius Collatinus.

WHether in writing the acts and affairs of the people of Rome,(...) from the first foundation of the citie, I shall performe a worke of importance and woorth my trauaile, neither wote I well, nor if I wist, dare I advouch: seeing it  is a thing both old and usuall; that new Writers alwaies persuade themselues, either in matter to deliver more truth and certaintie, or in manner of curious penning thereof, to outgoe the rudenesse of elder time. Howsoever it fall out, this yet will doe me good, that even I also, to the u^most of my power, have endevoured to eternise the worthie deeds of that people which is the soveraigne of the whole world. And if among so manie writers, my same chance to be obscure, yet may I comforemy selfe in this, That they who shall darken and shadow the same, are men so highly repu^ed  and renowned. Besides, the thing it selfe is of infinite toile and labour, as counting and comprising from above 700 yeares past, and which arising from small beginning hath proceeded and growne so great, as now the bignesse thereof is comberous to itselfe: and I doubt not, but the readers for the most part will take but small delight and pleasure, either in those (...) fetched originals, or in the times next ensuing, for hast they make to these nouelties of ^atter daies, where in the puissance of that so mightie people hath wrought long since their owne downefall and ouerthrow. But I contrariwise will seeke even this for guerdon of my paines, namely, to turne away from beholding these calamities, which this our age for manie yeare, hath see^e, so long at least: whilest I call to remembrance, and wholly employ my spirits in considering those ancient monuments of old time, exempt from care and trouble, which were able, if not to withdraw my mind as I write, from the truth, yet to make it pensive and heavie. As for such things as are reported, either before, or at the foundation of the citie, more beautified and set out with Poets fables, than grounded vpon pure and faithfull records, ^meane neither to averre nor disprove. This leave and priviledge hath antiquitie, by interla^ing the acts of gods and men together, to make the first rising of cities more sacred and venerable. And if it may be lawful for anie people under heaven to consecrate and ascribe vnto the gods their Original: certes, such is the renowned martiall prowes of the Romans, that all nations of the world may as well abide them to report Mars above the rest, to be the stockefather both of themselves and of their first founder, as they can bee content to liue in subiection vnder them. But these and such like matters, howsoeuer they shall hereafter be censured or esteemed, I will not greatly weigh and regard. This would I haue everie man rather to thinke upon in good earnest, and consider with me what their life, and what their carriage was, by what men and meanes both in war and peace, their dominion was atcheeved and enlarged. Afterwards, as their discipline began by little and little to shrinke, let him marke how at the very first their behaviour and manners sunke withall: and how still they fell more and more to decay and ruine, ye^ and began soone after to tumble downe right even untill these our daies, wherein wee can neither endure our owne sores, nor salves for the cure. For this is it that is so good and profitable in an historie, when a man may see and behold as in a conspicuous monument and light(...) memoriall, the lively examples of all sorts, set up in open view for his instruction, whereout he may chuse for himselfe and his countrey what to follow, as also learne, how to eschew a  soule enterprise, and avoid a shamefull end. But unlesse I be deceived with the affectionate loue of mine owne commensed worke, never was there Commonweale, either more mightie, more holie, and devout, better stored of good precedents, or into which covetousnesse and excesse more lately crept, or wherein povertie and frugalitie, were so greatly or so long time honored, insomuch, as the more they wanted, the lesse they desired. Now of late daies wealth hath

 brought in avarice, abundant pleasures haue kindled a desire by riot, lust, and loose life to perish and bring all to naught. But these complaints, which will be nothing pleasant, no not when perhaps they shall be needfull, banish we must (howsoeuer we doe) at our first entrance of so weightie a matter: when as we rather should begin (if as the Poets use, it were our manner also) with good osses and luckie forespeakings, with vowes and praiers to gods and goddesses, to vouchsafe their furtherance and happie successe to the enterprise of so great a worke.
FIrst of all, this is generally held for certaine, That the Greekes, after the winning of Troy, delt cruelly with all the Trojans, save only Aeneas and Antenor: to whome, as well in regard of the bond of mutuall  entertainement, as also for that they ever persuaded peace and the rendring againe of Helene, they wholly forbare to shew any rigor at all, as by martiall right of warre they might have done. And how Antenor afterwards, accompanied with a number of Henetians, who driven by ciuile discord out of Paphlagonia, and having lost at Troy their king Pylemenes, were to seeke both a resting place, and a captaine to conduct them, arrived through many adventures and accidents of fortune, in the inmost gulfe of the Adriatick sea: and after they had expelled the Euganians that inhabited betweene the sea and the Alpes,Venetians at this day, descended from Heneti^ a people of Paphlagoni^, and the Trojanes, un ^en the conduct of Antenor. those Henetians together with the Trojanes, kept those parts and there remained. The place where first they landed, hight Troy, whereof the territorie and  signorie thereabout was also named Troy, and the whole people in generall called Henetians. Moreover, how Aeneas upon like misfortune, having fled his countrey, yet aspiring by the fatall direction of the destinies to greater affaires, came first into Macedonie: and after into Sicilie, seeking an abiding place: and sailing with a fleet from Sicilie, arrived at length, and landed in the countrey of Laurentum:Aeneas and the Trojanes arrive in Italie. which place likewise was cleaped Troy. Where the Trojans being set a shore, having after their long wandring, nothing in a maner left them but ships and armor, as they forraied and drave booties out of the countrey,King Latinus. King Latinus with the Aborigines, who at that time inhabited those parts, ran forth in warlike manner out of towne and country, to withstand the violent invasion of these strangers. But what besell thereupon, is two manner of waies reported. Some say, that Latinus being in a battell vanquished, first made peace with Aeneas,  and after that allied himselfe to him by marriage. Others affirme, that as both armies stood ranged in bartell aray, before the trumpets sounded the battell, Latinus came forth into the vaward, and called out the generall of the strangers to parle: demanding who they were, from whence they came, by what chance they departed from their owne home, and to what end they entred the Laurentine borders? After that he heard the companie were Trojans, the Captaine Aeneas, sonne of Venus and Anchises, and that upon the burning of their cittie, they having forgone their countrey, sought some place to abide and build them a cittie in: wondred much, not onely at the noblenesse of the people and their leader, but also at their couragious hearts, resolved either for war or peace: whereupon, by giuing his right hand, he plight his troth, and faithfully promised them friendship and amitie. So the two generals made a league, and each  host saluted other.Aeneas esposeth Lavinia. And Aeneas was by Latinus entertained and lodged in the court. Where Latinus solemnly in presence of his familiar houshold gods, by giving his daughter in marriage to Aeneas, joined private alliance to the former publicke confederacie. Which thing truly put the Trojanes in good hope and full assurance, to end one day their wandring and flitting to and fro,Lavinium built and to settle themselves in one certaine place of abode. Hereupon, a towne they built, which Aeneas of his wives name called Lavinium. Within a while, by this new marriage, he had issue a sonne:Afeanius borne whom the parents named Ascanius. But after all this, were both Trojanes and Aborigenes warred upon.Turra.s For Turnus king of the Rutilians, unto whom Lauinia before Aeneas his comming, had beene espoused, taking it to heart that a stranger was preferred before him, made warre both upon Aeneas and Latinus: but neither armie departed from the battell  with joy and well apaied. For the Rutilians were vanquished: the Aborigines and Trojanes wan indeed the field,Latinus slaine but lost their Captaine Latinus. Then Turnus and the Rutilians mistrusting their owne strength,Mezentjus fled for succour to the puissant and mightie Tuscanes, and to their king *Mezentius, who keeping his roiall court at Cere, a towne in those daies of great wealth, not well pleased even from the first beginning, with the foundation of a new cittie, and supposing the Trojans power was alreadie much more encreased, than might well stand with the safetie of

the borderers, joined full willingly his forces with the Rutilians. Aeneas to win the hearts of the  Aborigines against so dreadfull and dangerous warre, to the end, they all should not onely live under one governement,The Latines. but also be all of one name, called both nations Latines. And from that time forth were the Aborigines nothing inferiour to the Trojanes in love and loialtie towards their prince Aeneas. Aeneas also trusting confidently in the valiant and faithfull hearts of these two States, growing vp dailie more and more in mutuall amitie, albeit Hetru^ia was so mightie, that the name thereof was renowned not onely throughout the inland parts, but the sea coasts also, even from one end of Italie to the other, from the Alpes to the narrow seas of Sicilie; yet whereas he might well have resisted the force of his enemies, and maintained a defensive war within his wals, he brought his armie forth into the open field. This was the second battell that the Latines fought, and the last deed that ever. Aeneas whilest he was man, atchieved. And howsoever by right he ought to be named,The death and sepulture of Acneas. he lieth interred upon the river Numicius, and Iupeter Indiges men him call. Now was not Ascanius, Aeneas his sonne, ripe as yet for age to sway the scepter.Iupiter Iudiges. Howbeit the roiall crowne remained whole and safe for him, untill he became to fourteene yeares of age. So long continued the state of the Latines, and the kingdome by grandsire and father descended, unto the childs behoofe, under the governement onely of a woman, as protectresse:The wife governmenent Lavinia, Queene Mother. of so vertuous disposition and princely carriage was Dame Lavinia. Doubtfull much I stand (for who can certainly avouch a thing so long agoe?) whether this were that Ascanius, or one elder than he, who had to his mother Creusa, whilst Ilium flourished, and who fled with this father from thence,Tulus or Aseanius. and from whom being named also Iulus, the house and familie of the Iulij doe fetch their name and pedigree.The familie of the Iulij. That same Ascanius wheresoever or of whomsoever  he was borned (but Aeneas his sonne of a truth he was) when Lavinium grew exceeding populous, left that cittie now flourishing and wealthie (as the world went then) unto his mother or stepmother, I wot not whether. Hee himselfe built another out of the ground under the mountaine Alba,Long Alba (...) A^canius The kingdome of Alba. which of the scituation thereof, stretching out in length on the side of the hill, was named Long Alba. Betweene the building of Lavinium and Long Alba, which became an under-towne or Colonie drawne out of the other, and peopled from thence, were almost thirtie yeares. But so mightie grew they, especially after the discom^ture of the Tuscanes, that neither upon the death of Aeneas, nor during the time of a womans governement, nor all the while that the young prince learned to bee a king, durst either Mezentius or the Tuscanes, or anie other of the borderers, once stirre or rise in armes. But peace was concluded upon these tearms, That the river Albula,Albula or Tybris. which now they call Tyberis, should divide the Tuscanes from the Latines, and limit to either of them their owne bounds. After this raigned Silvius, the sonne of Ascanrus, born by chance within the forrests: who begat Aeneas Silvius, and he had issue Latinus Silvias,Latinus Silvius. by whom were certaine Colonies or pettie townships erected, and the inhabitants named Prisei Latini. And from thenceforth all the kings of Alba continued the s^irname of Sylvius. This Latinus begat Alba, of Alba came At^s, A^s begat Capis, and of Capis descended Capetus; whose sonne Tyberinus in ferrying over the river A^bula,Tiberinus. was drowned, and by his name renowned that river unto al posteritic. Next to him raigned Agrippa his sonne, and after him succeeded Romulus Sylvius in his fathers kingdome, who being strucken dead with a thunderbolt, left the crowne to Aventinus.Aventinus. This Aventinus was buried in that hill, which now is part of the  cittie of Rome,Procas. and breareth his name. The raigned Procas, who had two sonnes, Numitor and Amulius.Numitor and Amulius. And unto Numitor, because hee was the elder, he bequeathed by his last will and testament the auncient kingdome of the Sylvians line. Howbeit, might preuailed more than either the will of the father, or the reverent regard of elder brother. For Arnulius hauing driven out Numiter, raigneth himselfe: and not herewith content, heapeth one mischeese upon another. For first he murdered the issue male of his brother:Rhea Sylvia. then by making Rhea Sylvia his brothers daughter, a vestall Nun, and that under colour of honour and dignitie, by perpetuall vowed virginitie, he berest her of all hope of childbearing. But it was a fatal thing, and (as I thinke) which God would have, that so great a cittie should be built for to yeeld the ground and beginning of that Empire,Romulus and Remus borne. which next under the gods is most mightie. For behold, the Vestall virgin was by  force defloured, and after delivered of two twins: and were it that shee thought so in very deed, or because the name and credite of a god might carrie away and cloke the fault more cleanely, shee fathered her bastard children vpon Mars. But neither god nor man was able to save her selfe or her children from the kings crueltie. For the Votarie was committed to close prison, and there kept bound in yrons: as for the babes he commanded they should bee cast into the

 stream of the river.Romulus and (...) (...) But (as God would) by good hap the Tyber ouerflowed the banckes, and the standing waters on either side was nothing rough, yet so as there was no comming to the deepe current or channell of the very river: and they that brought the infants, hoped well they might be drowned in anie place of the water, were it neuer so full and low. So to fulfill after a sort, the kings commandement, they laid the children in the next plash they came to: even where as now standeth the figtree Ruminalis, called as they say, Romularis: but all that ground then was nothing but wast desarts, and a very wildernesse. The report yet goeth, that when the ebbe and shalow water was gone, and had left on drie ground the floting trough or vessel, wherin the babes were put forth, a shee Wolfe from out of the mountaines thereby, being a thirst, turned towards the children crie, and with their pendant teates so gently gaue the infants sucke,  that Faustulus the head Reeue and overseer of the kings cattell,Faustulus. found her licking them with her tongue: who brought them to his homestall,Laurentia. and gaue them to his wife Laurentia to be fostered. There be that thinke, that Laurentia being a common strumpet among these heardmen and sheepeheards, was vsually called Lupa. Whereupon arose the occasion of this strange tale and wondrous miracle. Well, so were they borne, and so brought vp. And as soone as they grew once to some bignesse, it was no boot to keepe them within dores, nor to set them idlie to tend the cattell, for they would use to hunt abroad in the forrest: whereby having gotten strength of bodie and courage withall, they were able now, not onely to withstand the violence of wild beasts, and to kill them, but also to set upon common robbers by the high waies side, laden as they were with booties, and to spoile them thereof, yea and diuide the prey among the sheepeheards:  and as the number of yonkers dailie encreased, with them to keepe hollidaies, to make merrie, and follow their disports. And even in those daies (as men say) was the feastivall pastime Lupercal,Lupercal. used in mount Palatine, which of Palanteum, a cittie in Arcadia, was first called Palantium,Evander. and after Palatine, wherein Evander, who descended from the Arcadians, long before raigned in that country, and ordained a solemne game and recreation, yearely to be held,Pan Lycaeus or Inuus. as aforetime in Arcadia, in this manner: that young men in the honour of Pan Lycaeus, whom the Romans after called Inuus, should loosely and wantonly run naked. Now whilest they were busily occupied in this kind of sport, which by vow yearely they performed; there lay in ambush the robbers aforesaid, in reuenge and for anger of the prizes which they had lost: Where Romulus manfully quit himselfe,Remus taken prisoner. but Remus they tooke prisoner: and being thus taken,  they brought him before king Amulius, accusing him greevously, and laying especially to his charge, that he with others invaded and made rodes into Numitor his land, and with a power of Iustie youths, assembled in warlike sort, had forraied and spoiled the same. Thus was Remus delivered unto Numitor to bee put to death. Now had Faustulus even since the first day concieved some hope, that there were in his house softer children of roiall blood: For well hee wist, that both by the kings commandement the babes were cast forth to perish, and also that the time when hee tooke them up, fell out fitly thereunto: marie this would hee in no wise should bee knowne in hast, and before due time; unlesse it were either upon good occasion or great necessitie. Necessitie happened first: and so for very feare hee was driven to reveale the whole matter to Romulus. It happened also, that Numitor himselfe, having Remus in durance, and hearing they  were brethren twins, by comparing their age, and avising withall their very countenance and towardnesse, proceeding from no servile and base parentage, bethought himselfe of his sisters children: and by farther enquirie and computation, came so farre, as hee seemed welneere to acknowledge Remus for his nephew. Thus on all hands were meanes wrought to circumvent and surprise king Amulius. For Romulus on the one side not accompanied with a troope of tall fellowes, for he was not able in open fight to make his part good: but giving the heardmen his supposts, in charge to come at a time appointed, some one way, and some another, to the kings pallace, hee set upon the king. On the other side, Remus with another crue from Numitor his house,Amulius the userpet slaiae, came to second him: and so they slew the king. Numitor at the first uprore giving out eftsoones, that the enemies had entred the cittie, and assailed the kings pallace, and thereupon  having called the youth of Alba into the Citadell, to keepe it by force with a good guard, and espying the two young men after the murther done, comming towards him with ioy: forthwith assembled the people together, and declared openly before them all, the wicked dealings of his brother against him, the parentage of his nephews, the manner of their birth and bringing vp, and how they came to be knowne: after that, hee reported the murther of the Tyrant, and tooke it vpon himselfe as the authour thereof. The two young men passing with their

companies through the middest of the people,(...) of ^. saluted their grandsire king, whereat the whole  multitude also with one accord and voice ratified the same: so was his roiall name and estate by them established. Thus was the whole regiment or kingdome of the Albanes committed to Numitor. Then Romulus and Remus had a great desire to found themselues a cittie in the verie place where they had beene cast forth and fostered.(...) Now were there of Albanes and Latines both, very manie that might be spared; besides, a number also of heardmen: who, all set together, put them in good hope, that Alba and Lavinium too, would bee but small Citties in comparison of what which now was a building. Whilest they were devising of these things, an old canker came betweene to marre all,(...)betweene (...) even desire of rule and soveraigntie, the same which had troubled their grandsires before them: and thereupon a soule fray, which arose from a smal and slight occasion. For as much as they were both twins at one birth, and the respect of their age  might yeeld no choice and difference, it was thought good and agreed upon, that the gods, who had the tuition of those places, should by Augurie or slight of birds, declare and shew whether of the twaine should both name the citie, and also rule the same. Romulus chose the mount Palatine, and Remus the Aventine, for their temples or religious quarters, to marke the birdsight, and each one apart to receive their Augurie. First (as they say) had Remus appearing in slight sixe vultures or gripes:(...) and as tidings came unto him of this Augurie, it happened that the number unto Romulus was presented double: whereupon they were both of them by their supposts and favourites saluted kings. The one side tooke the vantage of the time: the other of the number, for the prerogative of the kingdome. Thus they fell to hot words first, and from chollerike words to blowes and bloodshead: in which sturre and preasse of the people, Remus was wounded and slaine in the place.(...) The more common report goeth, that Remus inscorne of his brother, leapt ouer the new wals: wherevpon Romulus in great choler slue his brother with his owne hands, and in menasing wife, added these words withal, So perish he, what ever else he be,^ (...) king of Rome. that shal once dare to leape over my wals. Thus Romulus alone became king, and the Cittie new built, of the founders name was called Rome. Wherein first hee fortified mount Palatine, in which he was himselfe reared. To all the rest of the gods he sacrificed after the rule and custome of the Albanes: onely to Hercules after the manner of the Greekes, according to the first institution of Evander.The (...) For the same goeth, that Hercules vpon a time, after hee had slaine Geryon, drave that way exceeding faire Oxen, and neere the riuer Tybris, where hee had swum ouer with his drove asore him, laid him downe in a faire greene meddow, as well to refresh  himselfe, being wearie of his way, as also to rest and bait his cattell in so plentifull grasse and forage. There, falleth he into a sound sleepe, as having well charged himselfe with wine and viands, and one Cacus a sheepeheard dwelling thereby, a man right fierce, and bearing him prowdly of his strength, being greatly in love with the fairenesse of the beasts, had a good will, and minded to fetch away that bootie: but for that if hee had driven the beasts into his owne cave, the verie trackes would have led the owner of them thither, hee drew the goodliest and biggest of them backeward by their tailes into his hole. Herculs earely in the morning when he awoke, and beheld his droue, and missed some of his count, went on toward the next cave, if haplie their footing would traine him thither: But seeing all traces from wards, and leading no other way; as one troubled in spirit, and doubtfull what to doe, he began to drive farther out of  that theevish and dangerous corner. But as some of the Oxen in driving, missed their fellowes behind, and honing after them, bellowed as their nature is: Herculs chanced to heare them loow again, and answere from out of the cave wherein they had been bestowed: whereat he turned backe, and made in hast thither. But as Cacus forciblie made head against him, and would have kept him from entrance, Hercules smote him with his club: and for all his calling upon other heardmen for helpe,Evander the in^enter of (...) letters. slew him outright. At the same time Evander, who fled out of Peloponnesus, governed that Countrey, rather by a kind of countenance and authoritie, than by force and lordly command. A man much honoured for his wonderfull invention of letters, a strange and rare thing among those rude and vnlearned sort: but more honoured for the opinion that the people had of his mother Carmenta,Carmenta mother of Evander. reputed to bee a goddesse, whom for her spirit  of prophesie, those countries, before that Sibylla came into Italie, had in great revence and admiration. This Evander being raised with the concurse of the sheepheards, affrighted about the stranger, guiltie of manifest murther, and hearing of the fact committed, and the occasion thereof: avising well there with the person of the man, his feiture and favour, more stately a good deale, and carrying a greater majestie than the ordinarie proportion of men; demandeth

 of him who he was. And as soone as he understood his name, his father, and native countrey: O Hercules (quoth he) the soone of Iupiter, All haile: my mother a most true prophetesse hath foreshewed vnto me, that thou shalt encrease the number of heavenly wights, and that in this place an altar shall be reared and dedicated vnto thee, which the most mightie and richest nation one day of the world,Ara maxima dedicated to Hercules. shall name Maxima, and honour according to the ceremonies by thee ordained. In a good houre be it spoken (quoth Hercules) and the osle I gladly accept; and so giving him his hand, faithfully promised to accomplish the will of the gods, and erected streitwaies and consecrated an altar in the place. There and then first, hee sacrificed one of the fairest Oxen, chosen out of the whole drove, calling to the ministerie of that divine service and feast, the Potitij and P^narij,Potitij and Pinary. two most noble houses at that time in those parts. It happened so, by  chance, that the Potitij were readie at hand in due time, and the inwards or intrals were set before them: which being eaten, the Pinarij came to the good cheere behind: whereupon the custome held, that so long as the familie of the Pinarij continued, they might not feed of the sacred inwards. But the Potitij, instructed by Evander, became the priests of that holie sacrifice manie ages after: untill the solemne service and ministerie of this familie was put ouer to publicke servants, and the whole stocke of the Potity utterly worne out and dead. These were the onely forraine sacrifices of all other,Romulus maketh lawes. that Romulus received and admitted, being even then a furtherer and maintainer of immortalitie, by his owne prowesse atcheeued, and whereunto his fortune conducted him. Having in this manner religiously performed and established the service of the gods, hee assembled the multitude to an audience and for that they could by no  meanes but by lawes, bee united together into one bodie and societie of a people, he derised Statutes, and ministred justice unto them. And supposing that those laws would be accounted sacred and inviolable of the wild and rusticall sort of men, in case he shewed himselfe by some regall ensignes venerable:Roiall robes, Iictours. he carried with him a greater port and majestie, not onely in his robes and princely habite, but most of all in the attendance of twelve officers or sergeants, called Lictores, whom he caused to goe ordinarily before his person. Some thinke he chose this number according to the birds, which by Augurie did foreshew and prognosticate his raigne: I rather am of their opinion, who thinke that Sergeants at armes, and this kind of officers came from the Tuscanes their neighbours,Chaire of estate, called Sella curulis. from whence also theyvorie chaire of estate, called Sella curulis, and the royall purple robe embrodered, named Toga pr^texia, was fetched, as also the  very number of sergeants or Lictours.The purple role called Toga pr^texia For that the Tuscanes had this manner, when they chose their king by the common voices of their twelve principall States, each one found a sergeant. All this while grew the cittie more and more to bee fortified with ramparts and bulwarkes, as men still built in sundrie places where they liked best, seeming thereby to provide rather for a future multitude in time to come, than for the present number wherewith it was then peopled. Furthermore, least that the cittie so large in compasse, should stand void and vacant, Romulus for to encrease the number of inhabitants (according to the old practice of the founders of citties, who by gathering about them the base multitude and obscure, feined that they were an ofspring borne out of the earth) set vp a sanctuarie or lawlesse church,The Asylum first erected. called Asylum, in that place which at this day betweene the two groves, is enclosed and fenced round about with thicke briers  and brambles. Thither resorted (as to a place of refuge) out of the neighbor countries, a rable and confused medley of all sorts, tag and rag, bond and free, one with another; folke desirous of change and noveltie.
So began first the citie according to the plot of large buildings,The institution of a Senate. to be wel peopled and grow mightie. Thus being provided of power sufficient: he thought then upon a counsaile and policie to his power. And so created a hundred Senatours: either because that number seemed great ynough, or for that there were no more but one hundred that were of worth to bee elected counsellor or (wife) fathers. These men certainely for honour and dignitie, were called Patres or Sage fathers:Patris. Patri^^. and their lineall descent Patr^ij or nobles. Now by this time was the State of Rome so mightie and puissant, that it was able in fight to match any cittie neere ad^oining  whatsoeuer. But for default of womankind, this puissance was to indure but the age of one man: for neither had they hope of issue among themselues at home, nor yet made marriages with their neighbours abroad. Whereupon Romulus by the advise of his Senatours; sent Embassadours to the countries there about, to treat for societie and alliance for his new people, by way of marriage.The Embassage of Romulus, treating for marriage.
Alledging that citties also, as well as other things, arose of base beginnings, and in processe of time by their owne prowsse, and helpe of God with all, grow to great power

and reputation: whereas therefore they were full well assured, that as the gods were gracious to  their first uprising, so their own vertue and valor should not be wanting: their neighbors ought not, in regard of common humanitie, and as they were men, thinke much and disdaine to ioine in blood and kindred with them, being also men as well as they. Howbeit, this embassage in no place had gentle audience and courteous entertainment. For they all in general despised them, and were in eare for themselues and their posteritie, by reason of so mightie a state, encreasing in the middest of them, and under their very noses. And from the most of them the Embassadors were dismissed and sent away, with this frumpe and demand, Whether they had set up a sanctuarie or lawlesse place for women to? For that were alone, and a fit marriage indeed to sort together. This tooke the youth of Rome in great displeasure, and doubtlesse the quarrell grew like to be tried by knockes. But Romulus dissimuling his inward heart-burning, to  the end he might find time and place meet for the purpose, prepareth to set forth certaine solemne plaies and games,The games Consualia. which he nameth Consualia, to the honor of Neptune Equestris. Hereupon he commanded to proclaim these games al over the country adjoining; and with as great preparation and furniture, as in those daies either their skill or abilitie might afford, they celebrate the same, and all to make the shew more goodly, and worthie so great expectation. Thither resorted manie a one, desirous also to see this new cittie, but their next neighbours especially of Cenina, Crustuminum, and Antemnae: The whole multitude of Sabines likewise came with their wives and children. Who being friendly invited to their houses, from one to another, and courteously entertained: when they beheld the scituation of the cittie, the strong wals and saire buildings, so thicke standing, wondred how in so short a space the cittie of  Rome was growned so great. Now when the time of this solemne sight was come, and that their minds were busied, and their eies bent thereon: then at once, as it was agreed before, there arose an uprore.The Sabine maldens ravished. And the youth of Rome upon a token and watch-word giuen, fell on every side to carrie away the Sabine maidens. A great many of them were ravished by hap hazard, as they did light upon them, and as they came next to their hands. Othersome more beautifull than the rest, were appointed for the cheese of the Senatours, and by certaine of the commons, as they had given them in charge, conveied home to their houses. But one passing faire and lovely above all others, was harried by the companie or crue of one Talassius (they say) and when as anie asked to whom they carried her, they ever cried out (for feare she should bee forced or defloured) Thalassio, Thalassio, i. Vnto Thalassius.Thalasio. Whereupon Thalassio became a common byword  at wedding ever after. Thus their sport and pastime upon this sturre and fright, was marred, and the parents of the virgines fled away with heavie cheere, blaming them highly, and complaining of their breach of hospitalitie: and calling upon the god for vengeance, to whose feastivall games they being come, were under colour of religion and truth, beguiled. The damsels likewise that were ravished, conceived neither better hope of themselues, no lesse indignation against them.(...)
But Romulus himselfe in person went from one to another, declaring, That their fathers pride, who denied their neighbours marriage, was the cause of all this: promising neverthelesse that they should bee linked in lawfull wedlocke, made partakers of all woridly goods, obtained the freedome of a citie, and (than which, nothing is more deare to mankind) enioy the blessing of children: exhorting them to appease their anger, and quiet  themselues: and to give them their harts, whose hap it was to have their bodies. For oftentimes vpon wrong and iniurie there growth loue and reconciliation. Alledging moreover, that they should find their spouses so much more louing and kind, as everie one of them for his part would endevour, after they had in their turne and course fulfilled the dutie to them of good husbands, for to make amends, and supplie the misse they haue of father, mother, and native countrey. Their husbands with all used faire speeches and flattering words, excusing the matter, and laying all the weight upon servent affection and pure loue: which kind of persuasion of all other, prevaileth most with womens nature. Thus were the ravished young wines in some sort quieted in mind, and held themselues well contented. But their fathers, then most of all araied in mourning weed, with teares and heauie complaints, stirred vp the Citties where they dwelt: neither contained they their mood within home, but assembled themselues from all parts vnto Tatius the king of the Sabines:(...) king of the Sabines. and to him repaired their Embassages, for that the name of Tatius was highly renowned in those countries. They of Cenina, Crustuminum, and Antemnae, who were partly touched and greeved for that wrong done, thought that Tatius and the Sabines dealt but coldly in the action, and went but slowly about revenge. These three natitons therefore

 banded themselves, and agreed to prepare for warre. But so sharpe set were the Ceninians that the men of Crustuminum and Antemnae, bestirred not themselves quick ynough for them. So they of Cenina entred alone by force of armes the territories of the Romanes. As they wasted and spoiled without order and measure, Romulus met them with an armie, and in one small skirmish made proofe,The Ceninians defeated. how Moode without might is vain and bootlesse.
For he discomsited, put to flight, and pursued in chase their whole host, slew their king in battell, and him despoiled:Their king slain: and having slaine their generall, at the first assault hee won the towne: and after hee had from thence brought backe his armie with conquest and victorie, as a man no lesse desirous to shew his noble acts with glorie, than to atchieve the same by prowesse, he bare afore him on high as a pompeous pageant in a frame fitly for the purpose wrought,Romulus (...) unto Iupiter Feretrius the spoile (...) the King of the Cenitians. the spoile and armour of his enemies  captaine, by himselfe slaine: and so ascended up to the Capitoll hill, where laying them downe at the Oke which the sheepeheards had in great reverence, hee consecrated them as a present to Iupiter: and set out with all, the foundation and bounds of a temple unto him: giving moreover this addition and title to the god, and saying solemnely: O Iupiter Feretrius, I king Romulus upon my victorie, present unto thee this armor of a king, and within this compasse of ground, which even now I haue conceived and assigned, I dedicate a temple, to receive those rich and roiall spoiles, which the posteritie, following mine example, shall beare away from the kings and captaines generall of their enemies, whom they shall happen hereafter to kill. This is the very beginning of that temple, which first of all other was in Rome consecrated. And so it pleased God, that neither the first founders words were spoken in vaine, whereby he foretold  and pronounced, that his posteritie should bring their spoiles thither: nor his glorie made vulgar and common to manie compartenes with him in the like exploit and glorious present. For after him,By Cornel, Cossus, and M. Marcellus. in so many yeres, and after so many wars, two roiall spoiles only were won of the enemies. So rare was the happinesse of honour in that behalfe. Whilest the Romanes were thus emploied about Cenina, the armie of the Antemnates, taking the vantage of the time, and of the Romanes absence from home, and seeing their frontiers without a guard, with a power of armed men entred the confines of Rome. Against whom also the Romane legion made head in all hast, and finding them scattered out of order in the fields, charged upon them. By reason whereof,The Antemnate: overthrown, and their cittie forced at the very first shocke and shout made, discomfited were the enemies and their towne surprised.
As Romulus returned with triumph and joy for these two victories,Hersilia wise to Romulus. his wife Hersilia, at the importunate sute of the wives that had beene ravished, earnestly besought him to pardon their fathers and receive them into his cittie: for so by concord and unitie, the weale publicke, and the good estate of his kingdome might flourish and grow mightie. This sure was gently heard, and soone obtained. After this, he set forth against the Crustuminians that began to warre upon him: with whom hee had the lesse adoe, for that their courages were well abated alreadie by the ouertrowes of others.Colonies of Romanes first planted. To both these places as unto Colonies, were new inhabitants sent. But the greater number were desirous to enter their names, and to plant themselues at Crustuminium, for the fertilitie of the soile. And manie likewise removed from thence to Rome,The Sabines make warre. the parents especially and kinsfolke of the ravished women. Last of all, the Sabines warred farre more sharply and dangerously than the rest: for nothing did they either in furie or  rage, or for covetous desire of spoile. Neither made they talke and shew of war, before they warred indeed and were seene in field. And besides this their considerat policie, they dealt also with craft and subtillie.The castle of Rome betrained to the Sabines. For wheras one Sp. Tarpeius had the charge of the castle in Rome, his daughter a young maiden, Tatius with a summe of money corrupted and procured, at what time as shee went to fetch water without the wals for sacrifice, to receive armed souldiours into the forresse. But so soone as they were let in, they with their armour smothered and killed her: either for that thereby it might bee thought the castle was woon by force: or because they would make her an example to posteritie, that no traitor should ever thinke to escape unpunished. But hereto belongeth a tale, namely, that the Sabines used commonly on their left armes to wear bracelets of Massie and weightie gold, and faire rings besides on their fingers, set with precious stones  of great value: and that she covenanted and agreed with them to have that which they ware on their left hands, whereupon shee had their targets in sheed of those golden ornaments, heaped upon her. Others say, that upon agreement and covenant made to deliver that which was on their left hands, she demanded their armour, and because she seemed to deale, deceitfully, shee was overtaken therwith, and perished by receiving a reward of her owne chusing. However it was, the Sabines were possessed of the castle. From whence the morrow after (when as the Romanes

armie well appointed in battell ray, had taken up and overspread the whole plaine that  lieth from mount Palatine to the hill Capitoll)they would not come downe on even ground before that the Romanes,(...) (...) (...) and Sabines Metivs Curtius. Hostius Hostilius partly netled with anger, and partly pricked with an hot desire to recover the castle againe, began with their great disadvantage to climbe against the hill. Whereupon the captaines on both sides joined battaile: Metius Curtius for the Sabines, Hostius Hostilius for the Romanes: who albeit he was on the lower ground, yet in the forefront most couragiously and stoutly abid the brunt of the conflict. But so soone as hee was stroken downe and slaine, incontinently the Romanes reculed and gave ground: and thus discomfited, fled backeward to the old gate of Palatium.
Romulus himselfe also, borne backe with the presse and throng of those that sled,,The praier of Romulus to Iupiter stator lift up his weapons on high towards heaven, and cried out saying: O Iupiter, I Romulus by thy direction guided and ruled, have here in this mount Palatine laid the foundation  of this cittie: and now alreadie have the Sabines by corruption and trecherie got the citadell and fortresse thereof: from whence they having passed the midst of the vale betweene, make hither in hast with force of armes: but thou O father of gods and men, vouchsafe yet from hence at leastwise to repulse the enemies, deliver the Romans from this so great feare, and stay their shamefull flight. And here to thee O Iupiter Stator I vow a temple, for a memoriall to all posteritie, that by thy present helpe this cittie was saved and preserved. Thus having once praied, as if he had knowne for certaine that his praiers were heard. Even here(quoth he) O yee Romanes, dooth Iupiter Opt. Max. i. the best and greatest of all the gods commands you to stay and begin the battell afresh. Herewith the Romanes, no lesse than if they had been commanded from heaven above, made a stand. And Romulus in person highed him with all speed to the formost  in the vaward.
Now was Metius Curtius, principall leader of the Sabines, run downe from the castle, and had scattered and chased the Romanes backe as farre as the Forum or common place of Rome at this day reacheth in length: and being come within a little of the gate of Palatium, he lift vp his voice and cried alovvd, Vanquisht we haue these faithlesse friends, and hartlesse foes: and now know they well, it is one thing to ravish maidens, and a farre other thing to fight with men. In this sort as he braved it out, Romulus with a troope of lustie young men, made head against him. Metius haplie at that time, fought on horsebacke, whereby he was forced the sooner to recule, and the Romanes made after and pursued him. The other battell of the Romanes in like manner, being much encouraged with the valour of their king, discomfited the Sabines. Metius with his horse under him, affrighted at the noise of them that ran after, lept into  a marish or bog thereby. Which accident, considering the danger of so great a person, made the Sabines to looke backe to him. And hee verily taking heart againe at the calling and encouragement of many his favourites, escaped. But the Romanes and Sabines both, in the middle valley betweene the two hils, renue the battell againe: where the Romanes got the better hand.
Then the Sabine dames, for whose wrongfull usage all this war arose, with their haire hanging loose about their shoulders, and renting their garments, for very greefe and sorrow past all feare, ventured to run amongst the javelins and darts as they flew: and thus hauing thrust themselues violently overthwart betweene them, began to part these bloodie armies, and to end their deadly feaud:The (...) wom^n to their (...) (...) the^^. Beseeching their owne fathers on the one side, and their husbands on the other, that they being fathers and sonnes in law, would not embrew themselues with so unkind and unnaturall  bloudshead, nor as parricides, murder the young ones newly borne, some their graundchildren, and others their owne heirs of their bodie begotten. If ye our fathers, thinke much (say they) of the affinitie betweene our husbands and you: or if yee our husbands are displeased with our mariage, bend all your anger and malice against us: we are the cause of this warre, we are the cause of wounding and killing both husband and father: yet will wee rather die, than liue either orphans without the one, or widowes without the other. This thing mooved as well the multitude of soldiours, as also the captains; and presently of a suddaine all was husht, and the fight ceased. Whereupon, the Generals came foorth to conclude a league. Neither made they peace only, but one citie of two: united their realms, and joined together in the regiment: but the roiall estate they setled in Rome.
The citie thus being made one of twaine, the Romanes for to gratifie the Sabines in some sort,Quirites. were of Cures, a towne of the Sabines, called Quirites. And for a memoriall of that battaile, the very place where Curtius, after he was gotten out of the deepe marish, first set his horsse on firme ground,Curtius Lacus. was named Curtius his lake. This joius peace ensuing presently upon so cruell war, made these women better beloued of their husbands and parents: but especially of Romulus

 himselfe.Curi^ 301 And therefore when hee divided the cittie into thirtie wards or parishes, hee called them by their names. But it is not left in any record (for out of all question the women were farre more in number than so) whether those that should give names unto the wards, were chosen by age, or by their owne dignitie and worthinesse, or their husbands degree and calling, or by casting lots. At the same time were enrolled and ordained three centuries of gentlemen or knights: The Ramnenses were so cleaped of Romulus,Centuries. the Titienses of Titus Tatius; but of the name and first beginning of the Lucerians, the occasion is not certaine. So these two kings not onely raigned together, but also governed with great unitie and concord. But after certaine yeares the kindred of king Tatius chanced to beat and euill intreat the embassadours of Laurentum. And when as the Laurentines pleaded the law of nations, for satisfaction of this outrage; Tatius  his kinsfolke what by favour, and what by intreatie, prevailed more with him than the just complaint of the others. Whereby hee brought vengeance due to them upon his owne head: For being come upon a time to Lavinium, unto a solemne sacrifice and feast, there in an uprore or hurliburly the people ran upon him,Tatius murdered. and so was he slaine. Which thing (they say) Romulus, made lesse regard of than was meet: either for that fellowship in lordship is neuer faithfull, or because he esteemed him not unjustly to be made away. Wherupon he forbare indeed to make warre: yet to the end the wrong done to the Embassadours, together with the murder of the king, might bee expiate and purged cleane away, the league betweene the citties of Rome and Lavinium was renued. But whilest peace verily was beyond mens expectation with them concluded: behold another fresh warre arose, much neerer than the other, and hard almost at their  very gates. For the people of Fidene supposing the Romans power and riches to encrease overmuch so neere unto them: before they should grow to such greatnesse as they were like to doe, began first to warre upon them: and sending a power of lustie tall souldiours, invaded and wasted all the countrey betweene the cittie of Rome and Fidene. And taking their way on the left hand, for that the Tyber kept from the other, they forraied and spoiled as they went, to the great feare of the pezants and countrey people. So as this suddaine tumult and garboile heard out of the fields into the cittie, brought the first newes of the warre. Romulus raised therewith (for so nigh a warre might beare no delay) led forth his armie, and encamped within a mile of Fidene: and leaving there a competent guard, hee departed thence with all his other forces, commanding part of his souldiours to lie close in certaine covert places,A stratage^ of Romulus. among the thickets in ambushment.  Himselfe with the greater number, and all his horse, advanced forward, and riding up and downe before their gates after a disordered and bragging manner, made semblant of a bravado, and all to traine the enemie forth, which was the thing he onely sought. This kind of horse service was a meanes that the Fidenates lesse suspected and marvelled at their flying, which they were to counterfet. For whilest the Cavallirie stood unresolved as it were, in a mammering whither to slie or fight, and the infanterie withall began to retire: all at once the enemies in thrunging manner sallied forth of the gates, and chased the Romanes so fiercely, that in their eager pursute they were drawne to the verie place of ambush. Thence the Romanes suddainely arose, and charged the flocke of the enemies: And to encrease their fright, they likewise that were left behind to guard the campe, shewed themselves with banners displaied.
So the Fidenates terrified  sundrie waies, before well neere that Romulus and his men of armes could reine about their horseheads, turned their backes, and rodefull gallop towards the towne againe, and so much the faster, for that they fled now in good earnest themselves, that pursued them, who a little before made but semblance thereof. Yet for all this could they not escape the enemie: for the Romans hard at their heeles, rushed together with them pelmell into the towne, before the gates could be shut against them. At this Fidenatian warre, spreading so dangerously, the Veientians grew angrie in their hearts, and began to chase. Touched they were also in regard of kindred and alliance: for the Fidenates were likewise Tuscanes. And fearing least (if the Romane forces should thus distresse and lie upon all the borderers) they being so neere, should not goe free, they were the rather pricked forward, and thereupon made rodes, and entred in armes the confines of  Rome, spoiling and boothaling, more like robbers than professed warriors. So without pitching any tents, or abiding the comming of their enemies, but onely driving and carrying away great booties out of the fields, they returne againe to Veij. The Romanes contrariwise, not ^^^ding the enemies in the field, but yet provided and resolved to give battell, and to hazard all, passed over the Tybet. Whom the Veientians understanding to be encamping themselves, fully minded to come against their cittie: issued forth and met them, intending to trie the quarell

by dint of sword,The Veientians (...) by Romulus. and in open field, rather than to be mued up within the town, and to fight and defend  themselves from off their houses and wals. There the Romane king with the strength onely of his old beaten souldiors, without anie other helpe and supplie whatsoever, without policie or stratagem, had the better: and having thus discomfited the enemies, he chased them even to their verie wals. And for that the cittie was exceeding strong, fortified as well by naturall situation, as by wals, he forbare to assault it. But in his returne homeward, hee wasted the countrey, more upon a mind to revenge, than hope of spoile. With this defeature, the Veientians no lesse subdued than if they had lost a field, sent Orantours to Rome to sue for peace: unto whom truce was graunted for an hundred yeares,Truce betweene Romanes and Veientians for an hundred yeares. but they were amerced to lose part of their lands. These were in a manner all the acts that were done both at home and abroad, during the reigne of Romulus. Whereof none seemed to derogate anie jot from the opinion, both of his divine birth  and beginning,The commentation of Romulus. and also of his immortalitie or deification after his death. Such was his courageous heart in recovering his grandfires kingdome: his policie and wisedome in founding the cittie first, and after in establishing and governing the same, as well in war as in peace. By whose good proceedings it got such strength, and so sure footing, that for fortie yeeres space after, it enjoied peace with salatie. Neverthelesse of his commons hee was better beloved than of his nobles: but above all, his souldiours most heartely affected him: of whom he had alwaies about him, as squires of the bodie, three hundred pensioners armed, not onely in time of warre, but also of peace,Celeres. whom he called Celeres. Thus having atcheeved these noble and immortall deeds, as he upon a time assembled al the people upon the plaine, at the marish Caprae, there to number or muster his armie: behold, upon a suddaine there arose a tempest with great crackes of  thunder, which with so thick and cloudie a storme, covered the king, that the people lost the sight of him.Romulus his (...). And never after was Romulus seene on earth. The Romane youth, after their feare was at length past, and that upon so darke and troublesome weather, it prooved a faire day againe, and calme withall, seeing the kings throne emptie, albeir they credited the Senators that stood next about him, who gave out he was taken up alost in the storme; yet strucken into sad dumps, as it were for the losse of their father, held their peace a good while. But afterwards, when some few of them had once begun, they all set on and cried aloud. All haile god Romulus the sonne of a god, king and father of the cittie of Rome: With earnest praier beseeching him of his grace, that he would vouchsafe to be propice, and save their ofspring and posteritie for ever. I am of this mind, that some there were even then, that suspected and secretly surmised that the king  was pulled in peeces by the hands of the nobles. For this rumour also was bruited abroad, although in very darke and obscure tearmes. But by reason of high admiration of the man, and the present feare withall, the former opinion tooke place, and was more currant. Over and besides, it grew the rather credible, through the politike practice of one person.
For as the whole cittie was pensive and sorrowfull for the misse of their king, and sore displeased with the Senators, one Proculus Iulius, a substantiall good author (as men say) and to bee beleeved in a matter of great importance, stepped forth into the assemblie, Romulus (quoth he) Quirites, the founder and patrone of this cittie,The speech of Proculus Iulius. even this verie morning at the day breake, descended suddenly downe from heaven and met me, and as I stood all quaking for feare, readie to worship him, and humblie beseeching that I might behold him face to face:. Away (quoth he) and tell the Romans, that the will of the gods in heaven is, that my cittie of Rome shall bee the head and cheefe of the whole world: will them therefore to follow and practise chivalrie, and the knowledge thereof: and wot this well, and so let them doe their posteritie to wit, That no power in the world shall be able to withstand the puissance of the Romanes. Which (said he) was not so soone spoken, but he ascended on high, and departed. A wonder it was to fee, how much they gave credite to this mans tale, and how greatly the misse of Romulus both among the commons and the armie, was by this beleefe of his immortalitie, digested.
In this meane while the Senatours fell to strive who should bee king: and the desire of soveraigntie troubled much and perplexed their minds. But as yet, there was no banding nor siding from any one person in particular: for that in a state so newly risen, and of so small continuance, there was not one that far excelled another in authoritie. All the contention was betweene the two severall factions in generall.(...) betweene the Romans and Sabines for the (...). For they that were descended of the Sabines, fearing least because after the death of Tatius there was none of their part, that had raigned with Romulus in equall jurisdiction, they should now loose their possession and title to the crowne; were desirous to haue a king chosen out of their corporation. The old Romanes againe might not abide

 an alien or forrainer to be king. Howbeit, thus diuersly affected as they were, a king they all will needs have, as who (God wot) had not yet tasted the sweetnesse of libertie and freedome. Besides the Nobles began to feare, least peradventure in case the hearts of manie citties thereabout, should not be well disposed, but provoked against them, some forraine power would make invasion, finding the cittie without government, and the armie without a captaine. Therefore they all liked well to haue one head, but none could find in his heart to giue place unto another. Whereupon the hundred Senatours associate and combine together in the rule of the Common-weale, by deviding themselues into ten Decuries, and for euerie Decurie chusing one to beare the cheefe authoritie. So that ten governed at once, but one alone had the regal ensignes and the Lictors before him. This soveraigntie and preheminence determined euery five daies:  and thus went it through them all round in course. After which manner they continued the space of one yeare. And the governement upon this occasion was (as it is still at this day) called Interregnum.The Interrogencie. Then after a yeare began the commons to grudge and mutter, that their servitude was greater than before, having now lords over them, an hundred for one: and seemed they would no longer endure, but haue a king againe, yea and one of their owne chusing. The Senatours seeing them thereabout, and taking it to bee good policie for to offer that of their owne accord, which they were otherwise like to forgoe, curried favour with them in this wise, to wit, by graunting the cheefe prerogative unto the people (in chusing a king) yet so as they gave them no greater priviledge, than they reserved to themselues. For thus it was decreed, that when the people had elected a king, it should stand firme and ratified, if the Senatours liked thereof, and  gave thereto their roiall assent. And even at this day in making of laws, and chusing magistrates or rulers, the same rights is in some sort observed, setting aside the violence of Tribunes. For that now before the people give their voices, the Senatours passe by their authoritie, that which they would have done, fall it out in the assemblie of people, by scrutinie, doubtful as it will.
To proceed then, the Interregent having called a generall parliament: In the name of God (quoth he) O Quirites, and which may be to you good, luckie, and prosperous, elect, or nominate yee a new king: for so is the good pleasure of the Nobles and Senatours: and in case yee shall elect a man of such qualitie, as may be deemed worthie to succeed Romulus, then will they by their assent passe the same, and allow thereof. This pleased and contented the commons so highly, that because they would not seeme behind in bountie and curtesie, they answered againe, that this only  they ordained and agreed upon, to with, that the Senate should determine who should be king of Rome.Numa Pompilius. Ther was in those daies one Numa Pompilius, much renowned and esteemed for his just life and religious: he dwelt in Cures, a cittie of the Sabines, a man right skilfull and very wel seene (as any one might be in that age) in all lawes both divine and humane: whose teacher and first maister, for want of other authour of his science and knowledge (they say) but yet vntruly, was Pythagoras as of Samos. Concerning whom, this is well knowne, that he a hundred yeeres after and above, in the daies of Servius Tullus king of Rome, held a schoole of yong men students, that were his disciples, and followed his sect, in the utmost and farthest coast of Italie, about Metapontum, Heraclea, and Croton. From which places (albeit he had lived in that time) what same of him could spread so farre as to the Sabines? or by what entercourse and affinitie of language  might hee possiblie have trained any man unto him for desire of learning at his hands? or by what good meanes and helpe, could Numa trauell alone unto him in safetie, through so many countries, of diuerse tongues and sundrie manners? I am of this opinion rather, that the man by nature was framed and disposed to vertue, and that hee was instructed, not so much in strange and forraine sciences, as after that strict rule, that sterne and severe discipline of the auncient Sabines; than whom, there was not a nation in times past, more precise, reformed, and void of corruption. The Romane Senatours hearing the name of Numa, although they saw well enough, that the Sabines were like to proove of great reputation and power, by chusing their king from among them, yet was there none of them so audacious, as to preferre either themselues, or any one of their bend and faction, not any one I say, Senator or Cittizen, before  that man: but all in generall with one accord, agreed to conferre the kingdome upon Numa Pompilius. Who being sent for and come; like as Romulus at the founding of the cittie was inaugurate King, or attained to the crowne by meanes of Augurie: so hee also would needs, that the will and counsell of God should be sought for, touching his owne election. Whereupon hee was by the Augur (unto whom for ever after that publicke ministerie or priesthood, in regard of honour and reverence by patent belonged) brought unto the castle hill, and there he set him

 downe upon a stone, with his face towards the South. Then the Augur on his left side, with head covered, tooke his place: holding in his right hand a smooth stafte without knot or knob, and hooked towards the top, which they called Lituus. From whence after that he had with good avisement taken a prospect and view towards the cittie and countrey, and made his praiers to the gods, he limitted the quarters of the heaven, from East to West: and the parts Southward he appointed for the right hand, and those Northward for the left.
And so farre as ever hee could cast his eie and see forward, he imagined to himselfe a marke: then shifting his staffe into his left hand, and laying the right hand upon Numa his head, he praied in this forme. O father Iupiter, if it may be right and lawfull, that his Numa Pompilius, whose head I lay my hand upon, shall be king of Rome, shew I beseech thee some certaine and manifest signes within that compasse and those precincts, that I have conceived and set out. Then pronounced hee in plaine  words what tokens by sight or flight of fowles he would have to appeare. Which being once seene,Numa Pompilius declared and inaugurat king. Numa was declared king, and so came down from the temple or place of prospect abovesaid.
In this manner, being inaugurate and invested in the kingdome, hee provideth by good orders, lawes, and customes, to reedifie as it were that cittie, which before time had been new built by force and armes. Whereunto, he seeing that they might not be brought and framed in time of warre, whose hearts were alreadie by continuall warfare growne wild and savage: and supposing that this fierce people might be made more gentle and tractable, through disuse of armes, he therefore built the temple of Ianus in the nether end of the street Argiletum,(...) in token both of warre and peace: with this invention, that being open it should signifie, that the cittie was in  armes: and standing shut, that all the neighbour countries were in peace and quiet. Twise onely after the reigne of Numa was this templeshut: once, when T. Manlius was Consull, after the first Carthaginian warre was done and ended: and a second time (as God would) in our age for us to see, when as the Emperour Caesar Augustus, after the battell of Actium (with Antonius and Cleopatra) had obtained peace both by land and sea. Numa then having knit the hearts of the borderers about him in firme league and amitie, and thereupon closed up the dores of Ianus, secured now from all feare and care of dangers abroad, yet doubting least through ease and idlenesse their minds might fall to loosenesse and riot, whom the dread of enemies and martial discipline had held in aw and in good order: devised above all things to strike some fear of God into them,(...). and to plant religion in their hearts: a policie no doubt, with the simple multitude  (rude in those daies and ignorant) most effectuall. Which reuerence of God, for that it could not sincke not enter well into their heads, and take a deepe impression, without some devise of a fained miracle, he made semblance, and gave out, that he conversed in the night season, and had, I wot not what, secret conference with the goddesse AEger^a. By whose counsell and direction forsooth, he ordained such divine service and sacrifices to the gods, as to them was most acceptable: and to everie god appointed severall priests for the ministerie thereof accordingly.(...). But first above all other things he divided the yeare, according to the course of the Moone, into twelve moneths: and for as much as the Moone hath not full thirtie daies to euerie moneth, whereby some daies are wanting to make up the just yeare, after the revolution and circle of the sunne: he, by putting the odde daies between everie moneth, so disposed and ordered the yeare, that in  every three and twenty years space the daies agreed just to the same point of the sun from whence they began, and so made up the void spaces, and accomplished fully the tearme of everie yeare.(...) He appointed likewise law daies and daies of vacation, called Fasts and Nefasti, thinking it good, that otherwhiles there should bee rest from attendance on the courts, and no dealing with the people. After this, he set his mind about the creation of priests, albeit in his owne person he performed very manie sacrifices, especially those which at this day pertaine to the priest, of Iupiter,(...) called Flamen Dialis. And supposing that in a cittie so martiall, there should succeed more kings like to Romulus than Numa, who in proper person would goe forth to warre: least haply the divine ministerie that belonged to the king, might be neglected, he created a Flamin to Iupiter, for to be a sacrificer continually resident: endued and adorned him with a rich cope  or vestiment,(...) called (...) Romulus. and with an yvorie chaire of estate upon wheeles, called Sella curulis. Vnto him he adjoined two Flamines more: one for Mars, another for(...) Quirinus. He instituted also a Nunnerie as it were, of religious vestall virgines. A priesthood that had the beginning from Alba, and suted well with the house, from whom the first founder of the cittie was descended. And to the end they should attend continually about the church, as resiant chaplaines, he allowed them an

 ordinarie fee or pension, at the publike charges of the cittie: and made them by perpetuall vowed virginitie and other ceremonies to be reverenced and accounted holie. Likewise vnto Mars Gradivus he elected twelve priests called Salij,(...), and gave unto them a rich purple coat, embrodered for an ornament, and to weare upon that coat a brasen brestplate, and to beare certaine scutchions or bucklers that fell from heaven,Ancilia^ called Ancilia: commanding them to run about the cittie, chaunting hymns and songs, with dancing and leaping full solemnly. Moreover, he chose for a Superintendent or high Priest, Numa Martius, the sonne of Marcus, one of the Senatours: and to him hee gave in writing, set downe under his hand and scale, a rule, whereby he might know what beasts should be killed for sacrifice, upon what daies, and at which temples, and how the monie should bee levied and disbursed for the diffraying of all charges.  All other sacred rites as well publicke as private, hee submitted and referred to the discretion and ordering of that high Priests to this end, that the common people might know unto whom they were to resort for counsell and instruction, and that no part of Gods worship and service should by neglect of the auncient rites and traditions of their owne countrey, bee consounded and corrupted by bringing in any strange and forraine superstitions. Hee ordained besides, that the same Archprelate should teach, not onely these heavenly ceremonies, but also funerall obsequies, and how the spirits beneath, and ghosts of bodies departed, should be quieted and pacified: and what strange and prodigious tokens, that came by way of lightening, thunder, or any other fearfull sight whatsoever, should be expiate and purged by sacrifice accordingly. And for to know the truth, portended by these tokens even from the minds of heavenly spirits above,  hee consecrated unto Iupiter Elicius an altar upon the mount Aventine.Iupiter Elicius. And by the meanes of Augurie, he consulted with that god, what things he was to enterprise and goe about. Whilest the whole multitude was thus drawne away, and cleane turned from thinking of force and armes, and busied about devising and ordering of these matters, not onely their minds were occupied in doing somewhat, but also the continuall feare of God now setled in them, (as being persuaded that the heavenly power was present in the managing of mens affaires) had possessed now all their hearts with such pietie and religious holinesse, that faithfull promise once made, and the reverence of an oath taken, abandoning all feare of law and punishment, was able to rule and governe the cittie. And as the people framed and reformed themselues to the fashions and manners of their king, as the only and speciall patterne to follow: so the nations likewise bordering  upon them, who before time verily thought that cittie to be built, and as it were encamped in the middest of them to the disturbance and disquieting of all their peace, were now become so respective of them, that they thought it an impious and sinfull deed, once to offend or offer abuse to that cittie, so well given, and so devoted to the worship and service of God. Furthermore, there was a grove, the middlest whereof was watred continually by a spring that issued out of a darke and shaddowed cave: into which, because Numa used verie oft to retire himselfe alone,Aegeria without any other, as it were to have familiar companie with AEgeria, hee dedicated that grove unto the Muses, for that, their assistance also in counsell and advise hee desired together with his wife AEgeria.The temple of Faith. And to Faith alone hee instituted a solemne yearely feastivall day, and erected a chappell. Vnto which hee commanded the Flamines to ride in an arched or embowed  close chariot, drawn with two horses, and to sacrifice and execute their function, with their hands covered and wrapped close to their fingers ends: signifying thereby, that faith is to bee kept and preserved: and that her seat was sacred and consecrated even upon the right hands. Many other sacrifices, and places for sacrifice, which the Priestscal Argeos, did he appoint and dedicate. But of all his acts this was most worthie and memorable, that during the time of his raigne hee had no lesse regard to preserve peace, than to maintaine roiall estate and dominion. Thus two kings one after other, taking either of them a severall course by himselfe, that one by warre, this other by peace, mightily promoted the welfare of the cittie. Romulus raigned 37 yeares, Numa 43. So that now the cittie became very puissant, as being well and equally tempered both with fears of armes, as also with discipline of peace.
 Vpon the death of Numa the regiment returned againe to an interreigne. Then the people nominated and elected for their king,Tullus Hostilius with the roiall assent of the Senatours Tullas Hostilius, the nephew or grandsonne of that Hostilius, who had in times past sought valiantly against, the Sabines, at the foot of the castle hill. This man was not onely unlike the former king, but also more fierce and hardie than Romulus himselfe. For besides the heat of youth, and strength of bodie withall, the glorious remembrance of his grandfather set him on and pricked him forward. Supposing

therefore that the cittie through rest and ease began to age as it were, and to decay, hee  sought everie way to picke quarrels, and to give occasion to make warre. It forruned, that the pezants about Rome, and those of Alba likewise, preided and spoiled one anothers land. At that time C. Cluilius was lord and king of Alba. From both parts wel neere at one time, were Embassadours addressed to demand restitution of good, and satisfaction for their harmes. Tullus Hostilius he had streightly charged his messengers to have no dealing with the Albane prince, before they had delivered unto him their message. For well hee wist, that hee would make deniall, and yeeld no amends: and then might hee with safe conscience justly proclaime warre against him. On the contrarie side, the Albane embassadours followed their businesse but slackely, for being courteously invited, and friendly entertained by Tullus, and lodged within his pallace, they were well content to bee feasted by the king, and were his daily guests so long, that the Romanes had  by this time both challenged their owne first, and upon deniall made by the Albane King, given defiance and proclaimed open warre within thirtie daies next ensuing. Vpon which tidings by them related to Tullus, hee gave the Albane Embassadours audience, permitting them to declare what their errand was,(...) of the Albanes to (...) Tullus. that they came about.
They (simple men) ignorant of all that was done, first spent time in excusing themselves, saying, they were very loath and unwilling to speak ought that might displease Tullus, but being commanded by authoritie, they might not will nor chuse: and thereupon were come to make claime of goods, and amends for wrongs, and if they were not restored and recompence made, they had commission to denounce warre against him.
Where unto Tullus made answere in this wise, Tell your king and maister (quoth hee) that the  Romane king calleth the gods to witnesse, whether of the two Nations sent the Embassadours away first, and rejected them when they demanded restitution, that upon his head they might bring the miserie, losse, and calamitie of the present warre. With this dispatch the Albanes returned home. So they made preparation of forces on both sides all that they could, most like in all the world to a ciuile warre, betweene fathers and sonnes, proceeding both from the Trojane race: considering that by Trojanes Lavinium was founded: from Lavinium came the people of Alba: and from the Albane kings were the Romanes in right line descended. But the finall (...) and end of this warre, made the warre it selfe lesse wofull and lamentable, both because they came not to a set field, and also for that by rasing the houses onely of the one cittie, two nations were intermingled and united in one. The Albanes first with a mightie power entered the  territorie of Rome, and encamped themselves not past five miles from the cittie, where they strongly entrenched themselves: which place of the Captaines name was called(...) Fossae Ciuiliae, many yeares after: vntill both it and the name with all in processe of time, decaied cleane and came to nothing. In this campe the Albane king Cluilius ended his daies, in whose stead the Albane armie created Metius Sussetius their Dictator.(...) Tullus in the meane time became hautie and prowd, especially upon the death of the king, eftsoons giving out and saying, that the mightie power of the gods, having thus begun at the verie head, would likewise take vengeance on the whole bodie of that Albane nation, for this their vnjust and godlesse warre: and one night above the rest passed secretly by the campe of his enemies, and in warlike manner invaded the Albane land. This newes raised Metius out of his standing campe. Who led forth his armie  and marched on as neere to his enemies as hee could, dispatching aforehand an herault unto Tullus, to notifie unto him thus much from him, that it was needfull and expedient before they joined battell, to parle and commune together. If he would vouchsafe to conferre, he knew very well, that he should alleadge and say forth such matters, as might concerne the weale of the Romanes, as well as of the Albanes, Tullus refused not the offer, albeit they were but vain toies that were pretended, and therefore set his men in battell aray. The Albanes semblably come forth against him. After they were thus ranged and embattelled readie to fight, the generals on both sides, accompanied with a few of their principal Nobles, advance betweene both armies. Then began the Albane Dictator in this wise.The Oration of Metius unto Tullus.
Mee thinkes (quoth hee) I heare alreadie of injurie and wrongs done, and how such goods as were demanded are not restored againe according to the  form of the league, as also that Cluilius our king was cause of this war^ neither doubt I, O Tullus, but even you pretend, and are about to alledge as much. But if wee would as wee ought to doe, stand upon the truth of things, rather than upon I wot not what gloses, and goodly shewes of words: it is ambition and desire of rule onely and nothing else, that spurreth on two nations of one bloud and neere neighbours to take armes and war one with another: justly or unjustly,

 I am not able to say, Let him on Gods name that first began the quarrell, in conscience see to that. As for me, the Albanes indeed have made me their generall. But this one point Tullus I would have you to remember and consider: How strong about us and you especially the Tuscanes are, you know better, the neerer yee are unto them: mightie they are by land, much more by sea. Then wot well this, that when you shall cause the trumpet to sound unto battell, these two armies will bee to them a faire marke and spectacle to behold: that they may give an assault to both at once, as well the victors, as them that are vanquished, whilest they are wearied and toiled out of heart. For the love of God therfore, if there be any sparke of grace in us, since we not contented with that libertie which we surely enjoy, will needs venture and put in doubtful hazard, which of us shall rule and command, and who shall serve and obey the other, let us take some  good course whereby it may bee decided without great losse or bloods head on both sides, whether shall be lord and soveraigne. The motion Tullus misliked not, albeit both for disposition of nature, and hope of victorie, hee were the haughtier of the twaine. And as they sought on both parts what way to take, this meanes at length they sound, where unto fortune it selfe presented fit matter and occasion. For by good hap even then, in either host three brethren twins there were, borne at one birth, and those neither in age nor strength unlike. Their names were Curiatij and Horatij,Curiatij^ Horatij. that is very certaine, neither is there any thing of ancient record more famous and notable. Yet as cleere in substance as it is, there remaineth still some doubt and error. in their names: of whether people the Curiatij and the Horatij were. Writers there bee on both sides, but the greater number say, as I find, that Horatij were the Romanes, to whom I rather encline,  and my mind giveth mee to follow them. With these three brethren the kings went in hand, persuading them to fight for the honour of their countrey, and trie the quarrell by dint of sword: shewing them, that on whether side the victorie fell, there should remaine the soveraigne dominion. Nothing refused they to doe, the time and place both, were agreed upon and appointed. But before the combate, it was covenanted betweene the Romanes and the Albans, and these conditions drawne: That whose champions in fight should have the better, that nation should peaceably command the other. There are of covenants many and sundrie Capitulations farre different in matter: but they run all after one manner and forme. As for this, it was made, as wee have heard in this wise, neither is there extant a more auncient record of any composition whatsoever. The Herald (called Fecialis) demandeth of king Tulius in this wise: Is it your  will and commandement my lord, that I make a covenant and accord with the Paterpatrate of the Albane people? It is (quoth the king.) Then (quoth he) I demand of you sacred hearbs. The king answered againe, Take them pure and cleane. The Facial then reached from the castle hill pure hearbs from among the grasse: which done, he thus asked the king: Do you (my lord) ordain meet the messenger roiall of the commons of the people of Rome? and allow necessary implements, all furniture for my selfe, and my retinue and traine? The king answered: I doe, so far forth as may bee, without the harme or detriment of my selfe, and of the citizens of the people of Rome. The Fecial or herald for that time, was Marcus Valerius, who created Paterpatrate or king at armes. Sp. Fusius, by touching his head and haire with vervaine. Now the Paterpatrate is for to confirme the agreement with an oath, and so he read out the covenant and oath, and that with  manie words: which to rehearse, as they were in a long prescript forme pronounced, were verie needlesse. After this having recited all the articles and conditions thereof.
Hearken (quoth hee) O Iupiter, listen thou Herald for the Albanes, attend also and give eare yee the Albane people, how these conditions from the first to the last, have beene read alowd out of those bookes or tables of waxe, without coven or fraud, and how at this day they are most rightly meant and understood, according to the tenure of the words: from these articles I say, shall not the people of Rome start backe first, nor make default: If they shall first goe backe and faile therein by publicke consent, and fraudulently; that day, O Iupiter, smite thou the citie of Rome, as I to day will strike this swine: yea and smite thou home so much more, as thou art more able and powerfull than my selfe. And after he had thus said, he smote the swine with a slint stone. The Albanes likewise  repeated their prescript forme of words, and the oath, by their Dictator and Priests for the purpose. The complements of the covenant and composition thus performed, and all concluded, then those three brethren of both sides, as it was before agreed, buckle to arme themselues. And being encouraged on both hands by their well-willers and friends, that put them in mind of their countrey gods, their native soile and parents, saying, that all their fellow citizens and countreymen whatsoever, both at home in the cittie, and abroad in the campe, euery one,

had their eie onely upon them, their weapons and their hands: the young men being both of  themselves by nature forward and lustie, and also emboldened with the comfortable words of their friends, advanced forth betweene both armies. Now were the two hosts set on both sides before their campes, rid of present danger, rather than void of care and pensivenesse. For why? the whole triall of soveraignetie and rule, rested in the valour and good speed of a few. Whereupon they longing to see the sequele and issue, were wholly bent to behold, and onely minded this unpleasant sight and spectacle. At sound of trumpet these brave brethren, three to three, like as they had beene two set battels, and carrying the stomackes verily of two great armies, affronted one another, and with cruell and mortall weapons gave the charge. Neither regarded they their owne proper peril, but set before their eies, only the rule or servitude of the commonweale, as if the state of their country from thenceforth lay wholly upon their good or band successe  in this action.The cruell (...) between the brethren Curiatij and (...). So soon as they began to cope together and make assault, that their harneis and weapons once clattered, and their drawne swords shone and glittered againe, behold such an exceeding feare came upon the beholders, that they trembled and quaked withall: and during the time of equall combate, seeing no inclination of victorie to the one side or the other, they were so astonied, that unneath they could well speake or freely take their wind. Afterwards, when as they were come to closing and handstrokes, and that now not onely the stirring of their bodies, and the doubtfull handling of their weapons and armour, but bloodie wounds also were seene, two of the Romanes (having sore wounded all the three Albanes) fell down one upon the other, and yeelded up the ghost. At whose fall, the Albane host shouted againe for ioy: but the Romane legions, albeit they were now past all hope of victorie, yet they were not void of care, being amated, and in an extasie as it were with very feare what should become of him, who being but one, had three Curiatij vpon him at once. But as good hap was, hee as yet was fresh and unwounded. And as hee was not able alone to make his part good with them altogether, so in single fight, man to man, he thought himselfe good ynough for them all, one after another. To single them therefore, and to part them in fight, he begins to flie, thinking thereby they would follow after him, each one as his hurt bodie would give him leave. Now when he was retired a prettie good way from the place where they had fought, and looking behind him espied them follow farre a sunder, and one of them not much behind himselfe, hee turned againe upon him with great violence. And whilest the host of the Albanes cried out to the Curiatij to rescue and succour their brother, Horatius by that time had slaine his formost enemie, and was in hand  with the second. Then the Romans with such a shout, as they are wont to make who after a great fright recover themselves and take heart againe, encourage their champion: and hee himselfe hasteneth to finish the combate. And before that the third, who was not far off, could get to the other, he had slaine the second Curiatius. So that now there was but one to one, left to fight on even hand and they, neither in hope nor strength equally matched. As for the one of them, his bodie as yet not wounded, and his double victorie withall, caused him to attempt the third conflict stoutly and courageously. The other faint and feeble of his hurt, tired with running, had much adoe to come forward, and quite out of heart, seeing his two brethren lie slain at his feet, offereth himselfe as a prey to his victorious enimie: for surely betweene them was no fight at al to speake of. The Romane he, triumphing and crying out for joy, Two brethren alreadie (qd.he) have I sent to the divell, the third likewise shall I send after them, that a Romane may command an Albane, which is the cause of all this warre.
And there with he thrust his sword alost into his throat, who had much adoe to hold his weapons: and so soone as he was downe, stript and rifled him. The Romanes with great triumph and gratulation, receive Horatius, rejoicing so much the more, as his case was more dangerous and well neere desperate. Then of both sides addresse they themselves to burie their champions, but not with like cheere and alacritie of heart.
For why? they of the one part were become lords, and they of the other, subiects. Their tombes remaine yet to be seene in the very places where they were each of them slain, two of the Romans entombed together in one place neerer unto Alba: the three Albanes towards Rome, but distant a sunder, like as they fought and left their lives. Before they dislodged and departed thence  the one from the other, Metius according as it was capitulated in the composition, asked and demanded what Tullus would command him to do: who enjoined him to keep his youth readie in armes at an houres warning, for that hee would employ them in service, in case hee should warre with the Veientians. So were the armies dismissed home. And Horatius he went formost, bearing afore him the threefold spoile of three brethren. Whom his sister, a maid affianced before to

 one of the Curiatij, met before Capena gate: and espying upon her brothers shoulders, the coat of armes of her espoused husband, which she her selfe had wrought with her owne hands; she unbound her head, let her haire loose, and pittiously called upon her dead spouse by name. This lamentable wailing of the sister presently upon victorie, and amid so great and publicke joy,Horatius killeth his sister. moved the prowd and haughtie young man to wrath, and drawing out his sword there with, ran the silie damsell through: and with these bitter words rebuketh her also, Get thee hence (quot he) to thy spouse with thy unseasonable and foolehastie love, forgetfull as thou art, of thy two brethren dead, and him that is alive: forgetfull of thy native countrey, and the honour therof: and so with a mischeefe goe she, what ever she be, that shall bewaile an enemie of Rome. A cruell and horrible fact this seemed, as well to the Senatours, as to the commons: but his late  and fresh desart made it the lesse trespasse: yet for all that was hee apprehended, and brought before the king. The king, that hee might not seeme the authour of a judgement so unpleasant and odious unto the people, and consequently of punishment according to the doome, assembled the people together and said: I ordaine Duumvirs to sit upon Horatius, in triall of a criminall cause of felonie; and to judge him according to the law, in that case provided. The tenor of the law runneth thus, in a dreadfull kind of forme. THE MAGISTRATES CALLED DUUMVIRS SHALL IVDGE THE PARTIE ACCVSED IN A CAPITAL ACTION OF FELONIE, IF HE SHAL APPEALE FROM THE DUUMVIRS, LET HIM TRAVERSE HIS APPEALE, IF THEY OVERTHROW HIM, THEN HOODWINKE HIM, OR COVER HIS HEAD, HANG HIM UPON A CVRSED GALLOW TREE BY A ROPE, AND STRANGLE HIM,  HAVING WHIPPED AND SCOVRGED HIM BEFORE, EITHER WITHIN THE POMOERIE OR WITHOUT. By vertue of this law were the Duumvirs created, who by the rigour of that law thought they might not quit so much as a guiltlesse person: and having once condemned him,The iudgement of Horatius. then one of them gave sentence and said: I judge thee O Publius-Horatius a murtherer and enemie to the state of Rome. Goe Lictor therefore, and bind his hands together. Then came the Lictor and cast a cord about them.
But Horatius, by the advise of Tullus, a gentle and mild interpreter of the law, I appeale (quoth he.) So upon his appeale was the matter debated, and to be tried before the people: who were not a little troubled in deciding or judging this cause, and most of all in regard of Publius Horatius the father, crying out and saying, That he deemed his daughter was justly and worthily killed: otherwise hee would  himselfe have punished his sonne by his fatherly authoritie. Beseeching moreover, that they would not now make him childlesse, whom erewhile they saw with a goodly companie of children about him. And there with all the old father embracing the young man, and shewing the spoiles of the Curiatij, set up and hanging in that verie place which now is called Pili Horatia, i. Horatius his pillar.P. Horatius the father to the people. And can yee indeed (O ye Romanes, quoth hee) abide to see him bound under a gallowes, yea and whipped and tormented, whom a while afore yee beheld to march in great glorie and jolitie for his atcheeved victorie?
So unseemely and foule a sight as which, the Albanes themselves can hardly suffer. Go Lictor, goe bind those hands fast, which armed a little before, wan the people of Rome their dominion: Go I say, and hoodwinke his head, who saved and delivered this cittie from bondage, hang him by the necke, and strangle him upon a  cursed tree: scourge him and spare not, either within the circuit of the wals, so it bee among those javelins and spoiles of the enemies: or without the wals, so it bee within the compasse of the Curiatian sepulchres. For to what place can you lead this young gentleman, where his honourable acts may not save him from so unworthie and shamefull punishment? The people could no longer endure, either the teares of the old father, or the constant resolution of the youth his son, who shewed himselfe still the same, and not to change for any danger. So they quit him, in the honorable regard rather of his prowesse and valor, than in the right and equity of his cause. Yet to the end that the murder so manifest and openly knowne, should be in some sort expiate, and satisfaction made therefore, his father was charged to purge his sonnes sinne, and make amends, at the expences of the cittie. Who having performed certaine purgatorie sacrifices,  which afterward belonged to the house and familie of the Horatij, put a rafter or beame crosse overthwart the street, and caused the young man with his head covered to goe under, as under a yoke or gallowes; which remaineth yet unto this day, from time to time at the cittie charges repaired, and they call it Sororium Tigillum, i. the Sisters beame. And in that verie place where Horatia was wounded and fell downe, her tombe was erected of foure-square stone.
But not long continued the Albanes in quiet and peace. For the common people finding

fault and greatly discontented, that the whole state of the weale publike was put into the hands  of three souldiors, infected so and poisoned the vaine and shittle head of the Dictator: that for as much as plaine and upright dealing sped no better, he began to win againe the hearts of his commons by crooked meanes, and indirect courses. Seeking therefore warre in time of peace, as before in time of warre he sought peace: and seeing his people had more heart than hand, and their strength not answereable to their stomackes: hee stirred up other nations, openly by way of proclamation and defiance to make warre, and reserved his owne men under a colour of league and consederacie, for to practise treason and falshood. The Fidenates, a colonie of the Romanes, having made the Ve^entians partakers of their counsell, and combined with the Albanes to forsake the Romanes, when time came, and turne unto them, brake out and tooke arms. When Fidene had thus openly revolted, Tullus sent for Metius and his power from Alba, and  setteth forward against his enemies: and passing over the river Anio, encamped neere the confluent, where both streames meet together. Betweene which place and Fidene, the armie of the Veientians had crossed the Tyber, who put themselves in the right wing of the battell fast by the river, and the Fidenates in the left, neerer to the mountaines. Tullus directly opposeth his owne forces against the Veientians, and placeth the Albanes to affront the Fidenates. The Albane captaine having as little heart as honestie and truth, neither durst keepe his standing, nor openly turne unto the enemie, but by little and little withdraweth himselfe toward the mountaines: and when hee thought hee had gained vantage ynough, hee mounted up the hill with all his companies, and with a wavering mind to spend the time, displaieth his ranckes. His intent and purpose was, on what side fortune seemed to give the better, with them to joine  and take their part. The Romanes that stood next, perceiving their flanckes naked by reason of the departure of their friends and allies, at first marvelled much at the matter: but afterwards there gallopt and horseman, and advertised the king that the Albanes were gone away. Tullus in this so fearefull and dangerous case, vowed twelve Priests Salij, and two temples to Pallor and Pavor, 1. to Palenesse and Feare: and with a lowd voice cried out in the hearing of his enemies, commanding the said horseman to return to the battel, saying, There was no cause at al to feare, for that himselfe had commanded the Albane host to wheele and fetch about, and so to charge the Fidenates on their backes where they lay open. Willing him expressely moreover, to cause the men of armes to hold up their launces on end. By which meanes, a great part of the footmen could not see the Albanes as they departed and went their waies. And those that had seene  them, thinking it was a truth which they heard the king to speake, fought so much the more hotely. So the feare turned now from them, and fell upon the enemies: for they heard the king when hee spake so lowd, and also a great manie of the Fidenatians being cohabitants with the Romanes, understood Latine. For feare therefore, that the Albanes should all on a suddaine run down from the hils, and stop their passage to the towne, they turned their backes and fled. Then Tullus presseth hard upon them, and having discomfited the Fidenatians wing, commeth back more fiercely upon the Veientians, being alreadie amased at the fright of the other. Neither were they able to withstand the brunt. Howbeit, the river behind at their backs kept them at first from flying away, but afterwards when their flight bended thitherward: some flinging their weapons shamefully away, like blind men ran headlong into the water: other lingering stil, and staying  on the banke side, doubtfull whether to flee or to sticke to it and fight, were trod under foot and hewen in peeces. Never had the Romanes before that day a more cruell battell. Then the Albane armie, which beheld and saw all this conflict, descended downe into the plaine. And Metius forsooth, rejoiceth much on Tullus behalfe for his victorie. Tullus againe speaketh Metius faire, and gave order, that the Albanes in a good hower should joine their campe to the Romanes: and against the next day, prepared a purging or Lustrall sacrifice. The morrow when it was day, and that all things were in a readinesse, according to the manner, hee commandeth both armies to assemble together to an audience. The criers, beginning at the furthest part of the campe, summoned the Albanes first. Who also for the strangenesse of the matter, and desirous to heare the Romane king to make his Oration, preased forward to stand next. The Roman  legion for the nonce, as it was before decreed, stood armed round about, and hemmed them in: and the Centurions had in charge without delay to execute whatsoever they were commanded. Then began Tullus to speake in this wise.The Oration of Tullus.
If ever in anie warre heretofore yee had cause, O Romanes, to render thankes, first to the immortall gods, and then to your owne manhood and valour, certes it was in yesterdaies battell. For yee fought not then with the force of your enemies,

 more than with the trecherie and falshood of your friends and confederates, which is the greater conflict and farre more dangerous. For to put you cleane out of doubt, and to beare you no longer in hand with a wrong persuasion; The Albanes went up toward the hils without my commission, neither was it my commandement that, but a policie and countenance onely of command: to this end, that yee not knowing how ye were forsaken, might not withdraw your hearts from fight, and also that your enemies weening they were environned behind, should be afraid and so enforced to flee. Yet are not the Albanes all in generall to bee charged with this fault which I reprove. They did but follow their leader, as yee likewise would have done, if I had willed the march to have turned anie whether from thence. It is Metius that was the guide and leader of this journey, Metius is hee that is the worker and deviser of this warre, Metius I say it is, and  none but Metius, the breaker of the Romane and Albane league. But let who that will from henceforth presume hardly to do the like, if I make not him forthwith a notable example to all the world.
The Centurions stood armed round about Metius, and the king goeth on with the rest of his speech as hee began, and said: That which I pray God may turne to the good, prosperitie and happinesse of the people of Rome, of my selfe, and you the Albanes, I am minded to reduce all the Albane nation to Rome: to endue the commons with the freedome of the citie: to advance their cheefe gentlemen to the order of Senators, and to make one uniforme citie and Commonwealth: that as in times past the Albanes state, out of one body was divided into twain, so now it may bee united and become one againe. At these words the Albane youth unarmed, and beset on everie side with armed men, albeit they were distracted in mind, yet were they forced  with a generall feare to keepe silence, and hold their peace.
Metius Suffetius (quoth Tullas then) If thou couldest have learned to keepe allegeance, promise, and covenants, thou mightest have beene tought it at may hands with life. But now since thy froward nature is incurable, teach thou by thy fearefull example and death all mankind, to hold and repute those things for sacred and holie, which have by thee beene broken and violate. Like as therefore erewhiles thou barest a double heart in doubtfull ballance, betweene the Fidenates and the Romanes state: even so, streightwaies shalt thou yeeld thy bodie to be drawne a sunder, and plucked into two peeces accordingly. Then forthwith hee caused two teemes of foure horses to bee set to, and Metius to bee stretched out and tied unto the chariots to them belonging. Afterwards were the horses driven a contrarie way, and carried with them in both chariots the bodie torne in peeces, as farre forth  as the lims hung fast together by their cords and ligaments : which made all men avert their cies from beholding so cruell and horrible a spectacle. This was the first and last punishment that ever the Romanes executed with so little respect, or none at all (to say a truth) of the lawes of humanity. In all other they may safely make their boast, that no nation in the world hath ben lesse delighted and pleased with extremitie of torment.
Whilest these things were in doing, there had beene certaine horsemen sent afore to Alba, for to translate the multitude to Rome. After whom were the legions also of the footmen thither led, to rase and destroy the cittie. At whose entrance within the gates, ther was not that stur nor fearefull hurrie, as usually is seene when citties are lost: and when with breaking down the gates, beating and battering the wals with rams and other engines, forcing the citadell, the  enemies shout, and the armed souldiours run to and fro in the cittie, killing and slaying, firing and burning all afore them as they goe: but a sad silence, and a still kind of sorrow and pensivenesse so possessed and astonied all their minds, 'that for feare forgetting what to leave behind them, or what to take with them, without advise and counsell, one asking another what to doe, they one while stood in their house entries, another while ran up and downe wandring in their houses, as if their last day had beene come. But so soone as they heard the horsemen crie aloud, and command them with menacing to void and depart, and that now the ratling of the tiles and slates from off the houses, as they were a pulling downe, was from the furthest part of the towne heard: and that the dust raised from places farre off, had as it were with a cloud overcast and filled all: then everie man catching up hastily, and carrying forth what hee could, leaving  their domesticall gods, leaving their houses wherein they had beene borne, bred, and brought up, departed forth: so that now they filled the streets as they went close on a row together, and the fight one of another with mutuall commiseration, redoubled their teares and wofull complaints. Yea and pittious mone and lamentations were heard of women especially, as they passed by their faire and stately churches, beset with souldiours, and abandoned their gods as it were captives and prisoners. After the Albanes had thus quit the cittie, downe went the Romanes everie

where with the buildings, as well publicke as private, and laid them even with the ground, and  so in one hower destroied and rased soure hundred yeeres worke, for so long had Alba stood and flourished. Howbeit the temples of the gods they spared, for so the king had given commandement. Rome all this while, riseth by the fall of Alba. The number of Cittizens increased double: to enlarge the cittie the mount Celius was annexed to it : and that it should bee better peopled and more inhabited, Tullus had his roial fear and pallace there, and therein from that time forth he kept his court. The cheese Cittizens of the Albanes he advanced to the order of Senators, that hee might augment that state also of the Commonweale, namely, the houses of the Tulli, Servilij, Quintij, Geganij, Curiatij, Cloelij: and for that degree and order of Senators by him encreased,(...) he built an hall or new court, called until our fathers daies Hostilia curia.i.Hostilias court. And that all estates and degrees might out of this new people be somewhat strengthened, hee chose from out of the Albanes ten troopes or cornets of horsemen, and with the same supplie hee both fulfilled the number of the old legions, and also made and enrolled new.
Tullus upon this affiance he had in his strength and power,(...) with the (...). denounceth warre against the Sabines, a people in those daies of all other most puissant and mightie, both in men and munition, next the Tuscanes. Wrongs had been done, and outrages committed on both parts, and restitution or amends demanded, but to no effect. Tullus found himselfe greeved, that diuers occupiers or merchants of Rome, at an open mart or faire of great resort before the temple of Ferom^, were said hold upon and apprehended. The Sabines on the other side complained, that their men, notwithstanding they took sanctuarie in a certain sacred and priviledged grove, were  arested and in hold at Rome. These were the quarrels and occasions pretended of the warre. The Sabines well remembring, that not onely part of their owne forces was by Tatius translated to Rome, and there planted, but also that now of late the puissarice of the Romans was well amended by the supplement of the Albanes, began likewise for their part to cast about, and seeke for helpe abroad, and forraine aids. Now was Tuscane their neighbour nation, and of the Tuscanes the neerest vnto them were the Veientians. From thence they gat certaine voluntaries to take their part, by reason that their minds alreadie were well disposed to revolt upon old grudges and rancour, remaining still of the former warres past: othersome also vagarants and idle persons of the rascall sort, and needie commons, were soone hired for monie. But as for any succor from thence by publicke consent of the state, they had none at all. So much prevailed even  with the Veientians (for in the rest it was lesse marvell) the faithfull covenant of truce concluded with Romulus. Now when these preparations of warre were made on both sides to the uttermost of their power, and that it stood upon this point, That they were like to have the ods and vantage, who should begin first, and enter the field: Tullus prevented the enemies, and invaded the Sabine land. A sharpe and bloodie battell was there fought under the wood Malicusa. Where the Romanes bare themselves bravely that day, much upon the valour of the Legionarie footmen, but more upon the strength of their men of armes, whose number lately was augmented: for by the suddain and forcible charge of the horsemen, the battel of the Sabines was so broken, their ranckes so disordered,The Sabines defeited by the Romanes. that they could neither stand close together to fight it out, nor yet spred themselves to flie, without great slaughter and bloodshead.
The Sabines thus vanguished, and the kingdome of Tullus and the whole state of Rome, being verie glorious and wealthie: behold, newes came to the King and Senatours, that in the Albane mount it raigned stones: which hardly was beleeved, and therefore certaine men were sent of purpose to see this strange and prodigious fight: who might plainely behold stones to fall thicke out of the skie, like as when some forcible winds drive haile in big round bals upon the earth. They imagined moreover, that they heard a great and mightie voice out of the grove from the verie top of the hill crying unto them, and warning the Albanes to do sacrifice and divine service according to the rites and ancient maner of their forefathers, which they had discontinued and forgotten, as if together with their country they had abandoned their gods, and either taken to the Romane fashion, or else being angrie with fortune (as it is commonly seene) forlet and neglected the worship of the gods altogether. The Romanes likewise upon that miraculous signe, for the purging and expiation thereof, celebrated solemne publicke sacrifices for the space of nine daies,(...). called a Novendiall: either because they were mooved thereto by that voice from heaven (for that also is reported) or tooke direction from the Soothfaiers that prie into the inwards of beasts. Certaine it is, that a solemne custome remaineth still unto this

 day, that whensoever word commeth of the like wonder, they keepe hollyday nine daies together. Not long after this, the pestilence raigned in the cittie. And albeit the people began thereby to slacke soulderie and militarie service : yet would not this martiall prince give them rest and respite from warre: being of this mind, that the bodies of young men were more healthie in armour, abroad in the open field, than at home in the cittie under covert: untill himselfe at length fell sicke of a long and lingering disease. Then that hautie and courageous stomacke of his, together with his lustie and able bodie, became so abated, that hee who earst before thought nothing lesse befitting a king, than to set his mind, and busie his braines about religious ceremonies; now all upon a suddaine became wholly devoted to all kind of superstition both more and lesse, yea and filled the peoples heads besides with holinesse and devotion. So as  now the verie common sort wishing againe for the old world, under the reigne of king Numa, were verily persuaded, that there was no other remedie left for their sicke and diseased bodies, but to obtaine at Gods hand grace and pardon. Men say, that the king himselfe in perusing and turning over the Commentaries and registers of Numa his predecessor, and therein finding certaine hidden and solemne sacrifices that had beene unto Iupiter Elicius, retired himselfe, and kept close within house to celebrate the same. But for that this holie service, was neither begun aright, nor dulie administred, hee had not onely no divine apparition and heavenly vision presented unto him, but also incurred the heavie displeasure and wrath of Iupiter, whom by his preposterous religion he had thus disquieted; and so both himselfe and his whole house were consumed with lightening.Tullus consume I with lightening. This Tullus in great glorie and renowne of martiall prowesse, raigned  two and thirtie yeares.
When Tullus was dead, the governement returned againe, as it was from the first beginning ordained, unto the Senatours; who named and Interregent, and he called a parlement, wherein the people elected Ancus Martius for their king,Ancus Martius king of Rome. and the Senatours gave their assent thereto. This Ancus Martius, was Numa Pompilius his daughters sonne, who so soone as hee was come to the crowne, hoth in remembrance of his grandfathers glorious governement, and also in regard of the raigne of his next predecessor, which in other points right excellent and commendable, in this onely failed, and was not so happie: either for that religion was neglected, or not with due ceremonies exercised: and thinking it a thing most necessarie, and of greatest moment, to reduce all publicke divine service and sacrifices to the first institution of Numa, commanded  the Archprelate or Highpriest, to make an extract, and transcript of all the sacred rites and misteries out of Numa his Commentaries, and ingrosse them into one table, and to publish them abroad unto the people: whereby both his subjects and citizens desirous of peace, as also the States thereby adjoining, were in good hope, that the king would altogether conforme himselfe, and take after the customes and ordinances of his grandfather. Hereupon the Latins, with whom in king Tullus his daies a league was made, tooke heart unto them, made in-rodes into the countrey about Rome, and fetch out booties. And when the Romanes demanded restitution, they made them a prowd answere, supposing belike, that the king of Rome would passe the whole course of his raigne in ease and idlenesse, sitting still in his chappels, and by his holie altars. But Ancus was of a meane and indifferent disposition by nature, having an eie as well to Numa, as to Romulus, and composed as it were of both. For over and besides, that he thought peace more expedient and necessarie for his grandfires reigne, the people being as then but new risen, unsetled, and fierce withall: considering also, that himselfe should not easily without taking wrong, enjoy the quietnesse which to him happened: for that his patience was alreadie tried, and not onely tried, but also despised: and seeing that the State of the present time was fitter for a Tullus to be king, than a Numa: yet to the end that, as Numa in time of peace instituted ceremonies of religion, so he might likewise set out to posteritie others concerning warre: and that warres should not onely be made, but also denounced and proclaimed orderly, and in some religious forme of solemnitie: he set downe in writing that law and formall order, by vertue wherof restitution is demanded (which at this day the Fecials or heralds observe) like as he received  it from the ancient people Aequi.
The Embassadour Fecial, comming to their borders, at whose hands the goods are required againe, covering his head with a bonnet or vale of woollen yearne, faith thus: HE RE O IVPITER, GIVE EARE YEE LIMITS AND CONFINES(naming them of such and such a countrie) LET IVSTICE AND RIGHT HEARKEN ALSO TO VVHAT I SHALL SAY: I AM THE PVELICKE MESSENGER OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME, OF A IVST AND RELIGIOVS EMBASSAGE

AM I COME, AND TO MY VVORDS GIVE CREDITE. After this, rehearseth he  all his demands, and then calleth Iupiter to witnesse, saying. IF I VNIVSTLY AND IMPIOVSLY DEMAND THAT SUCH PERSONS SHOULD BE DELIVERED, OR SUCH AND SUCH GOODS BE RENDRED UNTO ME, THE PUBLICKE MESSENGER OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME; THEN LET ME NEVER RETURNE AGAINE TO ENIOY MINE OVVNE COUNTRY. These words rehearseth he, as he setteth foot, and steppeth into the confines: the same also he speaketh to him whomsoever he meeteth first: the selfesaine words he pronounceth, as he entreth within the gate of the citie: yea and when he is come into the market place he saith the same, changing and varying in some few tearmes, from the prescript forme of the demand, and taking the solemne oth. In case then, the persons whom he requireth, bee not yeelded after three and thirtie daies expired (for so manie just, are usually graunted) then proclaimeth hee warre in this wise. HEARE O Iupiter, and thou Iuno, Quirinus thou: YE CELESTIALL SAINTS ALL, AND TERRESTRIALL POVVERS, YE INFERNALL SPIRITS ALSO LISTEN AND GIVE EARE. I CALL YOU ALL TO VVITNESSE, AND PROTEST BEFORE YOU, THAT THIS NATION, (naming them whosoever they be) IS UNIUST, AND DOTH NOT ACCORDING TO RIGHT AND EQUITIE. BUT OF THESE MATTERS VVILL VVE CONSULT AT HOME IN OUR COUNTRY, VVITH OUR ELDERS, AND ASKE THEIR ADVISE HOVV VVE MAY COME BY OUR OVVNE. Herewith returneth the messenger unto Rome for counsell, and presently the king would in these or such like words, sitting in counsell with his Peeres, move them in this maner. WHEREAS THE PATERPATRAT OR HERALD, IN THE BEHALFE OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME, AND THEIR QUIRITES, HATH TREATED VVITH THE PATERPATRAT, OR  HERALD, IN THE NAME OF THE ANCIENT LATINES, AND VVITH THE FOLK OF THE ANCIENT LATINES, CONCERNING CERTAINE THINGS, DIFFERENCES, SUTES, AND CAUSES THEREUPON DEPENDING; VVHICH THINGS THEY HAVE NEITHER YEELDED NOR PAID, NOR PERFORMED AND DONE; VVHICH OUGHT TO HAVE BEN PAID, YEELDED, PERFORMED AND DONE; VVHAT IS YOUR IUDGEMENT? Speaking to him, whose opinion first hee asketh in this case. Then (saith hee) MY ADVISE IS, THAT THOSE THINGS BE SOUGHT FOR AND RECOVERED BY PURE FORCE, BY IUST AND LAVVFVLL VVAR. THIS DO I FVLLY AGREE UNTO, THIS DO I DETERMINE RESOLVTELY. After him were the other asked in course: and when the greater number of them there present accord therunto, then by generall consent, they were wont to proclaime war in this order: that  the Fecial or king at armes should go with a javelin, having and yron head, or with a red bloodie spear burnt at the end, as far as to their borders or marches: and there in the presence of three witnesses at the least, not under fourteene yeares of age, should say thus: WHEREAS THE PEOPLE OF THE OLD LATINES, AND THE OLD LATINE FOLKE HAVE PRACTISED AND TRESPASSED AGAINST THE PEOPLE OF ROME AND THE QUIRITES, AND VVHEREAS THE PEOPLE OF ROME, AND THE QUIRITES HAVE SO DETERMINED, CONSENTED, AND AGREED, THAT VVAR SHOULD BE MADE VVITH THE ANCIENT LATINES; I THEREFORE TOGETHER VVITH THE PEOPLE OF ROME, DO DENOUNCE AND PROCLAIME AND MAKE VVAR VVITH THE NATIONS OF THE OLD LATINES, AND VVITH THE OLD LATINE FOLKE. And when he had thus said, he launced his speare  or javelin within the confines of the enemies. After this manner then, was restitution demanded of the Latines, and warre denounced or proclaimed: which order of proceeding their posterity by tradition received.
Ancus having committed the charge of divine service and sacrifice unto the Flamins and the other Priests, levied a new armie, went forth into the field, and by force wan Politorium, a cittie of the Latines. And following the usuall maner of the former kings his progenitors, who had mightilie increased the Romane estate, by admitting their enemies into the number of citizens, transported the whole multitude from thence to Rome. And because the ancient natural Romanes inhabited Palatium, the Sabines about the Capitoll and rocke Tarpeia, and the Albanes replenished the mount Celius: therefore the hill Aventine was allowed this new companie  to dwell in. Vnto whom not long after, there came fresh inhabitants to people it, upon the winning of Tellene and Ficana. But after this, the Romanes were driven to recover by war Politorium againe: for that whilest it stood void and vake, the old Latines had surprised and taken it. Which was the cause, that the Romanes destroied that cittie quite, that it should not bee at all times a receptacle for the enemies. Last of all, when as now the Latines warre was driven wholly

 and brought before Medullia, there for a good while was much ado, and doubtfull issue of sight, and interchangeable victorie: for that the towne was both well fortified with bulwarkes, and furnished with a strong garison of men: and also by reason that the armie of the Latines being incamped in plaine and open ground, had sundrie times with banners displaied, encountred hand to hand with the Romanes. At the last Ancus bending his whole power against them, first gaue them an overthrow in a set battell: and so having gained rich pillage, returned to Rome. At what time also were many thousands of the Latines received into the cittie. Who to the end, that the Aventine and Palatium should meet together, were appointed to feat themselves about the temple ofVenus Murtia. The Ianiculum likewise was adjoined unto the cittie, not for want of ground, but because it might not be at any time a fortresse and hold for the enemies: which was thought  good to be united unto the cittie, not onely with a wall, but also for more commodious passage to and fro, with a woodden bridge over Tyber. The Quirites fosse or ditch also, no small defence against the easie accesse from the plaine grounds, was a worke of Ancus. Thus the estate being growne to exceeding strength and bignesse: when as now in so huge a multitude of people there was much confusion, and no difference of well doing or ill, and thereby many mischeefes and outrages began secretly to be committed: for to restraine therefore with some terror, such boldnesse increasing daily more and more, there was a gaole or common prison built in the hart of the cittie, even over against the common place of assemblie. And in this kings daies not onely the circuit of the citie was enlarged, but also their lands and territories. For by reason that the forrest Moesia was conquered from the Veientians, their signorie reached to the seawhere,  in the very mouth of Tyber was the towne Hostia built, and the salt pits made thereabout, and upon such noble exploits by armes atcheeved, the temple of Iupiter Feretrius, was in more ample and glorious manner reedified.
In the reigne of Ancus, there came to dwell at Rome one Lucumo, a pregnant nimble headed man, and a wealthie, upon a desire especially and hope of advancement and honour, which at Tarquinij (where he was borne, although descended of sorraine parentage) he had no means to attaine unto. The sonne hee was of Demaratus the Corinthian, who upon civile troubles and dissentions having fled his countrey, and by chance planting himselfe in Tarquinij, there married a wife, and had issue by her two sonnes, named Lucumo and Aruns. Lucumo survived his father, and became heire of all his goods. Aruns died before his father, leaving his wife behind  him, conceived with child: neither lived the father Demaratus long after his son, who not knowing that his daughter in law and sonnes wife was with child, made no mention at all of his nephew, his will, and so departed this world. Whereupon the child after his grandsires decease, being borne to no part of his goods, for his poore condition, hight Egerius. But Lucumo on the other side, the sole heire and inheritor of all, as hee began by his wealth to bee hautie ynough, and to looke aloft, so hee grew much more prowd for his matching in marriage with Tanaquil, a dame of a right noble house descended, and who could hardly beare a lower estate and degree than that wherein she was borne. When shee was once married, and saw the Tuscanes to disdain Lucumo, for that his father was a stranger and banished person, she could not indure that indignite. But forgetting all kind affection to her native countrey, so shee might see her husband raised  to high promotion, shee resolved and plotted to leave Tarquinij and depart. To which purpose and dessignement, Rome seemed a place most fit and convenient of all others. For thus she projected and discoursed: That in a cittie lately founded, where all kind of nobilitie suddainely commeth up, and ariseth from vertue and prowesse, her husband a valorous and industriousman must needs have place, and be entertained: that king Tatius a Sabine borne, had raigned there: that Numa was from Cures sent for thither, and called to the crowne: that Ancus also a Sabine by his mothers side, had the onely image of Numa to shew for his nobilitie. Thus she soon persuaded him, as being a man ambitious and desirous of honour, and whose mother onely was a Tarquinien borne, and therefore hee was to make lesse scruple of abandoning the place of his nativitie. Thereupon they removed with all they had to Rome. And it fortuned that to Ianiculum  they came. Where, as Tarquinius sat with his wife in the chariot, behold an Eagle came gently flying downe from aloft, and tooke up his bonnet from his head, and soaring over the chariot with a great noise, and clapping of her wings, as if shee had been sent from heaven to doe this feat, set it gainely and handsomely on his head againe: which done, shee mounted on high, and flew away. Tanaquil, as they say, embraced this Augurie with great joy, being a woman skilfull, as commonly all the Tuscanes are, in such prodigious fights and apparitions from heauen; and

therewith taking her husband about the necke, willed him to be of good cheare, and to hope  for great matters and high preferments: saying, how that bird came from such a quarter of the heaven, addressed as a messenger from such a god, and shewed a divine token and presage upon the highest part of man, even the top of the crown, and lifted up the ornament that stood upon his mortall head, to give it him againe immortall, as from God above. In these hopes and cogitations which they entertained by the way, they entred the citie: where they tooke an house; and from thenceforth hee was commonly called L. Tarquinius. Now within a while both his new comming, and his wealth withall, made him well knowne: and himselfe also besides, set forward his good fortune by courteous and faire speech and affable language to everie man, by friendly inviting, and liberall feasting, and by making what friends he could by gifts, fauors, and good turnes: so farre forth, as the same of him came into the kings court: where, by his willing  service and singular dexteritie, in short time he had not onely accesse unto the kings knowledge, but also entered into familiar acquaintance and friendship with his highnesse. Insomuch, that both in private counsels and publicke consultations, as well at home as abroad, hee was alwaies present, and bare a great stroke. And having in all kind of offices carried himselfe with credite, was in the end by the kings last will and testament made tutor or protector of his children. Thus raigned Ancus foure and twentie yeares,(...) of Ancus. for glorie and reputation of his sage governement, as well in warre as in peace, equall to anie of the former kings his predecessors. Now were his sons neere foureteene yeares of age when hee died. Tarquinius therefore made the more hast, that the high court of parliament should with all speed possible bee summoned for creation of a king, which being against a day proclaimed, he sent away the boies to the chase a hunting, at the  verie instant of the said election. Hee himselfe (as men say) was the first, that both ambitiously sought for the crowne, and also to win the hearts of the commons, divised and framed an eloquent Oration.(...).
Saying, it was no new and strange thing that he stood for: And why? hee was not the first(that any man should be offended, or make any wonder) but the third alien that in Rome affected and aspired to the kingdome :that both Tatius, not of a forrainer onely, but of an enemie became king: and Numa likewise, a man unacquainted with the cittie and matters of State, was without any sute or seeking of his part, by the Romans sent for, and advanccd to the crown. As for himselfe, hee alledged and said, That from the time he was at his owne libertie to dispose of himselfe, hee with his wife and all that he had, removed and came to Rome: and of that age wherein men are emploied in civile affaires, he had spent a greater part in Rome, than in his own  ancient countrey. Moreover, that he was trained up both at home in the cittie and in war abroad, to the knowledge of the Romane lawes, orders, add customes, and that under no meane person but an excellent maister, even king Ancus himselfe. And finally, for faithfull service and diligent attendance about the king, he had endevoured to passe all others: and for liberalitie and courtesie towards all others, hee had striven to goe beyond the king. These and such like allegations, as he laid forth and pleaded, and that right truly; the people of Rome with exceeding great consent elected him their king. Who being a man otherwise of singular parts and of greatworth, as hee was ambitious in seeking the kingdome, so continued he stil, when he ware the crowne: and minding no lesse to establish his owne state and throne, than to maintaine the good estate of the Commonweale, he advanced one hundred more to the order of Senators, who afterwards were  called Minorum Gentium Patres, as a man would say, Senators of a latter sort, and meaner qualitie. A faction, no doubt to take part and side with the king, by whose meanes they had beane admitted into the Senate. The first warre he made, was with the Latines: from whom by force hee wan the towne Appiolae: from thence having brought away a greater pillage in proportion, than the warre imported in brute, he set forth gamings and plaies more stately and with greater furniture and provision, than the other kings before his time. Then was the plot or compasse of ground first set out and appointed for the lists or Theatre, called now(...) maximus Circus max. wherein were assigned scaffolds for the Senators, and for the gentlemen or knights severally by themselves, called Fori, where they might make them places to see the pastimes at their ease and pleasure. And in this manner stood they to behold: namely upon scaffolds born up twelve foot high from the ground  with forked perches or props. The gamings were running of horses, and fighting at firsts and buffets: for performance whereof, there were champions sent for of purpose, especially out of Tuscane. These sports continued afterwards from yeere to yeere in great solemnitie, and named diversely, either the Romane games, or the Great games. This king moreover assigned certaine places about the Forum or common place for private men to build in: where the galleries and shops

 were made. He went in hand likewise to wall the citie about with a stone wall, but the Sabine war staid him in the beginning, that he went not forward with that work. This came so sodainly upon him, that the enemies were passed over the river Anio, before the power of the Romanes could meet them, and make head against them. Whereupon great feare there was at Rome. And at the first a cruell conflict there was, and much blood shed on both parts, but no apparence of victorie. But after that the enemies were retired once into the campe, and that the Romanes had time to gather fresh forces, Tarquinius supposing his onely want was in his cavalerie, determined to joine unto the Rhamnenses, Titienses, and Luceres, which Romulus had ordained, other centuries or cornets of horsemen, and them to leave unto the posteritie after him, bearing his owne name. Which because Romulus had done aforetime by the counsell and advise of Augures, Accius Navius renowned and famous in those daies for his skill that way, opposed himselfe and gave out plainely, that there might be nothing changed or newly ordained in that behalfe, unlesse the birds first approoved and allowed the same. Whereat the king was wroth, and inscorne and derision of his art, as they say: Come on Sir Soothsayer(quoth he) areed, and tell me by the flight of your birds, whether that may possiblie be done, which I now conceive in my mind. To which demand Navius, who had first made proofe thereof by his learning, answered resolutely, that it might in very deed bee effected. Why then (qouth hee) I have imagined in my conceit, that thou shalt cut a wherstone asunder with a rasor: Heretake them to thee, and dispatch that which thy fowles foreshew may bee done: then as the report goeth, without more adoe, he cut the wherstone quite a two. And in that verie place where this seat was done, the Statue  or image of Accius was erected, with his head covered, even in the Comitium, at the staires thereof on the left hand of the Curia or counsell house. It is reported that the whetstone also was set up in the same place, for a memoriall to all posteritie following, of that miracle. Certes, both Auguries, and the priesthood and colledge of Augures, from that time forward was so highly honoured, and had in such reverence, that never after was there ought done, either in warre abroad, or in peace at home, but by their counsell and advise. Assemblies of people summoned were dismissed, armies levied and readie to take the field were discharged, yea and the greatest affaires of State, were given over and laid aside, when the birds allowed not thereof. Neither did Tarquine for that time alter the centuries of the horsemen anie whit, onely hee redoubled the number, so that in three centuries or cornets there were 1300 horse: and those later  sort who were added to the others, bare the names of the former, which at this day, because they be double, are called the sixe centuries. Tarquine thus having encreased that part of his power, bad the Sabines battell the second time. And over and besides, that the Romanes armie was in strength well amended, he devised also privily a subtile Stratageme, and sent certain men to set on fire a mightie stacke of wood, lying upon the bancke of Anio, and so to cast it into the river: the wood burning still by the helpe of the wind, and most of it being driven against the piles of the bridge, and ther sticking close together with the boats and plancks, fired and consumed it cleane. This accident both terrified the Sabines in their fight, and when they were discomfited, troubled them much, and hindered their flight: so that manie a man having escaped the enemie, yet perished in the verie river. Whose armour and weapons floting downe the Tyber,  were knowne at Rome, and brought newes thither of this victorie, in manner before word could be brought thereof by land. In this conflict the horsemen won greatest price and praise. For being placed at the skirts of both the wings, at what time as the maine battell of their owne footmen, were now at the point to recule, they charged so forciblie upon the enemie (as it is reported) from the flanckes where they were marshalled, that they not onely staied the Sabine legions pressing hard and fiercely upon those that began to shrinke and give backe, but all at once put them to fight. The Sabines ran amaine towards the mountaines, but few gat thither: for the greater number as we said before, were by the horsemen driven into the river. Tarquinius thinking it good to take the time, and follow hard upon them whiles they were frighted, after he had sent to Rome, the bootie with the prisoners, and burned on a great heape together (as hee  had vowed to Vulcane) the spoiles of the enemies, marched on still forward, and lead his armie into the territorie of the Sabines: who albeit they had alreadie sustained an overthrow, and could not hope for better successe, yet because they had no time to consult and advise with themselves, with such a power as might on a suddaine in that stirre bee raised, met with him. Where they once againe were defeated and vanquished, and in the end being in dispaire to make their part good, they sued for peace. Then was Collatia, and all the lands about it taken from the Sabines,

Egerius the kings brothers sonne,The forme of succeeding a (...). was left with a garrison at Collatia to keepe that place. And (as  I find upon record) the Collatines were yeelded into his hands, and the manner of their surrender went in this order. First the king demanded thus and said: Are yee Embassadors, or deputed assignes sent from the people of Collatia to make surrender both of your selves and the Collatines? We are (quoth they.) And are the people of Collatia in their owne power, and at libertie to doe what they will? They are (say they.) Do yee also render up your selves, the people of Collatia, their town, their territorie and lands, their waters, their limits, their temples, their houshold stuffe and implements, and all things els, as well sacred as prophane, unto my power and the peoples of Rome? We doe yeeld (say they.) Then (quoth he) doe I accept thereof, and receive all into my hands. The Sabine warre thus finished, Tarquinius returned to Rome in triumph. After this, he warred upon the old Latines, but they never proceeded so farre on any side, as to join  issue in a generall battell, and one set field for all. But bringing his power first to one towne, and after to another, he made a conquest of the whole nation of the Latines. So as these townes, Corniculum, old Ficulnea, Cameria, Crustumerium, Ameriola, Medullia, Nomentum, were recovered from the old Latines, or from those that had revolted unto them.
After all this ensued peace. Then was he more earnestly bent to goe forward with his workes, begun in time of peace, than he was before busied in managing of his warres: insomuch, as he gave the people no more repose at home, than he had in warres abroad. For besides that the prepared to compasse the cittie (which as yet he had not fortified) round about with a stone wall, the beginning of which peece of worke was by the Sabine warre interrupted and broken off: he divised also certaine draughts or vaulted sinckes from aloft into the Tyber, whereby he drained  and kept drie the base cittie, or lowest grounds about the marketplace, and the other vallies betweene hill and hill, for that out of the plains and flats, they might not easily make riddance and conueiance away of the water. Moreover, he levelled a large court or plot of ground, readie for the foundation of the temple of Iupiter in the Capitoll, which he had vowed in the Sabine war, his mind even then giving him, that one day it should be a stately place.
At the same time there happened in the court a wonderfull strange thing, both in present view, and also in consequence. For as the report went, a young lad, whose name was Servius Tullius, as he lay asleepe, in the sight of manie persons had his head all on a light fire. And upon an outcrie raised at the wondering of so great a matter, the king arose: and when one of the houshold brought water to quench the flambe, he was by the Queene staied. And after the stir was  somewhat appeased, she forbad the boy to be disquieted, untill such time as he awoke of himselfe: and within a while as the sleepe departed, the blaze likewise went out, and vanished away. Then Tanaquil the Queene taking her husband aside into a secret roome.Tanaquil the Queene in to king Tanaquinius. See you this boy (qd. she) whom we so homely keepe, and in so poore and meane estate bring up? Wot well this, and
know for certaine, that he will one day be a light to direct us in our dangerous troubles and doubtfull affaires; hee will bee the cheese pillar and succour of the afflicted state of the kings house. Let us therefore cherish and foster with all kindnesse and indulgence the subject matter of so great a publicke and private ornament. Wherupon they began to make much of the boy as if he had been one of their owne children, and to instruct and traine him up in those arts, whereby forward wits are stirred to great enterprises, and to atchieve high place of wealth and  honour. And soone came that to passe, which pleased the almightie gods. For he proved a yong man indeed of princely nature and towardnesse: in such sort, that when there should be a sonne in law sought out to match with Tarquinius his daughter in marriage, there was not one of all the young gentlemen of Rome to be found comparable to him in anie respect. So as the king affianced his daughter unto him. This so great honour whereunto he was advanced, upon whatsoever cause or occasion it was, induceth me to thinke he was not the son of a bondwoman, nor that he served whilest he was a little one, as a slave. I am of their mind rather, that report thus: When Corniculum was won, the wife of Servius Tullius, a great lord and principall personage of that citie, and there slaine, was left great with child: and being among other captives knowne whose wife she was, in regard of her rare nobilitie onely, was by the Queene preserved from servitude, and at Rome in Priscus Tarquinius his house, was delivered of a child: upon which so speciall favour, there grew more familiar acquaintance betweene the two ladies the Queen and her selfe; and the child also brought up of a little one there in court, was both tenderly beloved, and also highly regarded. But his mothers fortune, whose hap was after her countrey was lost, to fall into the hands of enemies, caused men commonly to thinke that he was the sonne of a bondslave.

 Now in the eight and thirtieth yeare almost, after that Tarquinius began his raigne, was this Seratus Tullius in right great estimation and credit, not onely with the king, but also with the nobilitie and commons. Then the two sonnes of Ancus, who as they alwaies before disdeained in the highest degree, that they were by the deceitfull practise of their guardian, so unworthily put by the inheritance of their fathers kingdome, and that a stranger raigned at Rome, one who was not descended of anie neighbour house thereby, no nor so much as of Italian bloud: so now they began much more to take stomacke and indignation, in case that after Tarquinius, the kingdome should not returne to them and their line, but should still run on end, and headlongwise fall unto such base varlets: That in the same cittie, a hundred yeares almost after that Romulus the sonne of a god, and a god himselfe, raigned therein, (during the time he remained  here upon the earth) a verie bondslave and no better, and one borne of a bondwoman, should be possessed of the crowne: and that it would be a foule staine and dishonour generally to the name of the Romanes, but most especially to their house and familie, if whilest the issue male of Ancus lived, the kingdome of Rome should lie open, and be exposed, not to strangers alone, but which is more, to verie bondmen and slaves. This ignominie therefore, and open wrong, they resolve by fine force to put by and avoid: howbeit, the greevance of this injurie done unto them; set them on against Tarquinius himselfe, rather than Servius Tullius; both for that the king, if he lived still, would be a more sharp revenger of the murder, than a privat person: and also if they should happen to kill Servius, whomsoever besides, the king would vouchsafe for his son in law, him was he like to make heir apparent, and inheritor also of the kingdome.  For these considerations they lay wait for to murder the king himselfe in this manner: There were for the purpose to do this feat, two passing stout and sturdie heardmen chosen, who having such rusticall yron tooles about them, as they were woont both of them to occupie, and made a great shew of a most tumultuous brawle and fray in the very porch of the court gate: by which means, they drew all the kings officers, sergeants, and guard about them: then as they called with a lowd voice, both the one and the other upon the king, in such wise, as the noise was heard within the pallace, they were convented before his highnes. At their first comming, they cried out both at once, and interrupted one another in all outrageous maner, so as by a sergeant they were saine to be restrained and commanded to speak by turnes, untill at length they gave over their confused brawlings. Then one of them for the nones, as it was before agreed, began his tale: and while  the king,L. Tarquinius the king killed. as wholly bent to give eare turned aside towards him, the other list his axe aloft, and strooke the king on the head, and leaving it sticking there still in the wound, they whipst out both of them together, and ran their waies. And whilest they that stood next about Tarquinius, tooke him up readie to die, the sergeants made after them that were fled, and apprehended them. Whereupon an outcrie arose, and a great concourse of people, wondering what the matter might be. Tanaquil in this hurliburlie caused the court gates to bee shut, and commanded everie one to avoid the place: and at one instant with great diligence provideth things requisit to cure the wound, as if there were some hope of life: and withall, if that should faile, shee prepareth other meanes and remedies against the worst that might happen. Sending therefore in all speed for Servius, when she had shewed him her husband halfe dead, and alreadie bloudlesse:  shee tooke him by the right hand, and besought him not to suffer, either the death of his father in law unrevenged,Tanaquil to Servius. or his wives mother, to be a laughing stocke unto the enemies.
Thine is the kingdome O Servius by right (quoth shee) if though bee a man; and not theirs, who by the hands of others have committed a most shamefull and villainous fact. Take a good heart therefore, and arme thy selfe, and follow the guidance and direction of the gods, who long since by a divine and heavenly flame burning about thy head, foreshewed that one day it should bee highly advanced. Now let that heavenly blaze, raise thee up: now awake in verie deed: what man! wee also being strangers have borne the scepter: consider with thy selfe who thou art now, and not from whence thou art descended. And if in so suddaine an occurrence, thine owne wits be astonied, and to seeke, then follow my reed, and be advised by my counsell. In this while the noice  and violence of the people was so great, that it could not well be suffered. Then Tanaquil from the upper lost of the house, out at a window that opened into the new street (for the king kept his court hard by the temple of Iupiter Stator) spake unto the people,Tanaquil to the people. willing them to be of good cheare.
The king indeed (quoth she) was amased and swowned at the suddaine stroke, howbeit it went nothing deepe: for now is he come againe to himselfe, his wound cleansed from bloud, and searched: all signes of life, and no danger of death: and I trust in God within a while you

shall see himselfe againe. In the meane time his pleasure his, that the people shall be obeysant  to Servius Tullius: the shal minister justice and give lawes, he shall execute and performe all theoffices of the king. Then came Servius abroad in his roiall robe; called Trabea, attended with the Lictors; and sitting in the kings throne, some causes he dispatcheth himselfe, of othersome he maketh as though he would consult and conferre with the king. Thus for certaine daies, the king being dead, and his death concealed, he, under colour of executing the function of another, garthereth strength to himselfe. But when at the last it was openly knowne by the wailing and lamentation which arose in the pallace, that the king was departed, Servius accompanied with a strong guard,Servius Tullius (...)-town (...) shewed himselfe, and was the first, that without the election of the people onely by the will and consent of the nobles, tooke the kingdome upon him.
The ionnes of Ancus at the first, seeing the murderers attached, and hearing that the king  was alive, and Servius so mightie, retired themselves as banished persons to Suessa Pometia. And Servius now sought meanes to make himselfe strong, as well by private helpes, as by publicke. And least peradventure the children of Tarquinius should another day be as ill affected against him, as the children of Ancus were against Tarquinius, he gave in marriage his two daughters to Lacius and Aruns, two of the kings sonnes late deceased. Yet could not the with all the policie of mans wit, stay the fatall necessitie, nor stop and divert the course of the destinies; but that the envie that followeth a kingdome, bred all distrust, disloiltie, and mallice, even among those of his owne household, for all their alliance and affinitie. Howbeit, in very good time, and sitly for the quietnesse of the present state, was the warre with the Veientes (for now was the tearme of the truce expired) and other Tuscanes, taken in hand. In which warre, both the valour, and also  so the good fortune of Tullius was well seene and greatly renowmed. Who having discomsited a mightie host of the enemies, as undoubted king in the conceit and judgment as well of the Senatours as of the commons, if their hearts had been sounded, returned to Rome.
Then in hand went he with a worke of peace, and of all other the greatest, and of most importance. To the end, that as Nyma was the first author of divined law and religion so the posteritie for ever after might report and record, that Servius was the founder of all distinction and order; whereby betweene degrees of worship and wealth, there might be seene due difference, and regard of worth.(...) For the devised and ordained the Cense, to wit, the assessing, and taxation of the cittizens: a thing most profitable to that state and government, which was like in time to come, to grow so mightie. By which Cense, the charges and contributions, either in  war or peace, was not levied by the poll upon the citizens, as aforetime, but according to the valuation of their wealth and abilitie.(...) So he erected certaine Classes and Centuries, and appointed their degrees, according to the assessing, and valuation, meet in decent manner to serve in warre, and meet to be emploied in peace. And first, of those who were rated at an *hundred thousand ASSES and above, he ordained so Centuries; 40 of the eldersort, and as manie of the yonger: and all jointly were counted the first Classis. The elder were charged to be in readinesse at all howers, for defence of the cittie: the younger to follow the warres abroad. These were bound to find harneis: for defence of their owne bodies, an headpeece or morion, a shield, greeves, and corselet, all of brasse: and for offence of the enemie, a javelin and a sword. To this Classis were adjoined two Centuries of carpenters and smiths, or engineers, who were in wage, and served  without amount: and their charge was to find the campe engines of batterie and artillerie. The second consisted of those that were valued betweene I00000 and(...) 75000 Asses. And of this sort both young and old, were enrolled twentie Centuries: who were enjoined to provide for their armour, a target or buckler in stead of a shield; and excepting onely a corselet, in all points as the former. The third he would have to be of those that were esteemed worth(...) 50000 Asses, and as manic Centuries of them, and with the same distinction of age. Neither concerning their armour was any thing altered: only for their greeves they were dispensed with. In the fourth Classis were those that were assessed in the Subsidie booke, betweene 50000 and(...) 25000 Asses, and of them were to manie Centuries. Their armour was changed, having no more but a speare and a casting dart, with a looped called Verutum. The fist was greater, containing thirtie Centuries. These carried with them slings and stones to sling a farre off: among whom were reckoned the beadels of criers, together with the trumpetters and cornestiers, who were divided into three Centuries. This band stood of them that were assessed from 25000 unto(...) II000 Asses. The valuation under this, comprised all the rest of the multitude. Whereof arose one Centurie, freed and exempted from warfare. Thus having furnished and disposed the forces of the Infanterie,

 he enrolled besides twelve Centuries of horsemen, and those out of the principall men of the cittie: and sixe other Centuries likewise, to those three that Romulus instituted, retaining the same name still, that they in their first solemne institution had. These horsemen for to buy their great horses, had32 bb. 5. (...) 10000 Asses out of the chamber of the citie, a peece: and for to find and keepe those horses, were the rich widdows set, yearely at6 ^b. 5. shi 2000 Asses a peece. Thus were all these charges and burdens shifted from off the pooremens shoulders, and laid upon the rich. And therefore afterwards was their dignitie and honour so much the more. For in the grand-leetes and solemne elections of Magistrates, everie man had not prerogative alike, nor equall authoritie, as Romulus first ordained, and the other kings continued, when they gave their voices by the poll indifferently, one with another: but there was distinction made, and certaine degrees; but so,  as neither any one was excluded or shut out, and yet the whole rested and lay in the power of the richer sort, and cheese of the cittie. For first the horsemen were called: afterward, the eightie Centuries belonging to the first Classis, of the principall footmen: who if they disagreed, and happened to be at anie difference, then the Centuries of the Second Classis were cited. And never went they likely so low, as to the last of all. Neither ought anieman to marvell, that this order in these daies, after five and thirtie tribes complete, agreeth not with the Centuries of the elder and younger sort, according to the computation set downe by Servius Tullius, considering their number is now doubled. For having divided the citie into foure Wards, according to the quarters and hils; those parts which were inhabited, he called Tribes, of the word Tribute (as I suppose.) For he it was that devised and brought up the manner of equall contribution and paiment,  proportionably to the assesment and rate of mens goods. Neither were these tribes anie waies at all respective to the division or number of the Centuries aforesaid. When this Cense and taxation was finished, which he dispatched the sooner, by reason of the peoples feare of an act by him made, concerning those that should not come in to be registred and enrolled in the Subsidie booke; he published an edict, under paine of imprisonment and death, that all citizens of Rome, as well horsemen as footmen, should the morrow after at the breake of day, everie one in his owne Centurie, shew himselfe in Campus Martius, i in Mars field. There, after he had mustered and embattelled the whole armie, he assoiled and purged the same with the sacrifice of a Swine, a Sheepe, and a Bull. And this was called Conditum Lustram. Which was the very closing up and accomplishment of the assesment. In this Lustrum, there were numbred  and assessed 80000 Citizens. Fabius Pictor, a most ancient writer sayth moreover, that so many there were of able men to beare armes. For to containe this multitude, it was thought good the cittie should be inlarged. Whereupon the adjoineth unto it two hils more, to wit, Iuirinalis, and Viminalis. After this, he proceeded to augment the mount Esquilie: and to grace that hill, and make it of more reputation, there he dwelt himselfe, and had his court. He cast a trench and ditch, and raised a rampire about the citie, and then walled it: by occasion wherof, he set out the Pomoeric further. Pomaerium,Pomocrie, what it is. according to the Erymologie and litterall signification of the word, is as much to say, as Postmarium, or the Arriermure, that is, a plat of ground behind, or without the wall. But indeed it is rather a space about the wal on either side, which the Tuscanes in old time, when they built their cities, used by advise of Augures, to hallow and consecrate in  certain bounds and limits, all along where they minded to set the wall: that neither within-forth the houses might joine upon the wall(whereas now adaies they build close to) and without also, there might be a void peece of ground, lying common, free, and unoccupied of men. This vacant space, that neither might lawfully be inhabited, nor yet eared and (...), as well because it was without the wall, as the wal without it, the Romanes called Pomoerium. And ever as the circuit of the cittie was made larger, looke how much the wals should be set out further, so farre those hallowed and consecrated bounds of the Pomoerie were extended.
Thus the cittie being much increased in compasse of building, and all things disposed in good order, requisit as well for war as peace; to the end, that he should not alwaies seeke to purchase wealth and puissance by war and martiall prowesse onely, he attempted to amplifie his dominion  by pollicie, and withall to bestow upon the citie some glorious ornament to beautifie the same. And even at that time was the temple of Diana at Ephesus, of great same, and much renowned: which as the report went, was built in common by all the states and princes of Asia. When as therefore Servius would use highly to praise and commend unto the lords and heads of the Latines(with whom of purpose he had both in publike and privat, mutuall intertainment and familiar acquaintance) that generall agreement of the princes of Asia, in matters of religion,

and in the uniforme worship of the same gods: at length, by much iterating and following  still that theame, he prevailed with them so far, that the nations of the Latines, and the people of Rome together, built at Rome a temple unto Diana: which was a plaine confession, and cleare case, that Rome was now the imperiall seat, for which they had so often warred. This quarell, albeit now the Latines all in a manner had neglected quite, and made no care at all thereof, seeing they had so often attempted it by force of armes, and sped so badly: yet fortune seemed to one only man to cast a favourable aspect, and yeeld good hope, by his private policie and industrie, to recover againe the imperiall dignitie unto the Latines. A certaine householder forsooth of the Sabines, had as they say, a cow bred with him of a wonderfull bignesse, and fair with all (for a memoriall of which so rare and wonderfull beast the hornes were set up, and remained fast fixed in the porch of Dianas temple, many a hundred yeares after) this was supposed  (as it was no lesse in very deed) a strange and prodigious thing: and the wisemen or wizards prophesied, that the soveraintie and Empire should be setled and established in that State, wherof any one citizen sacrificed that cow unto Diana. This prophesie came to the eares of the priest of Dianas temple. The Sabine abovesaid, so soone as he had espied a meet and convenient day for sacrifice, drives the cow to Rome, and leads her to the temple of Diana, and there presented her before the altar: where the Romane priest wondering to see so huge a beast, wherof there had been so much speech, and calling to mind withall the aforesaid Oracle, spake to. the Sabine in this wife, My friend (quoth he) what meane you to sacrifice so uncleanely unto Diana, and doe not rather purifie and wash your selfe all over in some running streame, before you come hither? Lo where Tyber runneth in the valley beneath. The stranger then, moved with  some scruple of conscience, who desired nothing more, than that all should be well and orderly done, that an happie successe might be correspondent and answereable to so prodigious a beast, forthwith went downe to the Tyber. In the meane while, the Romane killed the Cow in honour of Diana. This thing pleased the king and the whole cittie wonderfull well.
Servius, albeit he were now without all question by so long continuance, fully and really invested in the kingdome; yet because he heard say, that young Tarquinius otherwhile gave out speeches of him, that he raigned without the nomination and election of the people: therfore after he had first wan the hearts of the commons, by dividing among them everyone, certaine lands gotten by conquest from the enemies, he adventured to propound unto the people, and put it to their suffrages, and voices, Whether their will and pleasure was, that he should raigne over  them. Thus was he declared king with as great consent, as never any before with the like. But Tarquinius for all this, had never the lesse hope to aspire and attaine unto the crowne: nay rather so much the more, because he understood the said division of the lands among the commons, was a thing concluded and passed against the wil and mind of the Senators. Taking therfore occasion therby to accuse and blame Servius before them, he supposed he had good means offered to wind himself into favor with the lords of the Senat, and so to become strong in the counsel house. Over and besides, he was both himself a young man of great courage and hot stomack, and his wife likewise at home, dame Tullia, lay ever upon him, and pricked forward his distempered and troubled mind: for you must thinke, that the roiall court of Rome also, hath brought forth and afforded one example of a tragicall and horrible act: that by a wearines and lothing conceived against  the kings government, liberty and freedome might the sooner ensue: and that raigne bee the last, which was by mischeefe gotten first. This L. Tarquinius whether he were the sonne or nephew of Priscus Tarquinius, it is not very cleare, howbeit, I would rather thinke with most writers, that he was his sonne. A brother he had, Aruns Tarquinius, a young gentleman of a mild nature. These two (as is aforesaid) had married the two Tulliae, the kings daughters, and they also themselves were in conditions farre unlike. And happily it so fell out, that two froward and violent natures were not coupled together in wedlock: such was the good fortune, I beleeve, of the Romane people, that thereby the raigne of Servins might continue the longer, and the cittie brought and setled in good order. The younger Tullia, a stout dame and a prowd, greeved and vexed much that her husband had nothing in him, no mettall or matter at all, either to cover  and desire, or to enterprise and adventure: her mind was fully set upon the other Tarquine, him she esteemed highly, and had in admiration, him she said to be a man indeed, and descended of roiall bloud. As for her sister, she despised and checked her, for that she having a forward and valorous knight to her husband, sat still, and seconded him not in audacitie and boldnesse, as a woman should doe. Well, in short time likenesse and disposition soone brought them together,

 and as it is commonly seene, Naught will to naught, and sort best together. But the mischeefe and trouble that brought all up side downe, arose from the woman. For she using to have secret conference with her sisters husband, never ceased to speake badlie; and to raile of her own husband unto his brother, and of her sister unto her husband.
Affirming in good earnest, it were better both for her selfe to be a widdow, and for him to live single, and without a wife, than so to be mismatched as they were, and through the craven cowardise of others to languish and come to nothing. As for her selfe, if the gods had given her an husband according to her owne qualitie and worthinesse, she doubted not to see, and that very shortly, the crowne in her own house, that now she seeth in her fathers. In this manner possesseth she quickly the humorous young man, and filled his head with her owne rashnesse and follies. Now when Aruns Tarquinius and the elder Tullia, who died just in a manner both at one time, had well rid their owne houses, and  made way and ouverture for a new marriage, it was not long but they were married, with Servius his leave and connivencie, rather than his good liking. But then every day more than other began Tullius to be a continual more in their eies, his old age hatefull, and his raign more odious: for now the woman minded nothing but one mischeese upon another: and would not suffer her husband to be at rest night nor day, least peradventure the former murders done and past, should serve to no purpose, and misle the effect of their designements. And thus she brake out and said:Tullia to her husband. That she wanted not before one that carried the name of an husband, with whom she served, and kept her selfe quiet and said nothing.
But she had a want of one, that thought himselfe worthie of a kingdome, that remembred he was the sonne of Tarquinius Priscus, that loved  better to be seised of a crowne and scepter indeed, than hope for a kingdome, and here thereof. But sir(quoth she)if you be the man to whom I take my selfe wedded, then I cal you both husband and king: if not, then is our case changed for the worse, in that, cowardlinesse is accompanied now with wickednesse. Why resolve you not? why arme you not your selfe, and go about this businesse? you need not go so far as to Corinth or Tarquinij, for to seeke and compasse forraine kingdomes, as your father did. The gods of your owne house and native country, the Image and example of your father, the kings pallace, and therein theroiall seat and throne of estate, yea the very name of Tarquine, createth, nameth, and saluteth you king. But and if your heart will not serve you to these desseignes, why beare you the world in hand and deceive them? why take you so upon you as you doe, to shew your selfe as a kings sonne? Get you hence to Corinth againe, away to Tarquinij,  turne backeward to your former stocke and condition, more like to your brother than to your father. With these and such like motives, by way of reproofe she checketh the young man, set him on, and pricked him forwards, and she her selfe for her part, could be at no repose, for thinking that Tanaquil, an alien and stranger borne, could contrive in her head, and effect so great matter, as to make two kings together, one after other, namely her husband first, and afterward her son in law: and she her owne selfe, a kings daughter, could beare no stroke either in giving or taking away a kingdome. Tarquinius kindled with these furies and temptations of a woman, went about, laboured, and made court to the Nobles, especially those that were Minorum gentium: estsoones putting them in mind of the pleasures and favours that his father had done them, and requiring now of dutie the like good turne at their hands. The young men, the flower and manhood in generall  of the cittie, he wrought and won to himselfe with gifts: and so partly with great promises, what wonders he would doe, and partly with raising slanders upon the king in all places, and charging upon him odious crimes, he grew very great and mightie. At the last, espying a convenient time to set on foot, and putin execution his intended projects, with a strong guard of armed men, hee entred forciblie into the Forum or common place of assemblie, whereat the people all surprised with great feare, he sat him downe upon the kings throne, even at the entrance of the Curia or Senate house, and there, by the voice of the crier summoned the Senatours to counsell before king Tarquinius. Who forthwith there assembled together: Some, thereto made and prepared aforehand: others, for feare least their not comming, might turn them to displeasure. And as they were astonted at this strange and wonderfull sight, so they thought Servius utterly undone, and  his case desperate.L. Tarquinins his speech to the senatours.
There Tarquinius began an invective in spightfull and reprochfull tearmes, touching the first pedigree or parentage of Servius: saying, that he being a slave, and born of a bondwoman, after the cruell and shamefull death of his father Tarquine, usurped the king domeanot by meanes of an Interreigne, as the order was aforetime, nor by a solemne assemblie, and the free voices of the people, ne yet by the assent of the nobles, but only through the wile and fraud of one woman. And as he was(quoth he) thus borne and thus created king, so hath he been a partial

favourer ever of the basest sort, even such as himselfe; and in hatred of the noble birth of others  hath divided amongst the vilest persons, lands taken from the cheese men of the citie; and all such burdens and charges, as had ben in times past common to all, he hath cast upon great personages of qualitie and worth, and set up an assessing or taxing, that the state of the wealthier persons being made knowne and exposed to envie, he might bring them into disgrace with the people, and bestow their goods upon the poorest and neediest at his pleasure. Amidst this Oration of his, came Servius in place, advertised of the matter by a fearefull messenger in all hast.
And presently began to crie out with a lowd voice, at the very porch or entrie of the Curia: What is here ado (quoth hee) and what meaneth this O Tarquine? How darest thou, during my life, assemble the Senatours or sit on my seat? Whereunto he stoutly made a prowd answere, that hee did but keepe his fathers throne, and being as hee was, a kings sonne, hee demeed himselfe more worthie  to bee inheritor of the kingdome, than a bondslave: and as for him, hee had been suffered long ynough to play with his good Masters, and to insult over his betters. With this arose a great clamour from the partakers and complices of both sides: the people they ran from all parts to the counsell house, and like it was, that the stronger should be king. Then Tarquinius being put to his shifts, and forced to trie the utmost, seeing no other remedie, tooke Servins by the middle, as being himselfe much younger and stronger farre, carried him out of the counsell house, and threw him downe from the staires head to the foot, and so returned againe into the Senate house, to get the Senators together. The kings officers with the guard attending upon him, sled. Himselfe well neere dead, with certaine of his courtiers and traine, breathlesse also for feare, made speed, and retired towards his pallace, as farre as to the top of Cyprius street, where  he was overtaken by them that were sent by Tarquinius,^ervius Tullius ^ilied. and so slaine outright. And it is verily thought, that this was done by the suggestion and procurement of Tullia; so little disagreeth it from other wicked prankes of hers. But this one thing is known for certaintie, that she came riding in her coach into the common place of assemblie, and nothing dismaied or abashed at the presence of so many men, there met together, called forth his husband out of the Senat house, and was the first that stiled him with the title of King. By whom shee being willed to depart a way out of that throng and uprore, as she returned homeward as far as the pitch of Cyprius street, where was of late a place consecrated unto Diana, called Dianium, the coachman that had the guiding and driving of the steeds, as he turned the chariot on the right hand up to the cliffe Virbius, for to passe up to the hill Esquiliae, suddainely staired for feare, and reined in his horses, and shewed  unto his ladie and mistresse, Servius lying there murdered. And hereof followed (as the report goeth) a beastly part, and beyond all sence of humanitie, which the very place doth witnesse still at this day, called thereupon Sceleratus Vicus, i. the wicked street: Wherein, the raging and frantike woman Tullia, harried with the suries, and haunted with the ghosts of her sister and husband, caused (men say) her chariot to be driven over her fathers dead corps; and being her selfe bespreint and beraied with the bloudie chariot, carried home with her some part of it in token and witnesse, that her hand was in this parricide and murder of her owne father: to the end, that shee might provoke her owne domesticall gods and her husbands to wrath and displeasure: and so consequently, as they entred their raigne with mischeefe and wickednesse, they might soone after be turned out therof with shame and infamie Servius Tullius raigned foure and fortie  yeares, in such wife carrying himselfe, as it were hard, even for a good and staied prince that should succeed him, to follow his steps. This made moreover for his glorie and fame, that together with him died all right and lawfull government of Romane kings. And even that regiment of his, so mild, so gracious, and temperate as it was: yet because it rested in the absolute power of one man, he was minded, as some doe write, to have forgone and given over, had not this wicked intestine practise from his owne familie come betweene, to prevent and cut off his good designes and intent to let his country free.
]After him began to raigne Tarquinius, for his insolent acts surnamed Superbus, i. the prowd. For he would not suffer his wives father (unkind sonne in law he)to be interred: saying eftsoons in jibing manner, that Romulus also died, and was never buried. Moreover, the principall heads  of his peeres and nobles, such (as he thought)had favoured Servius his proceedings, and tooke parr with him, those he made away and slew. Afterwards, fearing upon the guilt of his owne conscience, that he had given an ill precedent for others, to take vantage against himselfe, attaining to the crown so leaudly; he retained therfore a guard of armed men about his bodie: and in very truth, setting only might aside, no other right had he to weare the diademe, as who raigned

 neither by peoples election nor Senatours approbation. Over and besides all this, to the end he might sit safely in his seat by servile feare and dread, who reposed no trust nor hope in the love of his subjects; therfore to strike the greater terror into them, and hold them in aw, he by himselfe alone without assistance of any counsell, sat upon all matters of life and death: by meanes wherof he was able to kill, banish, and condemne in forfaiture of lands and goods; not those onely whom he suspected and hated, but also them, from whom he could looke for nothing else but spoile. Thus when he had decaied the number of the nobles especially, he purposed to chuse no new in their place, for to make supplie: to the end, that the fewer they were, the more contemptible the whole order might grow: and with lesse discontent, put up the indignitie, that they were not emploied in the State, nor ought done by their advise. For this king was the first, that abolished  the custome received and continued by all others asore him, of consulting with the Senat in all matters, and managing nothing without them. He governed the Commonweale by himselfe, and after his owne waies: with whom it pleased him he made war and peace, league and societie, even of his owne head: and would breake the same as himselfe thought good: thus he did, and undid all at his pleasure, without regard of the peoples mind, or the Senates authoritie. Above all, he sought to win the hearts and good wils of the Latine nation, that by support of forraine power also, he might be more secure and safe among his owne people: neither entertained he with their princes, friendship and amitie only, but entred also into alliance and affinitie with them. For unto Octavius Mamilius a Tusculane, he gave his daughter in mariage. This Mamilius was of all the Latines the principall and noblest person, lineally discended(if we may  beleeve the common bruit and report)from Vlysses and Circe. By this marriage he gained many kinsfolke and friends of his new sonne in law. So that now Tarquinius was in great authoritie and reputation among the lords and Barons of the Latines. Whereupon he gave them knowledge, and proclaimed, that upon a certain day they should all meet him at the sacred grove of Ferentina, to treat and commune together about matters concerning the common good of both States. Thither resorted they in great number betimes in the morning. And Tarquinius himselfe failed not for his part, to keep the very day appointed, but it was sunsetting welneere before he came. There, in that assemblie all day long, before his comming, was much talke and reasoning, pro and contra,Tarnus Herdonius his orations against Tarquinius Superbus. touching him.
Turnus Herdonius of Aricia, had inveighed spightfully against Tarquinius in his absence (for his being away) saying it was no marvell indeed that he was at Rome  surnamed Superbus(for even then commonly they termed him so, although secretly, andin whispering wife.) For could there be(quoth he) a prowder part plaid, than thus to mock, delude, and abuse the whole state of Latium, that when their princes and nobles were cited there to appeare, farte from their citties and dwelling houses, he only should be absent that summoned the assemblie? Which verily was but a devise of his to trie their patience, that if they once tooke the yoke, he might keep them stil under as his vassails: for who seeth not what he reacheth at?even to command and lord it over the Latines. And in case his owne citizens have done well, in trusting him in the rule over them (if a man say they trusted him, and not rather that he came soulie and forcibly by it, even with shameful murder)the Latins also may put themselves into his hands with securitie. And yet I see not why they should so doe, considering he is a meere stranger and alien.  But how and if his owne subjects repent, and are discontented with him, being one after another by him murdered, banished, deprived, and spoiled of their goods? What better dealings may the Latines hope and looke for? Therefore if they would be ruled by him, they should depart home everie man, and not keepe the day of the Diet no more than he doth that published and proclaimed it. Whilest this seditious and dangerous person, who by these and such like factious courses was growne to be a great man and powerable in his countrey, stood arguing thus, inforcing and following hard upon other points, tending to the same effect, in commeth Tarquinius. Whereupon heebrake off his speech, and all was husht. Then turned every man to salure and welcome Tarquinius: Who after silence made (being advised by some of his familiars that were next unto him, to excuse himselfe for comming at that time of the daie)  said, that hee had beene taken to bee an arbitrator or daiesman betweene the father and the sonne: and because hee was desirous and carefull to procure attonement betweene them, and to make them good friends; hee made the longer stay and came the later. Which occasion of businesse seeing it had disappointed them of that day, therefore the morrow after hee would deliver that which hee had in purpose and intended to moove unto them. But Tarnus (as they say) could not hold, nor put up so much as this with silence: but brake out

and said againe, there was no speedier deciding and taking up of any matter, than betweene  the Father and the Sonne; a thing that might be dispatched in few words: for if he would not obey and giue place unto his father, he should abide the smart of it with a mischiefe. And thus the Aricine having girded as it were, and glaunced at the Romane king, departed out of the assemblie. Which thing Tarquinius taking more displeasantly a good deale then he made semblance of, forthwith devised and practised to bring Turnus to his death, that he might strike the same terrour into the hearts of the Latines, wherwith he had kept under his owne subjects at home. And for that he had no absolut power to cause him openly to be slaine, he framed most saltly a criminall action against the guiltlesse man; therby wrongfully to worke his destruction.
By meanes of certaine Aricians of a contrarie faction, he wrought a bondslaue of Turnus with a summe of monie, to suffer a number of swords privily to be conveyed into his  masters Inne or lodging:Tarquinius against Turnus Herdonius. which being done in that one night accordingly, Tarquinius somewhat before day, sent for the chiefe Lords of the Latines to come unto him; and pretending as though he were frighted by some strange accident, said that his long tarying the day before, (by Gods special providence, as it were, so appointed)was for the safetie of him and them all. For he was informed that Turnus contrived to massacre both him and the heads of their nation, to the end that he alone might raigne over the Latines: That he minded yesterday to have put this plot in execution, even in the verie assemblie; but the deed was deferred, for that himselfe(the principal author of that meeting) whose life he sought for aboue all other, was not in place. And herupon it was(faith he) that he fared so as he did, and railed against him so bitterly the day before in his absence; for that he by his long tarrying had put him by his hope and the effect of  his dessignes: and if all were true that was told him, he nothing doubted but early in the morning at break of the day, so soone as they were set in counsell together, he would come armed and well appointed with a crew of his adherents and sworne consederates: for reported it is, (quoth he) that a number of swords and other weapons are brought into his lodging: which whether it be so or no, might soone be knowne. And therwith he desired them to take the paines to go with him thither. And verily, considering the proud nature and hautie spirit of Turnus, together with his yesterdaies Oration, and the long stay of Tarquinius besides, for that the pretended massacre seemed therby to have beene put off and prolonged, the matter became very suspcious and pregnant. Thus go they with minds verily somewhat enclined and disposed to beleeue all, and yet so, as they would thinke all the rest but tales and lies, unlesse they found the swords aforesaid. Being come to the house, and Turnus awakened out of sleepe, certaine warders were set to keepe him on every side: and when they had laid hold upon his servants, who for love of their lord and master began to make resistance, the swords were brought forth out of all the blind corners of the hostelrie openly to be seene: then was it a cleare case and past all peradventures: and Turnus was apprehended and yrons clapt upon him. And immediatly in all hast the Latins Assembled together to counsell in that great tumult and uprore: Where, upon bringing forth the sword in sight before them all,Turnus herdonius put to death they were so incensed and deadly bent against him, that he was not suffered to answere and plead for himselfe, but was presently at the source or spring head of the Ferentine water plunged downe, and a hurdle done aloft upon him, and greatstones heaped theron, and so after a new kind of death stisled and drowned.
Tarquinius then, after he had called the Latins againe to the place of counsell, and much commended them for dulie executing Turnus, who practising thus to alter and trouble the state, was detected of a manifest intended murder, made this speech unto them:Tarquinius to the Ar^cines. I might(quoth he)if I would, by vertue of ancient rites alledge and plead, that for as much as all the Latines are descended from Alba, they are comprised within that consederacie and league, whereby in the raigne of Tullus the whole Commonweale and State of Alba, together with their inhabitants, became incorporate into the Empire of Rome. Howbeit, in regard rather of the commoditie and weale publicke of all, I judge it requisite, that the league were renued, and that the Latines might enjoy and be pertakers of the prosperitie and happie fortune of the people of Rome, rather than evermore to hazard and suffer the destruction and desolation of their citties, with the spoiling and wasting of their lands, which first in  Ancus daies they tasted, and after in my fathers time they had abidden and suffered. The Latines were hereto soone persuaded. And although in that league the preheminence and soveraintie rested in the Romans, yet they saw well enough that both the heads and rulers of the Latine Nation stood with the Romane king, and were wrought unto his hand, to side with him: and also Turnus unto them was a sreth precedent and example, to teach them what danger might

 betide euery one that should make a part against him and crosse his intention. So the alliance was renewed and proclamation made that according as it was capitulated, that all the serviceable men of the Latins should at a day appointed repaire in good number with their armor, unto the grove of Ferentina. Who when they were there met together from all parts according to the edict of the Romaine king, to the end should have no captaine of their owne to lead them, no privie watchwoord or regiment by themselves to direct them, nor private ensignes distinct from the rest to keepe them together; he shuffeled on mingled the bands and companies of Latins and Romaines one with another, making one of twaine, and two of one: and when he had thus doubled the bands, he set. Centurions over them. And albeit he was in peace an unjust prince, yet was he in war no bad captaine; nay, for martiall prowesse he had beene  equall to the formerkings; had he not failed and degenerated in other things, and thereby stained and hurt his glorie even in that behalfe. He was the first that warred upon the Volscians, which war after his time lasted more than 200 years:Suessa Pometia wonne by the Romanes. and wan from them by force Suessa Pometia. Where having made portsale of the pillage, and raised as much gold and siluer as amounted to1070 lib ^terl; 40 talents, he conceived in his mind to build so stately a Temple of Iupiter as might beseeme the soveraigne king of gods and men, become the noble Empire of Rome, and answere the majesty also of the very place where it was to stand. And for the rearing and finishing of this Temple, he laid that money apart, that came of the spoile aforesaid. But presently upon this, was he surprised with a warre that held longer than he hoped it would. For having made one assault in vaine upon Gabij, a neighbour citie to Rome, and dispairing also of  any good successe by beleagering the towne, for that he was valiantly repussed from the wals, at the last he devised and resolved to get it by wile and deceit: a course that Romaines had not usually practised.
For making as though he had given over and abandoned this warre, as being now earnestly bent and busily occupied about laying the foundations of the Temple, and folowing other publike works in the citie: Sextus his sonne, the yongest of three, sled for the nones to Gabij, complaining of his fathers intollerable rigor and crueltie against him:Ser: Tarquinins saying, That now to the Gabians. saying, That now he had turned his accustomed pride from strangers upon his owne blood, and was growne to be weary of so manie children: that as he had made good hand and cleane riddance of his nobles, and left the Senat desolate, so he might bring it to passe in his own house, to leaue behind him no issue nor inheritour of the kingdome. And for his owne person verily, he was escaped from among  the pikes and swords of his father, and was persuaded fully, he might no where be sure in safety, but with the capitall enemies of L. Tarquinius. For to put them out of doubt, and that they might be no longer abused, the war continued stil against them, which seemed in outward shew given over and laid away: and his father would not faile, but whensoever he could spie his vantage and sit opportunitie, come upon them at unawares. But in case there were no place of refuge and protection for poore and humble suppliants amongst them, he would wander and trauail all over Latium: and if he might not rest there, he would from thence go to the Volscians, Aequians and Hernicks, until he came to them that knew how to save the children from the crueltie and inhumane persecution of the fathers. Perhaps he should find meanes to stirre coles and kindle warre, yea and performe himselfe good service against that most proud king, and  that most stout and insolent people. And seeming withall in great anger and discontentment, (if they would not regard his complaints) readie to depart and go his waies, he was kindly intertained, and friendly intreated by the Gabians:The Gabines to Sextus Tarquinius. who willed him to be of good cheere and not to meruaile at all, that Tarquinius became now at length so ill affected against his own children, like as he had tyrannised alreadie upon his subjects and consederates: for he would no doubt in the end exercise his fell stomach even upon himselfe, for want of other subject matter to worke upon. And as to him, right welcome he was to them, assuring themselues that within a while it would so come to passe, that if he with them, would set to his helping hand, they should remoove the warre from the gates of Gabijunto to the verie wals of Rome.Sex= Terquinius to the Senators of the Gibins^ After this, was he admitted to sit with them in common counsaile. In which he used eftsones to say, That in other matters  he gaue place, and referred himse to be advised by the ancient Gabines, as men more practised and experienced than himselfe, but for the warre, which ever and anone he persuaded them unto, himselfe tooke upon him a speciall insight and skil therin, as he that knew the strength of both nations, and was fully persuaded in the conscience, that his kings pride must needs be odious to his subjects, which his verie owne children could not brooke and endure. Thus whilesby little and little he sollicited the principell citizens to rebell, and went himselfe daily in person

with a crew of the most forward and able yoong men, forraying, spoyling and making rodes  into the Territorie of the Romanies, and that now through his words and deeds, which tended to fraud and deceit in the end, they began more and more to give credit unto him that one day would deceiue them, he was at last chosen Generall for the warre. And having made certaine small skirmishes betweene Rome and Gabes, in which for the most part the Gabines had the better (whiles the simple people, God wot, saw not his drift and how he caried the matter:) then all the Gabines from the highest to the lowest, thought verily and in good earnest, that Sextus Tarquinius was sent them by speciall grace even from God above to be their Captaine and Protector. But with the soldiers, what with attempting painefull enterprises and performing dangerous service, and what with dealing prises liberally amongst them, it passed how he grew into credit, and how deerly he was beloved; in so much as Tarquinius the Father was of no greater. commaund at Rome, than Tarquinius the Sonne at Gabes. Thus when he saw he had gathered strength sufficient, and was fully furnished against all assaies; he dispatched unto his fatherat. Rome, one of his trustie servants with credence, to know his will and pleasure, seeing that the gods had done him this grace, that he at Gabes was able to do all in all. To this message made the king no answere at all by word of mouth, taking the man belike, as I verily thinke, for one hardly to be trusted. But as one musing with himselfe and in a deepe studie what answere to shape, he went into a garden on the backe side of the house, and his sonnes messenger followed after. There walked he vp and downe, and said never a word: onely, with his rod or walking staffe, as it is reported, he knapt of the uttermost heads and tops of the poppies. The messenger wearie with calling for an answere, and waiting such attendance; returned to Gabes as wife as the came, and without effect of his errand. He reporteth what he had said and seene, namely how the king, whether upon anger or hatred, or pride ingrasted by nature, uttered no speech at all. But Sextus knowing by these mysticall and secret circumstances, his fathers will and direction, made no more adoe but slew the chiefe of the Citizens: some by accusations unto the people, and others by reason of disgrace they were already in, and therby exposed unto violence, were soone overthrowen. Many of them were openly executed, and some whom there was little appearance or colour of justice or none at all to accuse, were secretly murdered. Divers of their owne accord sled into voluntarie exile, or else they were forced into banishment; whose goods as well as theirs that were put to death, were divided among the people. By sweetnes of his largesse of spoile,The (...) of (...) to (...). by the profit and wealth that grew to private persons; the publike wo and calamitie  was nothing felt and seene: until such time as the Gabines whole estate, dispoiled of counsaile, berest of aide and succour, yeelded without dint of sword unto the king of Rome.
Tarquinius having thus gained the towne of Gabes, made peace with the nation of the AEquains, and renued the league with the Tuscanes. After this he converted his mind to the affaires of the cittie, among which this was the principall, to leave behind him the temple of Iupiter, upon the mount Tarpeius, for a monument and memoriall of his raigne and name. That of two Tarquines, kings both, it might be said another day, that the father vowed it, and the fonfinished the same. And to the end, that the sloore and plot of ground, freed and exempted from all other kind of religions, might wholly be dedicated to Iupiter and his temple, there to be built: he determined to exaugurate and to unhallow certain churches and chappels, which having  been first vowed, by king Tatius, in the very extremitie of the battell against Romulus, were after by him consecrated and hallowed. In the very beginning and founding of which worke, it is said, that the divine power and soveraigne deitie, moved the gods to declare the future mightinesse of so great an Empire. For when as the birds by signes out of the Augurs learning, admitted and allowed the exauguration and unhallowing of all other cels and chappels besides, only in that of Terminus,Termin^s the (...) ^ounds and Me^rs. they gave no token to confirme the unhallowing thereof: which was taken for an ominous presage, and thus interpreted, That seeing the seat and house of Terminus was not stirred, and he the god alone that was not displaced and called forth of the limits to him consecrated; it shewed that all should remaine there firme and stable for ever. This divine token of perpetuitie being received for good and currant: there followed another strange and prodigious signe, portending the greatnesse also of the Empire. For as they digged for the  foundation of the temple, there appeared (as they say) a mans head, face and all, whole and sound: which sight imported no doubt and plainely foretold, that it should be the cheese castle of the Empire and the capitall place of the whole world. To this effect prophested the wisards, as well they of the cittie, as those whom they sent for out of Tuscane, to know their opinion and iudgement.

 Thus was the kings mind all wholly set upon sumptuous building, and spared for no cost. So that the pillage taken at Pometia, which was laid by for the accomplishment of the whole worke,Tarquinius Priscus foundeth the temple of the Capitoll. would hard and seant serve for the very foundation. And therfore I would rather give credite unto Fabias Pictor(to say nothing that he is the more nuncient authour of the twaine) that there were butI070 bb. sterl. 40 talents, and no more, than to Piso, who writeth, that there was125000 lib. ster. 40000 pound weight of silver set by for that use. Which summe of masse of mony could never be looked for to arise out of the saccage of one only citie in those daies: and must needs exceed the charges of the foundation of any of these stately and magnificent buildings in this our age. The king being thus wholly minded and bent to the finishing of the temple, and sending for Carpenters, Masons, and other workemen, out of all parts of Tuscane, emploited not only the citties monie and  stocke thereabout, but also had the worke and labour of the common people withall. Which was no small toile of theirs, considering the travell of warfare besides: yet were they lesse agreeved and discontented therewith, so long as they founded and reared with their owne hands the temples of the immortall gods. But afterwards were they emploied and set to other works, which as they were lesse in shew, so were they more painfull and of greater trouble, namely the making of scaffolds of standing places in the Cirque of Theatre; and to the conueiance of a mightie great sinke or vault under the ground, for to receive and carrie away all the silth and corruption of the citie. To which two peeces of worke, scarcely is the magnificence of our new modern buildings, in any respect comparable. Having in this wise held the commons in continuall labour, because hee thought that a multitude of a people would but overcharge and pester the cittie, when they  were not emploied some way or other, and also minded by erecting Colonies, to inlarge the confines of his dominions, he therefore sent part of them to inhabite and people Signia and Circeij, two strong forts and frontier townes for the defence of the cittie by sea and land.
Whilest he was busied in these affaires, there appeared unto him a strange and fearefull sight, namely a serpent gliding downe a pillar of wood, which having put the beholders in great fright and caused them to slie into the kings pallace, did not so much amase the kings heart with suddaine and momentanie seare for the present, as fill his head with perplexed cares what the thing might portend. Whereas therefore the manner was to use the Calchars and wise men of Tuscane about publicke prodigious tokens onely: he being much troubled in spirit, and terrified  at this fearfull sight, being domesticall, and as it were touching and concerning his own person: purposed to send out as far as Delphi, to the most famous and renowned Oracle in the world. And for that the durst not put any other in trust with the answered that should be delivered by the fatall lots, he addressed two of his sonnes to take a voiage through vnknown lands in those daies, and more unknowen seas, into Greece. Titus and Aruns were they that went this journie, having to beare them companie all the way, L. Iunius Brutus. This Brutus was the sonne of Tarquinia the kings sister, a yoong gentleman of a farre other nature and disposition, than he seemed in outward shew and semblance. He hauing heard say that certain principall citizens, and his own brother among, had been by this his uncle put to death; to the intent that himselfe might have nothing left, eyther in the parts of his mind for the king to feare, or in his outward state for  him to couet and desire: resolved under the cloake of base contempt to save himselfe, since that in right or justice he might repose small or no safegard at all. And therfore composing and framing himselfe of purpose to counterfeit a noddie and a verie innocent,Iun. Brutts cornteriaicech a icole as suffering himselfe and all that he had to fall into the kings hands as an eschear, he refused not to be misnamed Brutus, a name appropriate to unreasonable creatures; that under the shadow and colour of that surname, that courage of his lying close hid, which should one day set free the citie of Rome, might abide the full time and appeare in due season. This Brutus beeing by the Tarquines brought to Delphi, as their laughing stock to make them pastime by the way, rather than a meet mate to accompany them, caried with him (as men say) for to offer and present unto Apollo, a golden rod within a staffe of cornell wood, made hollow for the purpose: the very type and resemblance  by secret circumstances, of his naturall disposition. Thither beeing arrived, the yong men having done their fathers commission accordingly, were very desirous and earnest to inquire and learne of the Oracle, which of them should be king of Rome. And from the bottome of the deepe vault, this answere as men say, was deliuered in their hearing: WHICH OF YOU (O YONG MEN) SHAL FIRST KISSE YOUR MOTHER, HE SHAL BEAR CHIEFE AND SOVERAIGNE RVLE IN ROME. The Tarquines then intending that Sextus their brother

who was left behind at Rome, might neither know the answer, nor yet obtaine the kingdome, willed the matter should by all possible means be carried so secret as might be, and concealed from him. They themselues agreed upon this together, to draw lots whether of them twaine, when they were returned to Rome, should first kisse his mother. But Brutos supposing the speech of Apollo his priest, tended to another sence, made as though he stumbled forward and took a fall; and so touched the ground with his mouth and kissed the earth, thinking this with himselfe, that she was common mother of all mortall men. Then returned they to Rome. Where they found great preparations for warre against the Rutilians.
The Rutilians then were lords of Ardea. A people on those parts, and for those times, very rich and wealthie:(...) and that was it that gave the very occasion and was the first motive of warre. The Romane king was desirious both to enrich himselfe, as having about the sumptuous building of  publicke works emptied his coffers: and also by some spoile, to mollifie and win againe the hearts of his naturall all subjects: being much discontented (besides their generall mislike of his pride otherwise) at this maner of government; and disdaining greatly that they were by the king made labourers, to serue carpenters and masons, and held so long to servile toile and painefull labour. The Romanes assaied at the beginning to surprise and win Ardea by assault: but when that way sped but ill, then began they to annoy and distresse the enemies by laying siege, by casting trenches, raising forts, and fabriks, about the towne. During this siege, and the standing campe lying there, (as it falleth out commonly, when the warre is rather long and late than hote and cruell) there were granted large licences and pasports to and fro betweene the campe and Rome, with much liberty: and yet more to the Principals of the armie than to the common  soldiers. And the kings sons had otherwhile good leasure to feast and banket one with another. Vpon a time it happened whiles they were drinking and making merry with Sexta, Tarquinius in his pavilion, where Collatinus Tarquinius the sonne of Egertus sat at supper; there arose among other good table-talke, some arguing about their wives, whiles everie man highly praised and wonderously commended his owne. And growing to some heat and contention therabout: There need not many words for this matter, quoth Collatinus, for in few howers it may be known how farre my Lacretia surpasseth all the rest.(...) of (...) Lucretia. And therfore if there be any lustinesse and courage of youth in us, why mount we not on horsebacke, and in our owne persons go and see the natures and dispositions of our wives? And as they shalbe found and seene, taken of a sodaine, and not looking for their husbands comming, so let every man judge of them, and set that downe for  the onely triall of this controversie. They had all taken their drinke well, and were prettily heat with wine: Marry, content say they all, and to horse they go, and away they gallop on the spur to Rome. Thither were they come by the shutting in of the evening when it grew to be darke; and so forward without any stay to Collatia they ride. Where they find dame Lucretia, not as the kings sons wives, whom they had surprised and seen afore, passing the time away in feasting and rioting with their minions and companions: but sitting up farre within night in the middest of her house amongst her maidens, hard at wool-work by candle light. Whereupon, in this debate about their wives, the entire praise and commendation rested in Lucretia: Her husband and the Tarquines had a loving and courteous welcome at her hands. And hee againe for joy of the victorie, invited the kings sonnes kindly, and made them friendly cheere. There at  that infant, Sextus Tarquinius was bewitched and possessed with wicked wanton lust, for to offer violence and villanie unto Lucretia: her passing beauty and her approved chastitie set him on fire and provoked him therto. But for the present, when they had disported themselves all night long like lustie and pleasant youths, they returned be times in the morning to the campe. A few daies after, Sextus Tarquinius, unwitting to Collatinus, attended with one onely man came to Collatia, where he was againe in good and friendly sort received by them in the house, that suspected nothing lesse than that whereabout he was come. And being after supper brought up into the guest chamber, when he thought all about him sure, and that every body was fast asleep, all set on fire and burning in love, hee steppeth with naked sword in hand to Lucretia, as she lay sleeping full soundly, and bearing down the womans breast with his left hand, Peace (quoth he) Lucretia, and not a word: I am Sextus Tarquinius, I haue my drawne sword in hand: if thou once speake thou shalt surely die. The seely woman thus starting out of sleepe, was sore affright, as seeing no remedie but in a manner present death, in case she had cried for helpe. Then uttered Tarquinius and confessed his amorous passion, fell to intreat and intreat againe, and with his praiers intermedled threats, and went euery way about her, not ceassing by all meanes to sift, to sound

 and tempt the womans heart. But when he saw her obstinat and invincible, and (to die for it) not relenting one jot; then, besides the feare of death, he presented unto her dishonour and shame: pretending that after he had massacred her, he would lay by her side in naked bed, her own manservant with his throat cut; that it might be voiced abroad, that she was taken and killed in filthie adultery.Lucretia forced by Tarquinius Sextus. For fear of this reproch and infamie, see how sinfull lust gat the victory, and conquered constant chastity: and Tarquinius in great pride and jolitie, that he had by assault won the fort of a womans honor, departed thence. But wofull Lucretia, all sorrowing for so heavie a mischance, dispatched a messenger to her father at Rome, and so forward to her husband at Ardea, with this errand: That they should come unto her, each of them with one faithfull and trustie friend, and hereof they must not faile, but make all the speed they could, for that there was befallen a  greevous chance and horrible. So there repaired to the Sp. Lucretia her father, accompanied with P. Valerius the sonne of Volesus: and Collatinus her husband, with L. Iun. Brutus. Who both together by chance going backe to Rome, encountred in the way his wives messenger. Lucretia they found sitting alone in her bedchamber, all heavie and sad: and she at the comming of these her deerest friends, shed teares and wept apace. How now my deere (qouth her husband) is all well? No God wot sir,The pittifull plaines of cha^ Lucrece. (quoth she againe:) For how can ought be well with a woman that is despoiled of her honour and womanhood? The print, Collatinus, of another man is to be seen in thy own bed.
Howbeit, my bodie only is distained: my mind and heart remaineth yet unspotted: and that my death shall make good and justifie. But give me first your right hands, and make faithfull promise that the adulterer shall not escape unpunished. Sex. Tarquinius is the man, he it is, who this night  past, entertained as a friend, but indeed a very foe in the highest degree, hath by force and violence taken from hence with him his pleasure, a deadly pleasure, I may say, to me: and to himselfe also no lesse, if yeebe men of courage. All of them one after other give their assured word, comforted the wofull hearted woman, excused her selfe that was but forced, and laid all the blame upon him that committed the shamefull act: saying, It is the mind that sinneth, and not the bodie; and where there was no will and consent, there could be no fault at all.
Well (quoth the) what is his due to have, see you to that: as for me, howsoever I quit and assoile my selfe of sinne, yet I will not be freed from punishment. And never shall there by example of Lucretia, any unhonest woman or wanton callot live a day: and thus having said, with a knife which she had close hidden under her clothes, shee stabbed her selfe to the heart, and sinking downe forward, fell upon the floore  readie to yeeld up the ghost. Out alas, cried her husband and father hereat: and whilest they two were in their plaints and mones,Lucretia killeth herselfe. Bratus drew forth the knife out of the wound of Lucretia, and holding it out afore him, all embrewed and dropping with bloud, Now I swear (quoth he) by this bloud, by this most chast and pure bloud, before the vilanie wrought by the kings sonne, and here before the gods I protest, whom I cal to witnesse, that I wil by fire and sword, and with all my might and maine persecute and drive the country of L. Tarquinius the prowd, and his ingracious wife, and the whole brood of his children, and suffer neither him nor any els for his fake to raigne as king at Rome. Then gave he the knife to Collatinus, and so to Lucretius and Valerius, who greatly amased at this so strange occurrent, and wondering how it came to passe, that Brutus should of a suddaine be so changed, and become so stout of stomacke and courageous, tooke the same forme  of oath that he sware afore: and so leaving their wailing and lamentation, and wholly set upon anger and revenge, they followed Brutus as their captaine and leader, to put downe and overthrow the government of kings, and utterly to root our their race. The dead corpes of Lucretia, was had out of dores, brought into the market place, and there shewed. And thither, what with wondring (as the manner is) at so strange a sight, and what with the indignation of so unworthie a fact, they raised much people together. Everie man for his part was readie ynough to complaine of the wickednesse and violence done by the kings bloud. The sorrow of Lucretius the father on the one side, the resolution of Brutus on the other side, who rebuked and blamed all vaine weeping and foolish moning, mooved and persuaded all that were present, that like men of valour, like true hearted Romanes, they would take armes against them that demeaned themselves no better, nay  worse than ordinarie enemies. And presently, the bravest and tallest yong men shewed themselves forward, readie in armour, and voluntarie. The rest of the youths followed streight after. And having left at Collatia the one halfe of their forces in garrison, toward the gates, and set certaine watches, that no man brought tidings or newes unto the king and his sons, of this rising and commotion, all the other were appointed in warlike maner, followed their leader Brutus, from thence directly to Rome. At the suddaine comming thither of this armed multitude: no marvell if all

the way where as they passed and marched, there arose a feare and trouble among the people. But when they perceived the most substantiall and principall cittizens in the forefront, they judged whatsoever the matter meant, it was not for naught. And verily this hainous fact disquieted the minds of men no lesse at Rome, than it had before at Collatia. Therefore from all parts of the citie there was flocking and running into the market place. And being thither come, the Bedell or common Crier, summoned the people to appeare before the tribune of the Celeres or Captaine of the guard: which office haply Brutus bare at that time.
Where he made an oration,The ^emonstranc^^ (...) Brutus, (...), the people against the king and his b^ood. not proceeding from that spirit, nor resembling that qualitie of nature which unto that day he had pretended and made shew of unto the world, for he inveyed against the violence and filthie lust of Sextus Tarquinius; the shamefull vilanie and not to be named, done upon the bodie of Lucretia: he discoursed of her lamentable end and piteous death, and  the desolate case of Tricipitinus, berest now of all his children: who accounted the occasion of his daughters death a greater indignitie, and more pitifull, than her verie death. Moreover he laid abroad the pride of the king himselfe, the miseries, the infinite toyle and pains of the commons, buried as it were under the ground, with cleansing and casting of ditches, voiding and ferming of the sinkes. Saying, that the men of Rome which were the conquerers of all nations about them, were now of warriers become quarriers, hewers of stone and day labourers. He reckoned vp also and put them in mind of the unworthie death and cruell murder of Servius Tullius: and how his daughter (oh abhominable act!) rode over the corps of her father in her cursed chariot: And herewith he calleth on the gods that are revengers of outrages and wrongs done to parents. Thus rehearsing these and other matters, much more grievous and horrible, (I verily belleeue) according as the present indignitie at the verie time doth minister and giue utterance for, not so easie penned and set downe by writers that come after, he so mightily inflamen the multitude, that he caused them to depose the king, to deprive him of his royall state and dignitie, yea and to decree and enact, that L. Tarquinius with his wife and children should be banished for ever. Himselfe hauing selected and armed the yonger gallants who offered their service, and willingly entered their names, set forward in person to the campe lying before Ardea, for to excite the armie there against the king: leauing the government of the Citie unto Lucretius, who had before bene appointed deputie and lieutenant there, by the king. In this time of garboile, Tullia left the pallace and fled, and all the way as she went, both men and women cursed and cried out upon her, and be sought the ghostly spirits and furies of parents to be  avenged. When newes here of was brought into the camp, and that the king upon these strange tidings made hast towards Rome to stay and suppresse these broyles: Brutus hauing intelligence of his comming, turned another way because the would not meete with him. And so at one instance in a manner, by contrarie journies came Brutus to Ardea, and Tarquinius to Rome. But the gates were shut against Tarquinius,T^^quinius the king banished. and in steed of entrance, warned he was, and commanded into exile. The whole campe receiued with joy, Brutus the redeemer of their Citie. From thence also were the kings sonnes driven: two of them followed after their father and departed into banishment unto Caere, a towne of the Tuskanes: as for Sextus Tarquinius, he retired himselfe to Gabes as it were into his owne kingdome: where he was murdered in revenge of old quarrels, upon mallice and hatred of the people which he had brought upon himselfe in times past. L. Tarquinius Superbus raigned 25 yeares. Thus continued the kings regiment at Rome, from the foundation of the Citie, unto the freedome and redemption the thereof, 244 yeares. Then in a solemne assemblie and election by the Centuries, held, by the Provost of the citie,Con^^ls first created. according to the ordinance of Servius Tullius in his commentaries, two Consuls were created: L. Iunius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus.



THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the second Booke.
BRutus tooke an oath of the people, that they should not suffer any to vaigne king at Rome. Hee compelled his fellow Consul Tarquinius Collatinus, a suspected man to take part with the Tarquines, by reason of the affinitie he had with them, to give over the Consulship, and to depart the cittie. The goods of the king and his sonnes he commanded to be seised upon, and rifled. A field of theirs be consecrated to Mars, which was named afterwards Campus Martius, or Mars field. Hee beheaded certaine young gentlemen of the nobilitie, together with his owne and his brothers sonnes, for conspiring to receive the king and his complices againe into the cittie. Vnto the bondslare Vindicius, that bewraied the complot, he gave his freedome, of whom Vindicta tooke the name. Having led an armie against the king, who had assembled a power of Veientians and Tarquiniens, and made warre, he died in battell together with Aruns, the sonne of Superbus: and for his death the dames of Rome mourned one whole yeare. P. Valerius the Consull propounded and made a law concerning Appealing unto the people. The Capitoll was dedicated. Porsena king of the Clusines, warring in the quarrell of the Tarquines, and being come to the Iamculum, was by the valor of Cocles Horatius, empeached that he passed not the Tyber: who alone, whiles others hewed downe the Sublician bridge, withstood the Tuscanes: and when it was broken downe, leapt armed as he was into the river, and swam over to his fellowes. Another example of manhood is reported of Mutius, who being entred the camp of the enemies with full intent to kill Persona, and having slaine his principall Secretarie, whom hee tooke for the king, was apprehended: and thrusting to his hand into the fire of the altars, whereupon they had burned sacrifice, suffered it there to frie untill it was consumed: and said withall, that there were behind him three hundred more besides, that had sworne the death of the king himselfe. Who wondring at their resolution, was driven to offer conditions of peace, and upon taking of hostages to give over warre: amongst whom, one virgin Cloelia, beguiled her keepers, made an escape, and swam over Tyber to her friends: and being rendred againe, was by Porsena sent honorablie home, and had her statue or image on horsebacke, set up for a memoriall. App. Claudius abandoned the Sabines, and fled to Rome, of whom the tribe Clausia tooke the name, and was added to the rest. The number of tribes was encreased, to be one and twentie. Against Tarquinius Superbus, who with a power of Latines waged warre, A. Posthumius the Dictator, obtained a prosperous battell at the lake Regillus. The commonsrising, for being enthralled unto their creditors, retired themselves into the mount Sacer, and were by the policie and counsaile of Menenius Agrippa, reclaimed from their sedition, and appeased. The same Agrippa being deceased, was by reason of his povertie, buried at the citties charges. There were created five Tribunes of the Commons. Corioli a towne of the Valscians, was taken by the valour and industrious meanes of Cn. Martius, who thereupon was surnamed Coriolanus. T. Latinus a meane Commoner was warned in a dreame to make relation to the Senate of certaine religious ceremonies: and for neglecting the same, lost his sonne, and sell himselfe to bee lame of his lims, and being brought into the Senate in a chaire, after hee had declared the same, returned sound on his feet home againe. Cn. Martius Coriolanus after he was banished, became general of the Volscians, and with an armie of enemies approached the cittie of Rome: unto whom, first Embassadors were of purpose sent, and afterwards the Priests and whole Cleargie persuaded with him, not to make warre against his native countrey, but all in vaine. Howbent Veturia his mother, and Volumnia his wife entreated him and obtained, that hee should depart backe againe. The law Agraria, Concerning division of lands among the poore commons, was now first put up and proposed. Sp. Cassius and Alderman, after he had beene Consul, was condemned for aspiring to be king, and suffered death therefore. Oppia a Vest all Nun was for incest buried quicke. Against the Veientians neeve enemies and ill neighbours, yet indeed troublesome rather than noisome and dangerous, the house alone of the Fabij, required to be emploied in services: and set out three hundred and fixe armed men to the field, who everie one were by the enemies slaine neere the river Cremera, and left but one onely at home alive of that name, under foureteene yeares of age. Ap. Claudius the Consull having fought unfortunately against the Volscians, and that, by meanes of the stubbornesse and unrulinesse of his armie, cudgeled everie tenth man of his souldiors. Over and besides (this booke) containeth the exploits against the Volscians, Aequtans, and Veientians, and the seditious discords betweene the Nobilitie and Commons.


NOw will I describe from henceforth, the acts both in war and peace of the  people of Rome, a free state now from this time forward: their yearely Magistrates and governours: the authoritie and rule of laws, more powerfull and mightie than that of men. Which freedome of theirs, the last kings pride made more acceptable and welcome. As for the other kings before him, they raigned so, as that they might bee counted all of them, and that worthily builders of sundrie part of the cittie one after another, according as they everie one by himselfe added still one new place or other, for the multitude by them encreased, to inhabite. Neither is it to be doubted, but that even the verie same Brutus, who deserved so great honour and glorie for expelling the  prowd king Tarquine, should have done the same to the exceeding danger of the weale publick, if for desire of unripe and untimely freedome, he had wrested the roiall dignitie and governement: from any of the former princes. For what would have come of it, if that communaltie consisting of heardmen and fugitive strangers, resorting out of their owne countries there to dwell, having under protection of a sanctuarie and priviledged place gotten libertie, or at leastwise impunitie; being now freed and past feare of a roiall majestie, had begun to be troubled and disquieted, with the ruffling stormes and seditious tempests of the Tribunes? and in a new and strange cittie sowen debated, and intertained variance with the Nobilitie, before that the furest pledges of wives and children, the dearest affection of the verie place and soile, which requireth long time of liking and loving, had united and knit their hearts together? Certes, the  state not yet come to full growth and maturitie, had by discord faded and come to naught, which a peaceful and gracious governement cherished and fostered, and by cherishing and nourishing brought to that passe, that now being come to ripenesse and perfection of strength, it might be able to bring forth and beare the good and wholsome fruits of libertie.
The beginning of this freedome you must account in regard hereof, That the Consularie regiment was annuall, and from yeare to yeare, rather than that the roiall power and jurisdiction that the kings had, was any whit abated and diminished. For the first Consuls had the same absolute authoritie, held all the former roialties, and retained still the regall ensignes and ornaments of supreme dignitie. This only provided, that they should not both have the rods borne before them, for avoiding a twofold feare and dread of their majestie. Brutus with the good liking and  consent of his companion in office, had the preheminence and prerogative of that honour to be done unto him alone: who had not been aforetime a greater instrument, and more forward to procure and recover the libertie, than he was afterward a sure maintainer and protector of the same. And first above all other things, whilest the people were yet greedie of this new freedome, for feare least they might any time after he won by entreatie or moved by gifts on the kings part, he caused them to swear that they would never suffer any to be king at Rome. After this, because the Senat might be of more power and greater reputation, by the frequent company of that degree and order: he encreased their number (which had ben impaired much by massacres, committed by the late king) to the full complement of three hundred: by chusing the cheese and principall of the degree of knights of horsemen. And hereof came as they say, this custome, to  admit into the Senate both them that were before time of the ancient Nobilitie, and also those that were newly chosen for the supplie: naming these that were last enrolled, the new Senat. And a wonder it was to see, how much good this did to the concord of the cittie, and to the knitting of the hearts of Nobles and Commons together.
This done, they went in hand with religion and church matters: and for that there were certain publick sacrifices that had been usually executed by the kings themselves in their owne persons: least therefore they should not find the misse of kings in any respect, nor long after them again, they create of purpose a king-priest of sacrificer: which sacerdotall dignitie they ordained to be under the Arch-prelate, least that this new addition and title of honor, might prejudice their freedome any jot, whereunto they had then a special regard above all other things. And I wot not  well, but I thinke verily they went beyond all measure, and were over precise in the maintainance and strengthening thereof every way, even in the smallest trifles, and toies of no moment.
For when as nothing els was offensive unto them, the name forsooth of one of their Consuls became suspected and odius unto the cittie, without any other scandale whatsoever. And thus they muttered and said, that the Tarquinij had raigned overlong, and too much alreadie: that Priscus first

 began, and when after him succeeded king Servius Tullius, Superbus Tarquinius not having in that time and space betweene, forgot the kingdome, as seeing another invested therin; by wicked practice and violence claimed and recouered the same againe, as the inheritance properly to his house belonging. And now that Superbus is driven out and gone, the rule and gouernement is devolved unto Collatinus and there resteth. These Tarquines belike (say they) cannot skill how to liue as private men: giving out among, that the verie name was dangerous to a free state, and in one word, they could not endure it. These and such like speeched at first were whispered abroad throughout all the citie, by them that underhand sounded by little and little the harts and dispositions of men: and when these surmises and suspitions were once buzzed into the commons heads, and they thereby disquieted, Brutus called them to a generall assemblie. Where first and  formost he reciteth the oth of the people, That they should suffer none to be king, not oughtels in Rome,Brutus the Consul persuadeth Tarquinius to give over the Consulship and depart. from whence might arise any danger to their libertie. This moth is the thing (quoth hee) that with all diligence, and by all meanes possible is to be maintained, and nothing therto appertaining is to be dispised and lightly regarded.
As for me, I am unwilling to speake, in respect of the person, neither would I speak at all, but that the love and affection to the C. W. doth overrule me. The people of Rome is not throughly persuaded, that they have recovered their entire and perfect libertie. For as yet the kings blood, yea and the kings name, not onely remaineth still, but also beareth soveraigne rule in then citie: This is it that hurteth, this is it I say that hindereth their true freedome. Now quoth he, L. Tarquinius willingly of your owne accord rid them of their fear. We remember well, we confesse and acknowledge, you it was that expelled  the kings. Finish therefore and perfit this great benefit of yours: take away from hence the kings name also. As for your goods and substance, your citizens and countrimen, if they will be advised by me, shall not onely yeeld unto you againe, but if ought be short and wanting, shall by my consent supplie the same to the full right liberally. Depart I say, and friendly take your leave: deliver the citie and disburden them of this their feare, that peradventure is but vain and needlesse: Howbeit, this their minds give them, that together with the stocke and house of the Tarquines, the kings rule and government will likewise void and depart for ever. The Consull at this so strange and sodaine a motion, first wondred much, and was not able to open his mouth. But afterwards as he addressed himselfe and began to make a speech, the heads of the citie came about him, and with many praiers besought the same at his hands. As for all the rest, they prevailed  full little with him. But after that Sp. Lucretius, a more grave and elder man than himselfe, of greater worth aforetime, and his father in law besides, took him in hand and dealt with him sundrie waies, one while by way of intreatie, otherwhiles by persuasions and reasons, that he would condescend unto that which the citie in one generall consent required: then the Consull fearing, least hereafter being once out of his place and a private man againe, hee should chance to bee forced thereunto, with the losse of his goods and some disgrace perhaps besides; resigned up the office of the Consulship, and removing all that he had away to Lavinium, quit the citie and departed. Then Brutus by an act and decree of the Senat, proposed unto the people, That all the race and linage of the Tarquines should be exiled. And in a general Session of the Centuries, he created for to be his colleaque in goverment, P. Valerius, by whose assistance he had driven  out the kings.
No man doubted now that the Tarquines were about to take armes: yet that warre happened not so soone as men looked for: but see (a thing that no man feared) they had like by fraud and treason at home to have lost and forgone their freedome again. There were of the flower of Rome, certaine youths,A conspiracie of yoong gentlemen of the Nobilitie. and those of no low degree not base parentage descended, who in the kings daies had lived like yoong princes more loosely and at pleasure, as companions and plaifephers with the yoong Tarquines, the kings sonnes: who seeking to enjoy the same licentious life still, in this equality of estate wherin all others then lived, made mone and complained one to another, That the libertie of others turned to their servitude.
The king, say they, is a man, at whose hands one might obtaine somewhat, as need required, were the cause right or were it wrong: where a man  might find favour and friendship, as who could both be displeased and angrie, and also forgive and remit a fault, and knew well how to make difference betweene a friend and a foe. As for lawes, they are things dease and inexorable: more holsome and commodious to the poore than to the rich and mightie, affourding no release not pardon, if one chance to trespasse and transgresse: And a ticklish point it is and perilous, for a man among so many errours whereto our frailtie is subject, to beare himselfe onely upon his innocent life. Being thus of their owne accord alreadie

discontent, sodainly unlooked for, there came embassadours from the kings, who without any  mention at all of returne, demaunded onely their goods againe. Vpon their message being being delivered and heard in the Senate house, this debate and questions held them for certaine daies in counsell, fearing least that the goods not restored might minister occasion of quarrell, and being rendered, yeeld maintenance and nourishment of warre. In the meane time the Embassadours dealt and treated with divers persons diversly: in open shew, claiming only their goods, but secretly and under hand, contriving how to compasse the kingdome for their maisters. And under colour of procuring friends for the accomplishement of that which they pretended, and was in question, they sounded eftsoones the minds of certaine noble young gentlemen, how they stood affected to their dessignements. Whose words and reasons were of them gently intertained: and thereupon they delivered unto them letters from the Tarquines, and withall conferred  together, and practised the receiving of the kings privily by night into the citie. The execution of this plot was principally committed to certain of the Vitellij and Aquilij, that were brethen. A sister of the Vitellij was married unto the Consull Brutus, by whom he had two sons that were young men, Titus and Tiberius, whom their vncles by the mother side made partakers with them likewise of their counsell. Besides, there were diverse young gentleman (whose names long time hath worne out quite) made acquainted there with. In this meane season, their opinion in the Senat house prevailed, who thought is best that the goods should be restored: and the embassadors upon that occasion made stay in the cittie, for that they had gotten time of the Consuls to provide carriage for to have away the kings staffe, and other moveable goods. All the time spent they in consulting with the Conspirators, and so importunatelylaboured them, untill they had  procured their letters also unto the Tarquinij: for otherwise (say they) how will they beleeve but that their Embassadours make wrong report of matters so important. The giving of those letters in pledge of their truth and plaine meaning, prooved to bewray and reveale their purposed enterprise. For the day before the Embassadours were to take their leave, and returne to the Tarquines, they fortuned to sup with the Vitellij: and whilest the conspirators there, were in sad and close talke together, conferring at large about this new devised practise, and no man by but onely themselves (as the manner is:) a certaine bondslave chanced to overheare them, one that before, had an incling where about they went, but waited the opportunitie when the letters should be given to the Embassadors, which being found upon them, might directly prove the treason. This slave after he understood the letters were delivered, gave intelligence of all unto  to the Consuls: who immediately departed from their houses to take the Embassadours, and the conspirators in the manner,The conspiracie (...). and without any stirre or tumult light upon them unwares, and dashed all. But of the letters they had a speciall care, that they should be forthcoming and not miscarie. And commiting the traitors forthwith to prison, they made some pause and doubt about the Embassadors, what to doe with them. For albeit they seemed to have deserved no lesse but to be vsed as enemies, and to have no favor at all, yet had they regard to the law of Nations. Now concerning the kings goods, which they thought meet before to be restored, the matter came about wholly in question againe before the Senatours: who being overcome with ire and indignation, denied flatly the rendring of them, yea and forbad they should bee consiscate and converted to the common treasure: but they were given away among the commons to make  spoile and havock thereof: to the end, that they having once touched or seised on the kings goods as a bootie, might for ever after bee past all hope of any peace of favour with them. The field of the Tarquines lying between the cittie and Tyber, was consecrated unto Mars, and after called Campus Maritus,Campus Maritus. i. Mars field. It happened (as men say) that there was at that time standing corne there, now ripe and readie for the harvest: which crop of the ground, because they made some scruple of conscience otherwise to consume, therefore it was cut downe, come, straw, stubble and all, and a great number of people sent thither at once to carrie it away in baskets and skeps, and poure it downe the Tyber, running then but shallow, as it useth to doe in the middest and heat of Summer. And so the heapes of corne, together with the mud stucke still and rested in the ebbe places and fourds of the river: and by little and little encreased with one thing or  other that came downe the streame, untill it became an Island. Afterwards, I suppose there were dams and piles made therunto, and by mans hand it grew so high, and so firm a peece of ground, that it was able to beare even temples and stately galleries that stood thereupon.
When the kings goods were thus spoiled, rifled, and made away, the traitors were condemned and put to death. Which suffering of theirs was the more notable, for that the father by his

 place and vertue of his office, was bound and charged to see execution done upon his owne children: and he who otherwise ought not to have bene a spectator and looker on, euen he (such was his fortune) was forced of necessitie to be the principall actor in this tragicall execution. Then stood these most noble youths bound fast to a stake. But among all, the Consull his children, turned upon them the cies of everie man, from all the rest, as unknowne persons and of no reputation; all men pitied them, not so much for being punished, as for deserving by their fact to be punished: That they could find in their hearts and once let enter into their thought, to betraie into the hands of Tarquinius, sometimes a proud prince, and then a cruell enemie, and banished rebell, their native countrey, and lately and in that verie yeare set free from captivitie: their naturall father who set it free: the Consulship  sprung first out of the familie of the Iunij: the nobles, the commons, and in one word, all things whatsoever in Rome belonging either to God or man.The traitors executed. Then came the consuls forth, tooke their places and set them downe on the tribunall seat. The Lictours were sent to doe their office, who first stripped them naked and scourged them with rods, and then with an axe chopt off their heads. All which time,Brutus putteth to death his owne children. the father himselfe, his countenance and visage was a wonderfull spectacle to behold, considering how a fathers affection could hold out and abide the performance of this publike and exemplarie punishment. When the offenders had once suffered, to the end there might be shewed noble examples on both sides, for to debarre wickednes, and stop the course of sinne: the informer and reveiler of treason, had for his reward a peece of monie, out of the common treasurie, obtained his freedome, and was enfranchised a citizen of Rome. This was the first  man as they say, that was made free by the rod Vindicta: for that the partie his name was Vindicius, from whence, as some thinke, the word Vindicta was derived: after whom, this was observed. That whosoever in that sort gat their freedome, were supposed withall endenized.
When tidings here of came to Tarquinius, with the manner of proceeding in euerie circumstance, he not onely grieued that so great hope of his was frustrate and come to nothing, but also was set on fire with hatred and indignation: and seeing the way shut up and stopped against all deceitfull courses, he thought there was no dealing now but by fine force and open warre. Where upon he went vp and downe, sollicited and made humble suit unto the cities of Etruria, and besought the Veientians especially, and the i. 'The men of Tarquinij. The speech of Tarquinius Superbus to the Tuskans. Tarquiniens, that they would not suffer him, being come of their own blood, a banished man, forlorne, poore and needie, dispossessed so latelie  of so goodly a realme and kingdome, together with his children (forward yoong men) to perish even before their eies.
Alledging that others had been sent for and set out of forrain parts unto Rome for to be kings: and he their leige king, and such an one as advanced still the Romane empire by martiall prowesse, was by the wicked conspiracie of his neerest kinsfolke and friends deposed from his imperiall dignitie and expelled: and they now, because there was no one man thought sufficient and worthie to raigne, had parted betweene them the kingdome, and given among the people his goods as a spoile; that there might not be any one, who had not his finger, and whole hand in so foule a fact. Saying moreover, that his mind and intention was, to seeke meanes to returne into his owne countrie, to recover his crowne, yea and to persecute, and to be reuenged of those unthankfull subjects: and therefore praied them, to set to their helping  hand, and yeeld him assistance: and not to sit downe with so many old wrongs of their owne part received, namely, their legions so often hewen in peeces, their lands and livings taken from them: but to go with him for revenge. These suggestions mooved the Veientians, and everie man for himselfe muttered and gave out in threatening wise, that now at length, having a Romane captaine especially to be their leader, they were to doe away the soule dishonours sustained, and win againe what by former warre they had lost. As for the Tarquiniens, they were soon incited in regard of name and consanguinitie, and thought it was a godly matter and an honour unto them, to haue of their owne name and house to be kings of Rome. Thus two armies of two cities banded with Tarquine, for to restore him to his kingdome againe, and to make sharp warre upon the Romanes: who being entered the territorie of Rome, were met with by the Romane consuls.  The fooftmen marched under the conduct of Valerius, marshalled in a battallion soure square. Brutus with the horse went before to espie and discouer the coasts: In like sort the men of armes of the enemies rode foremost under the leading of Aruns Tarquinus the kings sonne, and the king himselfe in person followed with the legions.
Aruns espying by the Lictors, the Consull a farre of, and as he approached neerer knowing Brutus more certainly by his face, all inflamed with yre: This is the gallant (quoth he) this is he, that hath driven and banished us out of our

native countrie. Lo how bravelie he setteth forward, all gorgeously to be seene and dight in  our roiall ensignes and ornaments. Now helpe ye gods that are revengers of wrongs done to kings: and there withall set spurs to his horse, and ran amaine with full carriere upon the Consul his own person, intending certainly to speed him. Brutus perceived likewise that he made directly toward him: (Now was it a noble and worthie sight for the captaines themselves to begin the battell.) Whereupon with resolute courage he encountereth him. And so fiercely they charged one another, and so deadly were they bent, that neither of them had regard to save himselfe, so hee might wound and mischeefe his enemie, but were both with a counterpush that quite pierced their targets run into the sides, and thrust through, and so having one anothers launce, sticking in their bodies, fell from their horses readie to die. Herewith began on both sides the other horsemen to fight, and within a while the footmen also seconded them. And so equally were  they mached, and the barrell so indifferently fought, that it was verie doubtful whether side had the better. For on both parts the right wings got the upper hand, and downe went the left. The Veientians,The Veientians defeited by the Romanes. unto whom it was no newes to be overcome of Romanes, were discomfited and put to flight. But their new enemies the Tarquiniens, not onely held their owne and stood to it, but also from their battel put backe, and forced the Romans to give ground, and gave them the repulse. After this conflict there fell such a fear and terror upon Tarquinius, and the Tuscanes, that both armies as well of the Veientians as the Tarquiniens, gave over their enterprise with doing just nothing, and by night dislodged and departed every man to his owne home. This battell was more notable by reason of certaine miracles that men report: namely, that in the dead time of the night next following, when all were at rest, there was heard a mightie voice of Sylvanus (as  men thought) out of the wood Arsia, to utter these words, THAT THERE VVAS SLAINE ON THE TVSCANES PART MORE BY ONE, AND THAT THE ROMANES VVAN THE FIELD. Thus verely and no otherwise departed they asunder: the Romanes as winners, and the Tuskans as having the worse. For the next morrow, so soone as it was day, and that none of the enemies appeared in sight, P. Valerius the Consull gathered up the spoile together, and returned from thence with triumph to Rome, and performed the funerals of his brother Consull, in all sumptuous maner and solemn pompe, as possibly at that time he could deuise. But, that which did him the greatest honour after his death, was the publicke sorrow and heavinesse of the cittie, in this respect above all singular and memorable, for that the dames and Matrones of Rome mourned a whole yeare for him, as for their own father, in that he had ben so sharp a revenger of violence  done to the chasthie of women.
After this, the Consull that survived, presently upon the great liking and favour that hee was in (see how wavering and unconstant the minds are of the common people) was not onely envied, but also suspected, yea and charged with an odious and horrible crime. The voice went and bruied it was abroad, that he aspired to the crown. And why? because forsooth he had not chosen unto him a new fellow Consull in the roome of Brutus: and began to build aloft on the top of Velia, where (say they) in an high place and strongly scituate, hee may make a castle impregnable. These things commonly spoken and credited too, vexed much, and mightily greeved the Consull in his very soule, as a great indignitie offered unto him. Whereupon hee assembled the people together, and causing the rods to be held downewards to the ground, went up into the  pulpit to make an Oration unto them. That sight pleased the multitude passing well, taking it for a plaine demonstration, that the markes and ensignes of rule and government submitted unto them, was a very acknowledging and confession that the people was of greater majestie and power than the Consull.P. Valerius the Consull, unto the people.
Where after silence made, and commandement to hearken and give eare, the Consull began highly to extoll the fortune and good hap of his Colleague deceased, who having with great honour set his countrey free, ended his daies, fighting manfully in defence of the Weale-publicke, even in the prime, height, and best time of his glorie, ere that it became subject unto envie: but he himselfe outliving it, remained alive, exposed unto criminous slanders and spigthfull malice of men, and of a deliverer and redeemer of his countrey, was now reputed no better than the Aquillij and Vitellij. And will you never indeed (quoth hee) approoue  the vertuous and honest conversation of a man so well, but it shall be tainted with vnjust suspition? What? would any man thinke, that I being so fierce and fell an enemie of the kings, should ever feare to incurre the jelousie of men, for seeking to bee king? What if I dwelt on the top of Tarpeie cliffe, even in the verie Capitoll, should I beleeve and thinke it possible, that my countreymen, neighbours and cittizens, would stand in feare of me? and will so small a matter as this

 turne the balance of your opinion and conceit of mee? Is your assiance and confidence in mee grounded so slightly, and standeth it upon so nice tearms and ticklish points, that you force more and make greater reckoning of my dwelling place, than of the qualitie of my person. Wel, P. Valerius his house shall be no hinderance or impeachment unto your libertie, O Quirites, ye shall not need to feare any harme from Velia for me. I will remove my house not only downe into the plaine, but even to the valley under the hill foot, that you may dwell above me, and overlook me (a suspected cittizen.) Let them a gods name build in Velia, who may be better trusted with the cities freedom, than P. Valerius. Then was immediatly the timber and all carried downe beneath Velia, and where as now Vicus Publicus is, in the very bottome of the hill, was his house reedified.
After this were lawes enacted, which not only acquit the Consull, and cleared him of all suspition  of affecting to the kingdome, but also contrariwise wrought such effect, that he became exceeding popular againe, wherupon, he was surnamed Publicola or Poplicola. And first and formost the Statute passed as touching the appeale unto the people,Valerius surnamed Publicola or Poplicola. against the rulers and Magistrates. Item, concerning the cursing and condemning of him both bodie and goods, that should intend or plot to usurpe princely dominion over them. These acts the commons liked well of. Which when he had alone ordained, that all the thankes and praise might bee his therefore, then assembled he a generall Session for the substituting of another Consull unto him, in the roome of his colleague departed. So, Sp. Lucretius was created Consull: who being an aged man and of great yeares, feeble withall, and not able toexecute the office and function of a Consull, within few dates pased nature her debt and died. And in place of Lucretius was M. Horatius Pulvillus  chosen. In some ancient writers I doe not find that Lucretius was Consull. For immediatly after Brutus they make mention of Horatius. But I thinke verily because no act of his, made his Consulship memorable, thereupon he was forgotten and left out. Now as yet was not the temple of Iupiter in the Capitoll dedicated. And when Valerius and Horatius the Consuls, cast lots whether of them twaine should performe that dutie, the charge fell unto Horatius, and Publicola went forth to the Veientian warre. But the kinsfolke and friends of Valerius tooke it more greevously and impatiently than reason was, that the honour of the dedication of so famous a temple, was given unto Horatius. Devising therfore by all means possible they could, to impeach it, and seeing they had assaied all in vain, and nothing tooke effect: even at the very instant, whiles the Consull was holding a post of the temple, and in his solemne praiers to the god, behold  they brought unto him heavie and wofull newes, that his sonne was dead, and that he might not lawfully, whiles his houshold mourned and was polluted with a dead corps, consecrate the temple. Whether it were, that he gave no credit to the messenger, or rather was of heart so stout, neither is it for certaine reported, nor easie for a man to divine. But for all these tidings, never a jot was he turned from his purpose, nor said ought els to the messenger, but willed that hee should bid the corps to bee had forth to buriall, and so holding the pillar or post still, said out his praier, and dedicated the temple. These were the acts done both at home and abroad, in the first yeare after the expulsion of the kings.
Then were P. Valerius the second time, and T. Lucretias created Consuls.
By this time were the Tarquines fled for succour to Lartes Porsena king of Clusium: where, by many reasons and remonstrances,  intermedled with praier, one while they besought him not to suffer them, descended from the Tuscans, of the same bloud and name, to live needie and forlorn in perpetual exile; otherwhile they advised and warned him not to put up without revenge, this new fashion of expelling kings, now comming up. Saying, that libertie in it selfe had sweetnesse ynough: and unlesse kings would defend and maintaine their crownes with as great might and maine, as citties desired to enjoy freedome, there would be a generall confusion, and all things turned upside down: neither would there be in States and Commonwealths any thing a lost and eminent above other, endured: whereupon would insue a finall end of kingly regiment, a thing with God and man of all other most excellent and beautifull. Porsena supposing it would be an honourable matter unto the Tuscanes,Porsena before geth Rome. both to have a king at Rome, and a king too of the Tuscanes line, came with a cruel  armie against Rome. Never was the Sena at any time afore put in such feare: so mightie in those daies was the puissance of Clusium, and the name of Porsena so renowmed. Moreover, they feared not their enemies onely, but also their owne subjects at home, least peradventure the Communaltie of Rome for feare of warre, should receive the king into the cittie, and accept of peace, though it cost them their libertie. During which time the Commons were entertained of the Nobles with all kindnesse, and many favours and courtesies they had at their hands. And

above all things order was taken for provision of graine and victuals. And for to purvey store of  corne, some were sent to the Volsci, others to Cumes. Over and besides the licence of selling salt, because it was sold at an exceeding high price, was taken from private salters, and was undertaken by the citie, with all the cost and charges ther to belonging by them defraied, and salt delivered out to the people at an easie reckoning. The commons also were freed of portage, tollage, and tribute; and rich men that were able to beare the burthen, were assessed at all paiments and contributions: the poore were thought to be charged enough with the bringing up of their children. This kind dealing and indulgencie of the Nobles, kept the citie afterwards (notwithstanding their hard distresse of siege and famine) in such concord and unitie, that the meanest as well as the highest abhorred and detested the name of KK. And never after was there any one private person, so popular, so devoted to the people by craftie meanes and indirect courses tending  to their particular dessignes, as the whole Senat was at that time, by their good government of the Commonweale. Now when the enemies approached neere at hand, everie man made shift for himselfe, forsooke the countries and came into the citie. Which they fortified with strong guards round about: so that what with wals and bulwarks on the one side and what with the Tyber on the other side, it seemed sure enough, and sufficiently defended. The wooden bridge had like to have given the enemie enterance,The (...) Horatius (...). had not the valour of one man beene, even Horatius Codes (who that day by the good fortune of the Romances was a fortresse unto the citie of Rome.) He as good hap was, appointed to ward and keepe the bridge, seeing the Ianicle by a suddame assault wonne, and that the enemies ran down so furiouslie from thence upon him, and contratiwise, the multitude of his owne companies for feare, to forgoe their weapons, breake  their arraies, and to be gone: tooke hold of everie man, opposed himselfe against them afront: and calling God and man to witnesse, protected, shewed and declared unto them, that forsaking and abandoning thus their quarter, all their flying was but in vaine: for if they left the bridge on their backs, to yeeld passage to the enemies, there would anone be more of them in Palatium and the Capitoll, than in the Ianicle: and therfore he willed and commanded them, yea and gave them direction to breake downe the bridge, by hewing, by firing, or by what meanes they possible could: assuring them for his owne part, so much as the bodie of one onlie man was able to doe, he would receive, and withstand the violence of the enemies. Then advanceth he himselfe unto the first entrie or foot of the bridge, and all goodly to bee seene, amongst those that would no point fight, but shewed their backes, he so bent his sword and target in their verie faces, resolute  to encounter with them hand to hand, that even with his wonderfull hardines and incredible courage, he astonied and amazed his enemies. Howbeit, two there were that for verie shame +aried still and stood to him, namely Sp. Largius and Tit. Herminius, bravemen both, as well for noble birth as worthie deeds. Assisted for a while with these gallants, sustained he the first storme of danger and most cumbersome push of the skirmish. But as they that were hewing downe the bridge called upon them to come backe, he constreined those two also to retire and save themselves, while; some little part of the bridge was left behind free and uncut. Then casting all about in menacing manner his fierie and terrible cies, towards the captaines and principals of the Tuskanes, one while he chalenged them one by one to single fight: otherwhiles he rated them all in generall, calling them the hirelings and slaves of proud kings and tyrants; who forgetting and  making no reckoning of their owne freedome, were come to oppugne and impeach the libertie of others. The enemies stood at a baye and in suspence a good whie, looking about them one upon another who should first begin to fight. At last, verie shame made the whole troupe to sturre and comeforward, and so setting up a loud crie, from all sides they let slie their javelins at him, one man alone and their on lie enemie. All this while bare he off their shot which light upon his target, and there stucke, and na^h'lesse with full resolution kept the bridge still, walking his stations, and staulking like a giant. Then assaied they with all their force to beare the man down, and to turne him over into the water: but by this this time the cracke of the bridge broken under him, and the shout withall of the Romanes, for joy that they had finished their worke, staied with suddaine feare their violent assault.
Then praied Cooles in this wise: O father Tiberinus (quoth  hee) O sacred river, with devout heart I thee beseech, receive with thy gracious and mercifull streame, this harnish, these weapons, and this thy soldier. And so all armed as he was, he leapt into the Tyber: and albeit many a dart was flung from alost and light upon him, yet he swam over and escaped safe to his fellowes. A brave adventure for all posteritie another day to talke of, rather than to beleeve. For this so great fortitude and resolution of his, the citie was

 thankfull, and in token thereof his Image or Statue was set up in their common hall, named Comitium, and as much ground given him in compasse, as he was able with a plough to break up in one day. Amongst these publick favors and honors done unto him, the kind affections and good wils of privat persons also, wel appeared: for in that extream want and scarsitie that then was, every man out of his house-store and provision spared from himselfe, and for to give him one thing or another, defrauded his owne bellie. Thus Porsena with the repulse of this his first enterprise, changed his mind from assaulting, to besieging of the cittie: and after he had placed a garrison in the Ianiculum, hee planted himselfe and encamped on the plaine even upon the banckes of the Tyber. And sending for boates and craiers from all parts, both to stop the mouth and passage of Tyber, that no corne should come in and bee conve^ed to Rome: and also that the souldiors  as they saw occasion, might crosse the river, and fetch booties in diverse and sundrie places at their pleasure, in short space he brought the whole country about Rome to such streights, that not onely other things were brought in, but all their cartell also was faine to be driven out, the fields into the cittie, and no man durst put any creature forth out of the gates. The Tuscanes were permitted to be thus bold, not so much for feare as for a policie: for Valerius the Consull waiting for some vantage and opportunitie, suddainely to set upon many of them at once and at unawares, as they stragled abroad disorderly, making little regard to revenge small matters, kept himselfe to be revenged of them throughly, and to pay them home one time or other. To the end therefore he might draw forth these forragers, and toll them abroad, hee gave his men in charge and proclaimed, That the next day in great companies they should put their cattell  forth at the gate Esquilina, which was furthest from the enemies: supposing that they would have intelligence thereof, by reason that in this extremitie of long siege and pinching hunger, some false knaves and disloiall rogues, would flie unto them. And so fell it out indeed. For they had knowledge thereof by a fugitive slave. Whereupon they in farre greater multitudes passe over the river, in hope to make a generall spoile and havock once for all. Then Valerius commanded T. Herminius with a sufficient companie to lie close in ambush at two miles end, in the Sabine high way, and Sp. Largius with a power of lustie tall fellows lightly armed, to keep; the gate Collina, until the enemie were gone by and past: with direction, then to put himselfe betweene the river and them, and so to intercept them in their returne. The other Consull T. Lucretius issued forth with certaine bands of footmen at the gate Naevia: and Valerius himselfe in proper Person set forth from mount Coelius certaine ensignes of his best and choice souldiors. These first  were descried and discovered by the enemie. Herminius so soon as he heard some noise and stir, arose and ran at once out of the ambush, and whilest the Tuscanes turned so set upon Lucretius, he charged them lustily at their backs: so that on every hand from the gate Collina on the one side, and from the gate. Naevia on the other, the al'arme was given. Thus the robbers were slain and cut in peeces in the midst of them: both for that they were overmatched in fight, and also because all the waies were stopped up, that they could not escape by way of flight. And never after durst the Tuscanes raunge about the countrey so audaciously. Howbeit, the siege continued neverthelesse, with great scarsitie of corne, and exceeding dearth within the cittie. And Porsena had good hope by sitting still,The valiant resolution of C. Munus to force it in the end, and be maister thereof.
At what time one C. Mutius  a noble young and gentleman, who thought it a dishonour and soule shame, that the people of Rome, who all the while they were in bondage under kings, were in no warre nor by any enemies beleagerd, should now, being the same still, in time of their freedome, be of these Tuscanes besieged, whose armies they often had defeited: and supposing that by some hardie and adventurous peece of service this reprochfull indignitie was to be revenged, devised at first on his owne head to enter into the enemies campe: but fearing afterwards to go without commission from the Consull, and the knowledge of any other person, least peradventure he might bee taken by the watch of the Romans, and brought backe for a traiterous runagate, at such a time especially, when the hard estate of the cittie was ynough to bring him into a deepe suspition, and to be reputed for no better: presented himselfe before the Counsell into the Senate house: I am right  willing, and I have a purpose my LL (quoth hee) to passe over the Tybre, yea and if I can, to enter the campe of the enemies, not in qualities of a robber, nor to bee revenged for booties from us taken, with doing the semblable. A greater exploit with the favour of the gods, I intend to performane. The Senatours gave their consent, and approved his dessignment. Then with a skeine hidden under his garment, he setteth forward. Being thither come into the campe, he presseth in the thickest throng to stand neere the kings Tribunall. It fortuned that then and there, the

souldiors were receiving their pay. And the Chancellor, or kings principal Secretarie, sat together  with the king in like array, much emploied and busied in many matters, and the souldiours commonly had recourse unto him.
Mutius fearing to enquire whether of them two were Porsena, least by not knowing the king, he should bewray himselfe who hee was, happened (see how fortune in her rathnesse directed his hand) to kill the Secretarie in stead of the king: then as he passed through the fearefull multitude, making himselfe way with his bloudie blade, there was a present outcrie, and therat the kings guard came running in, laid hold of him, and brought him backe before the king his ro^all throne: and albeit he was now forlorne and without all succour, amidst those threats of frowning fortune,(...) his speech to king Po^ena yet as a man more feared stil than fearing: I am (quoth he) a citizen of Rome, and Caius Mutius is my name, a prosessed enemie, I confesse, and an enemie would I have staine; as readie and willing am I to die my selfe, as I was to kill another. For both to doe, and to suffer valiantly, is the part of a noble Romane. And it is not I alone that carrie this mind and resolution against thee, O king, there is a long traine and crue behind, of them that seeke to win the same praise and honour: make thee readie therefore, and arme thy selfe, if thou thinke good, against this danger, and reckon everie hower to bee in hazard of thy life, and to have alwaies at the verie court gates thy enemies sword. This kind of warre doe we youths of Rome denounce openly unto thee: no battell, no fight else shalt thou need to fear. With thee alone will we all, one by one have to do, and with none other. Hereat the king incensed with wrath, and for the danger that he stood in, affrighted with all, commanded in menacing wise that he should be fried at a stake, unlesse he would presently unfold in plaine tearmes, what secret and dangerous practises he meant and threatened under this covert circuit of words and  intricate circumstances. Lo, (quoth hee againe) how little they set by this carkasse, that aspire to great glorie, and aime at honour: and with that, thrust his right hand into the hearth on fire that was made for the sacrifice, and when he indured the rosting there of, as if he had been senselesse, and felt no paine, the king welneere astonished at this wonderful and miraculous sight, start up and leapt from his roiall seat and chaire of estate, commanding the young man to bee had from the altar.(...) his (...) to Mutius.
Goe thy waies(quoth hee) in peace, thou that hast done thine owne selfe more mischeefe, than thou hast attempted against my person. I would say God blesse thee, and worthie hadst thou been of honour for thy prowesse, if it were in my service, and in the behalfe and defence of mine owne countrey: and now by the law of armes. I discharge thee freely, and give thee leave to depart without any hurt or abuse offered unto thee. Then Mutius, as it were to require againe his  courtesie and desert.Ma^ius to Por^^.
Forasmuch as (quoth he) thou settest so great store by valour, and honourest vertue so highly; to the end it may bee seene that thou shalt get at my hands by courtesie that which by cruel threats thou couldst not: these are therfore to let thee understand, that there are three hundred of us noble youths, even the very flower and knighthood of Rome, that have conspired and sworne thy death, and in this manner to assaile thee. My lot it was to be the first, the rest as it shall fall out, will be here shortly, and wait everie man his turne and time, untill they hit right upon thee. Mutius, surnamed afterwards Scavola, by reason of the maime of his right hand,M^rius su^named S^^rol^. was no sooner dismissed and gone, but there followed streight after him to Rome, Embassadours from Porsena; and so much troubled in spirit was he, both for the danger past of the first assault(from which nothing preserved him but a small error and oversight of the assailant) and also for the hazard to come, (for looke how many conspirators remained behind to give the like attempt, so often stood he in jeopardie of his life) that of his owne accord he offered the Romanes conditions of peace. And among other capitulations, he stood hard upon this article (but al in vain) of restoring the Tarqaines into their kingdom. This point the king urged instatnly rather because hee could not well himselfe denie the Tarquines so much, than for that hee was ignorant, that the Romanes would never yeeld thereto. But another article hee got graunted, namely, the restitution of the Veientians lands againe: and the Romanes were driven of necessitie to give him hostages,Peace betweene Po^^^n^ and the Romaner. in case they would have the kings garison to quit the Ianiculum. Vpon these conditions peace was concluded, and Porsena withdrew his forces from the Ianiculum, dislodged and departed out of the territorie of Rome. The Senators bestowed franckly upon Mutius, as a testimoniall of his valiantnesse, a peece of ground lying beyond Tyber, which wasafterwards called Mutia prata. i. Mutius his meddowes.
Vpon this honourable regard and reward of vertue, women were likewise provoked and encouraged to enterprise worthie acts in the service of the Commonweale. For a yoong damosell and virgin named Cladia, one of those hostages aforesaid, whiles the Tuskanes were encamped

(as it fell out) not farre from the bankes of Tyber, deceiving her keepers and leading a companie of other maydens after her, even within the shot and darts of the enemies, tooke the river, swam over with them,The com^tend^bledeed of Cloc^a brought them all to Rome safe, and delivered them to their parents, kinsfolke and friends. Which being reported to the king, he at the first stormed at it, and was all in a rage, and sent unto Rome certaine Oratours to demaund againe his hostage Claelia by name: as for all the rest, he made no great account of them: but afterwards, upon further consideration he admired the enterprise, and plainly said, it surpassed farre all the adventures of the Coclites and the Mutij: so as he pretended that if the mayde were not rendered againe, he would take the league as broken, and being yeelded, he would send her backe to her friends, undefiled and without any abuse or violence done unto her. On both parts was promise faithfully kept: Forboth  the Romanes restored the pledge of peace according to covenant, and seene also it was, that vertue was not onely secured safe, but also highly regarded and honoured with the Tuskane king. For after he had commended and praised the damsell, he promised to give her part of the hostages, chuse whom she would. And when they were all brought forth before her, she made choise (they say) of those yoong boies that were under 14 years of age: which was not onely most besitting her virginitie, but also by the accord of the hostages themselues, best approved: namelie, that that age especially should be delivered out of the enemies hands, which was most subject to injurie and taking wrong. The peace thus renewed and confirmed, the Romanes rewarded this rare valour in that sex, with as new and strange an honour, for, in remembrance of her, in the top of Via sacra, there was erected her statue, A MAIDEN SITTING ON HORSEBACKE.
 There remaineth yet even unto our daies amongst other solemne ceremonies, this one custome received from our ancestours, farre differing and disagreeing from this peaceable and friendly departure of the Tuskane king from before the citie of Rome, and this it is: In the portsale of goods they use to proclaime first aloud, THE SALE OF KING PORSENNA HIS GOODS. This ceremoniall custome must needs eyther begin in time of warre, and so was not afterwards forgotten in peace: or else arose from some more gratious and gentle occasion at the first, than this title or outward forme pretendeth, of selling goods by way of hostilitie, and after the manner of enemies. But the likeliest conjecture and neerest to the truth of all those that are given out, is this: that Porsena dislodging from the Ianicle, gave freely unto the Romanes, (the citie at that time being after long siege distressed and in great streights) his rich campe furnished with victuall  and provision, conveied thither out of the plentifull countries of Hetruria, neere adjoyning: which goods, for feare there should have beene some havocke and spoile made therof in warlike wise, in case the people had beene let loose to the rifling of the tents, were after sold, and called Porsena his goods: which title signified rather their thankful acceptation of the gift, and remembrance of the giver, than any open and ouversale of the kings goods, which were not so much as in the Romanes power, nor at their disposition.
Thus Porsena having given over the Romane warre, because he would not seeme to have brought an host of men into those parts, and performed no exploit, sent his sonne Aruns with part of his forces,Rizza to surprise and assault Atricia. At the first this suddaine and unexpected enterprise, much troubled the Aricins, but afterward when they had gotten aid both from the Latine  nations and also from Cumes, they tooke such heart againe, that they durst enter into the field and bid the enemie bartell. In the beginning of the conflict, the Tuskans charged them so hotly, that at the verie first encounter, they brake the arraies of the Aricines. But the troupes of the Cumans setting pollicie against force, went a little aside, made way and gave some ground, and when the enemies had outstripped them, and were rashly and disorderlie passed beyond them, they turned their ensignes, and set upon their backs: so were the Tuskanes being in the verie traine of their victorie, be set round about, and slaine in the mids betweene. Onely a small remnant of them after the losse of their captaine, because they had no other place of refuge neerer, were faine to trudge to Rome without weapons and disarmed, like suppliants both in deed and shew. Where they were kindly entertained and bestowed in severall lodgings. Some of them when  they were cured of their wounds repaired home, reporting the hospitalitie and courteous usage they had found. Many remained still at Rome for love of their hosts and the citie: who had a place allotted them to dwell in, which after they called Thuscus vicus, the Tuskane street.
After this, were P. Lucretius and P. Valerius the third time created Coss.
In that yeare, for a small end, there came embassadours from Porsenna, to treat about the restoring of the Tarquins into their realme: to whom this answere was returned: that the Senate would send embassadors

to the king himselfe: wherupon their were immediatlie addressed unto him in embassie the  most honourable personages of all the nobilitie, who in the name of the people of Rome delivered this speach: That the chiese of their nobles were sent, rather than any dispatch given by word of mouth unto his embassadours at Rome;(...). not for that they could not haue shapen them this short answere, They would no kings have: But to this end, that for ever after there should be no suite renewed of that matter, nor in so great mutuall benefits, and fauours passed between them, some discontentment arise on eyther side, whiles he might be thought to request that which was repugnant and prejudiciall to the libertie of Rome, and the Romances againe, unlesse they would be executors of their owne wrongs, and seeke their owne mischievance, to make deniall unto him, whom by their goods wils, they would not seem to denie ought for anything in the world. But as to the substance of the matter, this was the point: namelie, that the people of  Rome were not under the regiment of a king, but were a free state: and fullie setled in this purpose, To set open their gates to enemies, sooner than to kings: and were all generallie of this mind and resolution, That looke when the freedome of that citie had an end, then should the citie come to an end also. To conclude therfore, they were to intreat him, that if he tendered the weale and safetie of Rome, he would permit them to be free still and at their owne libertie.
The king overcome with verie modestie, and much abashed in himselfe, answered thus againe: Since you are so fully minded and stislie bent (quoth hee) neither will I importune you, nor dull your eares with harping still upon this unpleasant string, and do no good: nor beare the Terquines any longer in hand, and deceiving them of that hope of aide, which nothing at all is in my power to performe. Let them from henceforth seeke some other place of exile, either for  peace or warre, as they shall thinke more expedient, that there may be nothing to let and hinder the free course of amitie, and alliance betweene mee and you. To these good and kind words he joyned better and more friendlie deeds. For all the hostages that remained in his hand, he sent home: and the Veientians lands which by the covenants indented at Ianiculum, were taken away, he restored to the Romanes againe. Thus Tarquine seeing all hope of returne cut of, remooved unto Tusculum to this sonne in law Mamilius Octavius, there to live and spend the rest of his daes in banishment. So there continued faithfull peace betweene the Romanes and king Porsena.
Then were Coss, M. Valerius and P. Posthumius. In that yeare the Romances fought with the Sabines fortunatelie, and the Consuls triumphed. But afterwards the Sabines made greater  preparation of warre: to withstand whom, as also for feare of some suddaine danger that might arise from Tusculum, from whence they suspected warre, although none was openly seene, were P. Valerius the fourth time, and T. Lucretius the second time created Coss. But among the Sabines, there grew some civile discord betweene that part that would have war, and the contrarie that sought peace: which gained the Romanes some strength even from thence. For Appius Clausus (who afterwards at Rome was surnamed Appius Claudius) a persuader himselfe of quietnes and repose,App^^^ Claud^us being overmatched and not able to make his part good with the adverse faction that minded and stirred troubles, accompanied with a great power of friends and followers, from Regillum fled to Rome. Who were enfranchised citizens and possessed of those lands that lie beyond the river (...) Anio. And from hence came the name of the old tribe Appia: after that  other new citizens were put unto them, those I meane, that descended of that race, and out of the same territorie.Tribe Appia. This Appius was admitted into the number of the Senatours, and not long after advanced to be one of the chiese men and heads of the citie. The Coss. went with a strong power into the Sabines land, where after they had first wasted the countrie, and after in battell abated the strength and puissance of the enemies; so, as for a long time after they needed not to feare anie rebellion from thence, they returned to Rome in triumph.
The yeare following, when Agrippa Menenius and P. Posthumius were Coss. P. Valerius ended his dates in great glorie, reputed the onely singular man in those times, by all mens judgement, for skill and knowledge as well in martiall feats, as in civile affaires: but so poore was his estate,The (...) of (...). that he had not wherwith to deffray his funerall expenses, and was therfore at the cities  charge right honourablie enterred. And the dames of Rome mourned for him as they did for Brutus.
The same yeare two Colonies of the Latines, Pome^ia and Cora, revolted to the Auruncans. The Romanes first began to warre upon the Auruncans. And after they had discomfited a great host of them, who met with the Consuls as they entered the borders, and fiercely made head

 against them, then all the Auruncane warre was driven and translated wholly to Pometia. The camage and execution was no lesse after the conflict, than during the fight: for whereas there were many more of them slaine outright in the place than taken prisoners, those also that were prisoners, they spared not, but murdered every where as they went: neither staied the furious rage of warre therewith, but even the very hostages whom they had received, to the number of 300, they put to the sword. In this yeare also was a triumph at Rome.
The Consuls Optter Virginius, and Sp. Cassius, that followed the next yeare, assailed Pometia, first by fine force to skale that wals, after with pavoised, mantelets, platformes, and other fabriks, raised against it. Vpon whom the Auruncans sallied forth, rather of a cankred and malicious hatred than for any hope or vantage given them of good exploit: the greater part of the furnished better with fireworks than armed with sword and speare, killed and burned all afore them: and  having thus fired their fabrikes aforesaid, hurt and slaine a greater number of their enemies, one of the Consuls also (but his name precisely is not by any authour set downe) was sore wounded, strucken downe from his horse, and welneere slaine. Whereupon the Romanes returned backe to Rome thus unhappily defeated, leaving the Consull behind them amongst many that were hurt, like to die. Soone after, and no longer than whilest their wounds might be healed, and a new supplie of souldiours made, they came against Pometia, in more furious manner than before, and also with a stronger power. And when by making of new mantelets and other warlike instruments of assault, they were proceeded thus forward, that the souldiours were readie to skale and get up the wall, then they within yeelded: and notwithstanding the towne was thus surrendred  up, yet there was no more mercie shewed unto it, than if it had beene forced by assault. The cheefe and pincipall citizens shamefully lost their heads, the rest of the inhabitants were sold at the speare in ouvert market like slaves, the town sackt and rased to the ground, yea and mony made of all the lands belonging to it. The Consuls for that they had so wreaked their anger, and sharpely revenged themselves, more than for any great warre they had finished, obtained triumph.
The yeare following, were Posthumius Caninius and T. Largius Consuls. In this yeare, during the games and plaies at Rome, certaine yonkers of the Sabines, went about in a wanton jolitie to carrie away and ravish the curtizans and common strumpets of the cittie. Whereupon the people ran together, and made a roiot, grew to words, and from words to brawles, insomuch, as  they went together by the eares, and made a fray in manner of a battell: upon which smal occasion, there was a rebellion like to insue. Over and besides the feare of the Latines warre, (for to encrease their troubles the more) newes came, and it was certainly known, that by the solliciting and practice of Octavious Mamilius, there were alreadie thirtie nations banded together against the Romanes. The citie thus being perplexed for the event and expectation of these so great occurrents, there arose the first occasion and mention made of creating a Dictator. But neither in what yeare, nor in what Consuls time (for that it can hardly be beleeved, that they should be of the Tarquines faction, and yet that also is reported) nor yet who was first created Dictator, is it certainely knowne:Dictator first created at Rome. Howbeit, in the most auncient writers I find, that T. Largius was created the first Dictator, and C^eus Cassius generall of the horsemen: and Consular men (i. such  as had beene Consuls afore) they were that elected him: for so the law provided that was enacted, concerning the creation of a Dictator. And this induceth mee the rather to beleeve, that Largius an auncient man, and one who had been Consull before, was appointed as a controller and maister over the Consuls, and not M. Valerius the sonne of Marcus, and grandson of Volesus, who as yet had not attained to the Consuls dignitie. For if these Consular men aforesaid, had ben minded to have chosen a Dictator out of that house above all other, surely they would have made choise rather of his father M. Valerius, a noble personage, of approved prowesse and valor, and one besides that had ben Consull. When the Dictator was once chosen at Rome, and the axes were seene borne before him, the commoners stood in great awe, and took better regard to be obedient at every becke and command. For neither could they make account of any help (as  they might under the Consuls, who were both in commission alike, and of equall authority, when they had recourse from the one to the other) nor yet appeale unto the people: no nor looke for succour at all, but in their own double dilligence and care of obedience. The Sabines likewise were afraid of the Dictator thus created at Rome: and so much the more, because they were verily persuaded he was made of purpose for them: and thereupon, they sent embassadors to treat for peace, who beseeching the Dictator and the Senate to pardon so small a fault, and being but a

tricke of youth, receiued this answere: That youths indeed might well be pardoned, but such old  babes as they might not, who never rested to sow debate, and minister occasion of one warre after another. Howbeit, they sat in consultation about a peace, and obtained it had ben, if the Sabines could have found in their hearts and condescended, to make good and repay the expenses that the Romanes had disbursed about the warre: for that was the thing demanded at their hands. So, defiance was sent and war proclaimed. And yet for that yeare all was quiet, as it were in time of a secret truce, during the Consulship of Servius Sulpitius, and M. Manlius Tullus, in whose yeare there was nothing done worthie of remembrance.
After them were T. Ebutius, and C. Vet^sius. In their time (...) Fidene was besieged,(...) Crustumeria woon, and P^lastrina Or^^. Preneste revolted from the Latines unto the Romanes. And the Latine warre, which had ben a breeding and budding for certain years, was no longer delaied, but brake forth. A. Posthumius the Dictatour, and T. Ebutius Generall of the cavallerie, with great power of foot and horse, set forward and advaunced as farre as the lake Regillus, in the teritorie of Tusculum, and there encountred the armie of the enemies,T^us^ulo. in their march. And because they heard say that the Tarquines were in the host of the Latines, they could not for anger forbeare any longer, but presently fell to it, and began battaile. This field was fought right fiercelie, and cost more bloodshed a good deale, than others usually before: because the Generals and chiefe Commaunders were there present, not only to give direction by their counsell and advice, but also in person themselves hazarded their own bodies, and fought bravelie in the medley. And not one almost of the principall leaders, escaped out of the skirmish, eyther of one side of the other, safe and sound, save onely the Romane Dictatour. For as Posthumius was encouraging his men, and setting them  in aray in the vaward,The famous battell a^ the lake Regil^us Tarquinius Superbus (albeit he was now verie aged and unwieldie, and not able to be^^irre himselfe) set spurs to his horse, and ran full but against him. But having caught a thrust from a side, was rescued by his men that came about him, and retired to a place of safetie. And in the other wing, Ebutius Generall of the horsemen, set upon Oct. Mamilius: but he, the captain I meane of the Tuscalanes, was well ware of him, and espied him comming, and ran his horse with full carriere likewise upon him, and so desperately they bare their launces one against the other, that Ebutius was run quite through the arme, and Mamilius wounded in the brest, whom the Latines succoured and received into the middle ward. As for Ebutius not able any longer to beare his staffe, with his arme sore hurt, withdrew himselfe out of the battell. The leader of the Latines, nothing dismaied for all his hurt, maintained fight still: and seeing his souldiors somewhat  distressed, he sendeth for the regiment of the Romane exuls, that were under the leading of L. Tarquini^s his son: who sticking more courageously unto it, for anger that their goods were spoiled, and they driven out of their owne countrey, renued the combate afresh for a while. And as the Romanes from that quarter began to recule and give ground, M. Valerius, the brother of Publicola, espying young Tarquine vaunting himselfe gloriously in the forefront of the exuls, inflamed also with a desire of domesticall glorie of his house: that the same familie which had the praise of expelling the kings, might likewise win the honour of killing them, spurred his horse, and with deadly speare ran against Tarquinius, who giving way to his mortall enemie, retired backe to his owne regiment. But Valerius by this time was disbanded from his companie, and rashlie ridden into the battaile of the exiles, and there a common soldior  happened to charge upon him a flanke, and run him through. The horse staied not a jot for all the rider was wounded, and so the Romane knight readie to die, fell to the ground with his armor upon his bodie, and paid nature her debt. Posthumius the Dictator, after he perceived so valiant a man fallen, and the banished men advancing lustilie forward with full trot, and his owne soldiors distressed, and at point to turne their backs, gave expresse commaundement unto his owne band, which he had about him of chosen tall men for to gard his person, that as manie of their fellowes as they saw to flie, they should take them for enemies, and kill them in the place. Thus by reason of a counterfeare, the Romanes made head againe and renewed the battaile. Then began the Dictators cohort to fight, and comming with fresh bodies and couragious stomackes, charged vpon the wearied exiles, and killed them one everie side. Wherupon  began another combat also between the Colonels and captains of qualitie and marke. The generall of the Latines seeing the battalion of the banished, well neere environed round by the Romane Dictator, speedily taketh with him into the forefront of the battaile, certaine squadrons of those that were appointed in the reergard to succour and aid: whom T. Horminius a lieutenant, espied to come marching in good order and knowing amongst them Mamilius by his gorgeous harnish,

 and goodly cote armour, with farre greater violence than the Generall of the horsemen a little before, encountred the Colonell of his enemies so hotly, that both he ran Mamilius through his sides, and slue him outright, and also whilest he was disarming and rifling his bodie, he was wounded himselfe with a short javeline, and being brought backe with victorie into the campe, at the first dressing yeelded to nature and died. Then rode the Dictator apace to the horsemen, and earnestly cried unto them, that seeing the footmen were toiled out and wearied, they would alight from their horses, and take the matter into their hands. The horsemen soone obeied, lept from horsebacke, and set forward as if they had flowne, to the forefront, where they opposed their targets in defence of them that fought before the ensignes. Whereat presently the Infanterie began againe to take heart, seeing the principall men of armes and noble young Gentlemen in  the like kind of service, exposed to the same danger, and readie to take part with them. Then at the last were the Latines put backe, and their whole battel began to shrinke. The gentlemen had their horses brought to them againe, and they mounted on horseback to pursue their enemies. The footmen likewise followed after. There the Dictator omitting no helpe of God and man, vowed as men say, a temple to Castor, and openly promised and proposed rewards to that souldior that made either first or second entrie into the enemies campe. Whereupon they bestirred themselves so courageously, that the Romanes at one brunt both vanquished their enemies, and also were possessed of their tents. This was the noble field fought at the lake Regillus. The Dictator and the generall of horsemen returned into the cittie with triumph. For three years after, there was neither assured peace betweene them, nor yet professed war.
Consuls were Q. Cloelius, and T. Lartius. After them A. Sempronius, and M. Minutius. Whiles these two were Consuls,Temple of Satura dedicated. the temple to Saturne was dedicated, and the feast called Saturnalia instituted.Saturnilia instituted. After them succeeded A. Posthumius, and T. Virginius. And in this yeare and not before, I find in some authours, that the said battell was stricken neere the lake Regillus, and that A. Posthumius suspecting the fidelitie of his brother Consul, gave over his place, and so was made Dictator. The account of times doth so varie and is so intricate and confused, whiles writers diversly set downe the cheefe Magistrates, that in so great antiquitie, not of acts onely, but also of authours, a man cannot orderly and directly distinguish, according to some writers, who were Consuls, and what was done in every yeare.
Afterwards were Ap. Claudius, and P. Servilius created Consius. This yeare was famous for the  newes of Tarqui^e his death.Tarquinius Supe^bus dieth. He died at Cumes, to which place after the defeature of the Latines power, he went to Aristodemus the Tyrant. At which tidings the hearts of the Nobles were wel lightened, the Commons also began to look up. But that joy in the Nobilitie was above measure too excessive and licentious. For why? the great men began now to wrong and wring the communaltie, whom untill that day they had favoured and pleasured to their full power. In the same yeare the Colonie Signia, which king Tarquinius had erected, was now stored againe the second time,Wards. 2 ^. and the number supplied with new inhabitants. And the tribes or wards at Rome were now made up 21. The temple of Mercurie was dedicated in the 15 of May. Ides of May. With the Nation of the Volscians in the time of the Latine warre, neither was there peace, nor war: for both the Volscians had levied a power for aid to send unto the Latines, if the Romane Dictator had  not made good speed: and also the Romane Dictator hastened the more for feare he should in one battell have to deale with Latines and Volscians both at once. Vpon this quarrell, the Consuls led forth their legions into the Volscians countrey. The Volscians fearing no revenge for their deseignement (that was intended onely, and never came in action) were much troubled with this suddaine and unlooked for occurrent. Not minding therefore to make resistance, and forgetfull of warlicke prowesse, they delivered 300 of their noble mens children out of Cora and Pometia for hostages. Whereupon the Romane Legions from thence without any fight were withdrawne. But not long after the Volscians being somewhat cased and delivered of their feare, came again to their old biace and returned to their wonted nature, and secretly under hand made preparation anew for warre, joyning with them as confederates  in this quarrell, the Hernikes. They send also their embassadours all about, to moove and sollicite Latium.Compagna d^ ^oma. But the Latines, for their late overthrow at the lake Regillus, tooke such a spleen and hatred against him whosoever, that should once put into their heads and persuade them to take armes, that they could nor forbeare the verie embassadours, but offer them abuse. They apprehended therfore the Volscians, conveyed them to Rome, and delivered them to the Consuls: where they revealed and gave intelligence, that the Volscians and the Hernikes were out in armes,

readie to warre upon the Romanes. Which being reported unto the Senators, they were so  well pleased and contented therwith, that they set at libertie 6000 Latines, prisoners, and sent them hence. And concerning a league to be concluded with them, which was like before to have beene denied for ever, they referred the consultation thereof, unto the new magistrates that should next enter. And in good sooth, blith and glad were the Latines then, for that they had done, and the authors of peace were magnified and had in great reputation. They send moreover a crowne of gold into the Capitoll, for a present to lupiter. With these embassadours and the present, those prisoners which before were set free, came in greater number. Who repaired straight waies to everie man his house, where they had beene prisoners, yeelding them great thanks for their kind usage and friendlie intertainement in time of their calamities and miseries, and promised therewith the like courtesie and mutuall hospitalitie.Never were the Latines  at anie time afore, both publikelie and privatelie, united more neerlie to the Romane empire.
But as the Volscian warre was now at hand, so the cittie was at discord among themselves. The Senators and commons hated one another at the heart, and all this arose by occasion especiallie of certaine persons that were indebted, and in danger of their creditours: who murtered and gave out in murmuring wise, how that abroad they adventured themselves and fought for the libertie and dominion of the citie, and at home by their owne neighbours they were held prisoners and oppressed: saying that the freedome of the commons was more safe in time of warre, than of peace, among the enemies rather than their owne fellow citizens. This inward grudge and heartburning, which of it selfe still kindled more and more, the notable calamitie  of one man above all others, set on a light fire. A certaine aged person chaunced to breake prison, and with the armes, badges and ornaments of all his ancestors, ran into the market place. His apparell was all to rattered, foule and loathsome, but the habite or plight of his bodie much more filthie: so pale, so wan, so leane withall, as if he had beene over-pined and starved, his long side beard and haire of his head so overgrowne, that they made his visage and countenance wild and gastlie. Howbeit, for all he was thus disfigured by this deformitie, he was a man well knowne, and as some said, he had done good service in the ward, had beene a chiefe Centurian, and had the charge and leading of bands in the field: and the common people, as pittying his estate, and to moove compassion, recounted many worthie exploits of his, to his great credit and singular commendation. Himselfe likewise shewed the fears of wounds, which in  his breast and forepart of his bodie in divers places he had received, that might testifie his valiant service. The people flocking about him as it were in a common assemblie to heare a solemne Oration, enquired of him, how he came to be in that taking, so poore, so disfigured and deformed? He answered, that whiles he served in the Sabine war, he by reason of he continual forraying, and wasting of the territorie, not onely lost the revenewes and increase of his lands, but also his Maner-house was burnt, all his goods ransacked and spoiled, his cattell driven away: and when a levie and tribute was exacted in a time when he ill might, he was driven to take up monie and run in debt; which growing more and more by paiment of interest, first he was constrained to sel his land, that his father and grandfather had left him, and to turn himselfe out of all, by making a cleane hand of the rest of his goods: until at length his bodie also began to winder away in a consumption. Complaining moreover how by his creditor he was not onely brought into bondage and thraldome, but also imprisoned, and whipped, and tormented in most cruell and butcherlike manner. With that he shewed before them all, his backe lately scourged, with the fresh wales of the lashes newly given him. At the sight and hearing hereof, there arose a great outcrie of the people, so that anon the uprore kept not within the compasse of the market place, by spread over all the cittie: in such sort, that as well they that were bound, as they that were loose, came forth from all parts into the open streets, calling the Quirites and the people pittifully, to helpe. In no corner wanted any companions to take part willingly in this seditious rout,A dangerous sed^tion in Rome. and every where in all the streets they run by companies into the common place. Those Senatours who chanced to be abroad, at their no small perill light upon this multitude: and had not the Consuls P. Servilius, and App. Claudius, made the better speed, and come upon them to appease the commotion, there would have ben some knocks, for hardly could they have held their hands. At whose comming, the multitude turned unto them, shewing their yrons, and all their other shamefull misuage and miserie, saying, This is all the good we have gotten for our warfare: upbraiding every man the services they had performed, some in one place some in another, requiring them in

 threatening wise rather than by way of supplication, to call the Senate together, and they the while stood about the Curia, as if they would be judges and moderators of their publicke counsell. Very few of the Senatours, such onely as by chance came that way, could be brought to repaire to the Consuls: as for the rest, they were afraid not onely to come into the Counsell house, but also to venture abroad into the market place, so that by reason of their smal assemblie, there could be nothing done nor determined. Then thought the people indeed they were mocked and dallied withall, and driven off with delaies surmising, that the Senatours which were away, absented themselves not by chance, nor for feare, but onely to hinder the proceeding of their cause: and that the Consuls themselves kept a hafting and flinching, and without all question, made but a scorne and game at their miseries. This broile so increased, that hardly could the reverence  and majestie of the Consul srestraine the peoples rage. But the Senatours standing in doubtfull tearmes, whether to tarrie behind or to come forward would be more dangerous, at length they resolved to repaire into the Senate, and being now at last a full and sufficient house gathered, neither the Lords there assembled, no nor yer the Consuls, could well agree amongst themselves what to doe in this case.Divers opinions in the Senate house. Appius a man of a hot spirit, was of opinion to order the matter by Consular authoritie and commandement saying, That if one or two of them were laid hold on, the rest would be quiet. But Servilius more inclined to mild and gentle remedies, thought it a more safe and easie course too, rather to bend than to breake their angrie and fell stomackes. But amidst these troubles there happened a greater and more fearefull occurence: For certaine Latines on horsebacke rode in post, and brought news in hastie and tumultuous manner,  that the Volscians were comming with a mightie and cruell armie against the cittie to assault the same. Which news being heard (see how discord had of one citie made twaine) wrought far other effect in the Nobles, than in the Commons.
The comminaltie lept for joy, and said the gods were now come downe from heaven to be revenged of the Senators pride, and encouraged one another not to take prest-monie, or to enter their names in the Muster-masters book, saying that they had rather die at once with al, then perish alone and none but they: Let the Nobles (qd. they) serve as soldiors; let them take weapon in hand and abide the brunts and hazards of war, who receive the profits, the prizes and rewards therof. But contrariwise the Senat pensive and surcharged with this twofold feare, as well from citizen as enemie, besought the Consull Servilius (a man by nature more affable and popular) That he would provide for the safetie of the Commonweale,  beset as it were round with so fearefull perils.
Then the Consull dismissed the Senate, and came forth into the assemblie of the people, where he shewed what care the LL. of the Senat had for the good of the commons: But whiles they were (qd. he) busie in consultation for the greatest part (I confesse) of the cittie, and yet in truth no more but a part, it fell out so in the meane while; that of necessitie they must see to the whole bodie of the Common-wealth, whereof they stand in exceeding feare. Seeing therfore the enemies were almost hard at the gates, they could not possiblie doe or intend any thing before warre. Neither (if there should be anie respite and leasure granted) were it either for the commons credite and honestie, not to fight for their countrie, unlesse they had their pay before hand; nor well beseeming the Nobles and for their reputation, to looke unto and take order hastilie, to redresse the miseries and calamities of  their citizens upon feare, rather than afterwards with good deliberation, for love and of willing mind. This speach of his he confirmed with an edict, by vertue wherof, he gave streight commaundement: Imprimis, that no man should keepe bound or in prison, any citizen of Rome, but that he might be enrolled before the Consuls. Item, that no person should hold in possession, or sell the goods of anie soldior, so long as he abode in the campe, nor arrest his children or childrens children. This edict being once published and proclaimed, not onelie the enthralled debtors there present, were immediatlie by name enrolled, but also from all parts of the citie, they leapt out quicklie of their houses, seeing that now their creditors had no right nor power to detaine and arrest them, and ran into the market place for to take a militarie oth of alleageance, to be true soldiours and faithfull to the state. A number there was of these: neither was there anie that  more manfullie behaved and quit themselves or tooke more paines in the Volscian warre. Then the Consul led forth his power against the enemies, and within a little of them incamped himselfe, The night following, the Volscians presuming upon the variance and discord of the Romanes, assailed the tents, if happily in the night season any of them might have been wrought, to abandon the campe, and come to them, or to practise any treason. But the Sentinels descried them, and upon alarme given, the whole armie arose, and everie man made hast to his weapons. Thus came

that enterprise of the Volscians to nothing. The rest of the night both parts rested, and were  quiet. On the morrow by breake of day, the volscians having filled up the trench, assailed the bulwarkes and rampiers. And by that time they had on everie side plucked up he fences, pallisadoes, and other fortifications, the Consul, who for all he was called unto instantly on everie hand, but of the debtors aforesaid especially above the rest, to give the signal, and to sound the barrell, made some stay on purpose to trie the courage of his men: and seeing well now their forwardnesse and their stomackes, at length gave them a token to rush forth, and so letteth them loose, as eager to fight as might be. So at the verie first onset the enemies were presently discomfited and put to flight: the footmen followed hard upon them in chase, and as they could reach, wounded them behind on their backes, and killed them: the horsemen likewise pursued them even to their pavillions, who still feared exceedingly what might become of them: and within  a while their very campe also, environned about with the legions, and abandoned of the Volscians themselves for feare, were forced and rifted. The next day following, the legions marched to Seussa Pometia, for thither the enemies were fied: and within few daies the towne was wone, and put to the sacke, and the spoile and pillage given away: whereby the needie couldiors were somewhat refreshed. The consull in great glorie and honour brought backe his victorious armnie to Rome. In his way homeward the Embassadours of the Eretrian Volscians distrusting their. owne state, upon the losse of Pometia, came into him. To whom after consultration had with the Senat, and a decree passed, peace was granted: but were they were fined to part with their lands. Immediately upon this, the Sabines also put the Romanes in a fright, and in very deed it might be called a tumult, rather than a war. For words was brought in the night season, that an armie of the  Sabines were corne in a rode, as far as the river Anio, robbing, spoilling, and burning all the villages and hamplets as they went. Forthwith was sent thither the whole power of horsed under the conduct of A. Posthumius, who in the Latine warre had been Dictator. After him followed the Consull Sarviluis with a chosen regiment of footmen. Most of the enemies, as they raughed abroad a sorraging in scattering wise, were by the horsemen surprised and inclosed. And when the insanterie besides matched against the Sabines legion, they were not able to resist: for being tired out, partly with their long iourney, and partly with boothaling all night long, and many of them having overcharged themselves with meat and wine within the villages, had hardly strength ynough to run away. Thus the Sabine warre in one night was heard of and ended. The day following, when as now the Romanes were in good hope, that they had peace on everie side, behold, the Auruncane Embassadors came into the Senate, proclaimingwarre, unlesse they would forgoe the Volscian lands, and restore them to their rightfull owners. And even at one time with the Embassadours was the armie also of the Auruncans abroad, and had taken the field. The newes whereof, and namely that they were now in sight not farre from Aricia, raised up to the Romans in so great a broile and hurliburlie, that the Senators could neither be consulted with, and deliver their opinions in order, not yet give a peaceable answer to those that came as it were with weapon in hand, being thus forced to take armes themselves. So to Aricia directly in warlike manner they march, and not far from thence they joined barrell with the Auruncans. And in one day that war had also an end.
Thus when the Romane shouldiours had gotten victorie within so few daies in so many places, and had now defeated the Auruncants, they looked for the promise of the Consul, and the faithfull performance of it by the Senate. At what time Appius both upon a proud stomacke and arrogant spirit of his owne by nature, and also to discredit and disanull the word of his fellow Consul, in all actions of debt proceeded, and gave judgement with rigour against the debtors. Whereupon, both they that had been before imprisoned, were delivered againe into their creditors hands, and other also became prisoners anew. Where at when as a souldiour, whose case it was thus hardly to be dealt withall, called upon the Consull his fellow for helpe, they ran all at once to Servilius, at his hands they claimed a promise: everie one upbraided and reproched him with their service in warte, with the scars there gotten, requiring that the would propose the matter againe unto the Senate, and as a Consul, succour and protect his citizens; or like a Generall , maintaine his souldiours. These matters no doubt, moved the Consull: but so stood the cafe that he could neither will not chuse, but hast, deale double, and temporise with them: so fully bent, and wholly wedded to the other part, was not onely his colleague, but also the whole faction of the Nobilitie. Thus by bearing himselfe as a Neurre, and going as they say, betweene the barke and the tree, he neither avoided the hatred of the Commons, nor yet woon favour with

 the Nobles: while the Nobles tooke him for a soft and base minded Consull, seeking to please all parties, and the Commons for as craftie and false a dissembler: insomuch as within a short time, it appeared, he was as much hated of the peoples as Appius. For, the Consuls happened on a time to strive, whether of them twaine should dedicated the temple of Mercurie. The Senate put over the deciding of this matter from themselves vnto the people: and decreed withall, that to whether of them the dedication of the temple was by the peoples election graunted, he should over and besides sides have the charge to purvey come and victualles, he should erect and institute a Colledge or fellowship of marchants, and he in steede of the high Priest, should undertake the solemne feasts, or festival daies. Then the people gaue the dedication of the temple to M. Lectorius, a principall Centurion of the vantgard: which as it easily appeared, was done not so much to grace the man,  as who had an higher office bestowed upon him, than was sit for one of this degree and calling ; as to disgrace and deface the Consuls. Hereat, one of the Consuls yea and the Patricis stormed and fared exceedinglie against the Commons. But the Commons tooke heart vnto them more and more, and began to proceede farre otherwise, and to take another course than they purposed at the beginning: for, dispairing of the Consuls and Senats helpe, when they saw a debtor sued and brought to the barre, they would run flocking from all parts together, so that the Consuls sentence and decree could not be heard for the noyse and clamour. And decree or judge what he would, no man would obey. And so violenlie they went to worke, that in presence of the Consull, the creditours were singled out, evill intreated, and misused of the Commons, being many togither. So the whole feare and hazard of the maine chaunce, even of libertie it selfe, was now altogether  translated from the dentors tothe creditours.Appius his inuective against his fellow Consul. In the very necke of these troubles, there arose feare of the Sabine warre, and when it was determined, there should be a muster of souldiours, no man would answere to his name and be enrolled.
All this while Appius taged and tooke on, inveying bitterly against the nicerie and popularitite of his brother Consul, who with his keeping silence for displeasing the people, by his soft cariage of himselfe, had betrayed the weale punlike, and over and besides that, he had not ministred justice for the loane of mony, nor dealt according to law in that behalfe, he had brought the matter so to passe, that he could take no musters by vertue of the decree of the Senate. How beit (faith he) the common wealth is not wholy sorsaken and forlone, not yet the Consular authoritie vtterly cast downe and troden vnder foot: for the would himselfe alone, if there were no more but he, defend and maintaine both his owne place, and the  Senatours dignitie. When as the multitude therefore stood thus malapertlie, as their dailie maner was, about the bar, he commanded one principal captaine of fedition to be attached and had away: and as he was haled to prison by the sergeants and lictors, he appealed. Neither would the Consul have given place to the appeale (for all he knew the people how they were bent, and what their doome would be) had not this obstinate stiffnesse with much ado beene overswaied more throught the discreet advise and authoritie of the cheefe Nobles and Lordes of the Senate, than by the clamorous noyse and menaces of the multitude: so resolute was he, and his heart so couragious, to undergo their ill will and heavie displeasure. Thus grew the mischiefe more and more dailie, testified not with open mouth and broad speeches onely, but also (which was more pernicious and dangerous) by conventicles, secret meetings, and conferences. At  length these Coss. so odious vnto the commons, went out of their office, to wit Appius, a man wonderous well affected of the Nobles, Servilius liked neither of them not the Commons.
After whom A. Virginius, and T. Vetufius entred their Consultship. But then the Commons not knowing what manner of Consuls they should have, began to assemble together by night, some in Esquiliae, others in the Aventine: to the end, they might not be unprovided and to seeke upon a suddaine, what to doe in the common place, nor manage their businesse hand over head, and at a venture. Which the Consuls supposing (as it was indeed) a perilous example, and of ill consequence, propounded the matter before the Senators: but when they had proposed it, they could not orderly aske their advise what was to be done: they tooke so on, and kept such outcrie and vias at it, on all hands faring and fuming, that the Consuls should lay upon the Senat the burden  and heavie load of that, which properly they by vertue of their authoritie and office should execute and performe themselves: and surely, if there were any Magistrates in the cittie (say they) there would not be thus suffered in Rome any other counsel but punlicke: whereas now the state is divided into a thousand courts and conventicles: whiles some have their meetings and assemblies in Esquilie, others in Aventine: Certes, one onely man indeed (for that is more than a Consul) such a one as Appius Claudius was, would soone dispatch, and in one minute of an hower

scatter these their unlawfull assemblies. The Consuls upon this rebuke and checke, replied again  and demanded in this manner: And what would you have us to doe (quoth they) for we are resolved to doe nothing flackly and coldly, but with as great courage and diligence as shall be well liked of the Senatours. Whereupon an order passed, that they should take muster, and levie souldiors with all rigour and severitie: adding moreover, that the Commons with idlenesse and ease were growne over-malaperr and too licentious. And when the Senate was dismissed, the Consuls went into the Tribunall and tooke their places, and summoned by name all the (...) 17 yeares (...) to 47. younger sort to appeare: and none making answere to his name, the multitude standing about as it had been to heare some publicke Oration, said plainely, that the commons from thenceforth would be no longer deluded, and that the Consuls should never get so much, as one souldour, unlesse they would stand to
their word, and make good the promote that publickely before was made, and restore  to everie man againe his libertie, before they caused them to take weapon in hand: to the end, they might fight for their countrie and countriemen, and not for their lordlike masters. The Consuls saw well what they had in commission from the Senate, and that of all those who within the counsell house wals spake so stoutly, and gave out so great words, there was not one present to take part of this odious mallice of the people. And like they were to have a bitter fit and cruell briole with the Commons. They thought good therfore ere they tried the worst, and deal by extremitie, once againe to aske advise of the Senate, and to conferre with them. But then all the younger sort of the Senatours, approached by fiockmeale, hard almost to the Consuls feats, willing them to give over their Consulship, and to resigne up their rule and authoritie, to the maintenance where of they lacked courage.
Now when the Consuls had sufficiently peised  and tried both waies,A sedition bet^^ene the Consuls and the p^o^^. thus at length began they and said. A great sedition and commotion is toward, my LL. To the end therefore that ye pretend not ignorance, and say another day ye were not foretold of it, there is a great sedition and commotion toward. We require therefore that they who find greatest fault with our remissenes and lack of courage, assist us and sit with us while we take the musters: and since you will needs have it so, wee will execute it according to their minds, that are most earnest and severest. Then come they backe againe unto the Tribunall, and commanded for the nones, one of them that were there in sight to be cited and called by name. But the stood still and held his peace, with a crue of men gathered round about to guard him, for feare hee should have some harme or violence done unto him. The Consull then sent a Sergeant to attach him, who being repulsed off, then those Nobles which sate there  on the bench to assist the Consuls, cried out upon the shamefull indignitie, and said it was intollerable, and so ran downe in hast from the Tribunall seat, for to aid the sergeant. But the violent rage of the multitude, who let the Lictour alone, and onelie staied him from laying hold on the man, turned upon the Partitians. So that the Coss.were faine to step betweene, and then the fray was appeased. In which, there being no stones flying about their eares, nor weapon drawne, there was more clamour, brawling and chasing than any hurt done. Then was the Senat house called in a great hurrey: and with more confusion sat they there in counsell: whiles they that pretended how they were beaten and misused, required that commissioners should sit upon this riot and make due inquisition: and the stourest of them gave their determination, as much by clamour and noyse, as by sentence and opinion grounded upon reason. At last, when the
tempest was  overblowne and their heat allaied, and that the Coss. hit them in the teeth, and reprooved them, saying there was as little discretion and gravitie in their court and counsell house, as in the common hall, they began in the end to consult orderly, and three opinions there were amongst them. P. Virginius would not have it a common and generall case (to wit, that all debtors should be released from their creditours) but his advise was, that they should onely be considered, who relying upon P. Servilius the Consull word and faithfull promise, had served in the warres of the Volscians, Auruncans and Sabines. T. Largius, he opined and thought this, that it was not a time then to make amends onely for good deserts, and to respect them alone that had done well, and to recompence good service: but for as much as the whole comminaltie was depplie engaged and plunged in debt, unless they were all provided for, and good order taken for them everie  one,
there would be no quietnes nor end of troubles: yea and (that which more is in case they be not all alike regarded, but some debtors in better conditions than others, the discord would rather be more kindled than quenched.
Appius Claudius a man both of naturall disposition fierce and cruel, and also by occasion made more outragious, netled with the Commons hatted against him on the one side, and tickled with the praise and commendations of the Nobles on the other

 side, who ever magnified him and lift him up to the skie, spake to this effect: These so great sturres and mutinous hurliburlies, The Oration of Appius Cl^udius in the Senate. my Masters (quoth he) is not long of the miserie and calamitie, but onelie of too much libertie of the commons: who rather upon fatnes are growne wanton and unrulie than for any want unpatient and discontent: and all this mischiefe no doubt is sprung of this, that they have liberttie to appeale. For so long as it is in their power to flie for helpe unto those that have faulted as well as they, well may the Consull threaten and give out menacing words: as for anie rule else or command, they shall have none among them. Come on therfore, let us create a Dictatour from whom they cannot make their appeale. Then shall this furious rage, which now setteth all on a light fire, be soone husht and quite extinguished. Let me see then, who dare beat a Lictour, when he shall well know, that he alone whose honorand majestie  he shall offend and abuse, hath power to scourge him and take away his life. Many men thought this sentence of Appius to be verie hard and cruell, yea and dangerous withall, in regard of the late precedent of Vir^inius and Vetusius. That other likewise of Largius was thought inconvenient, in taking away all keeping of credit with the creditours. The opinion and advise of Virginius was supposed as well in one respect as in another most indifferent and meane betweene both. But by reason of the faction are regard of private benefit, which alwaies hath done hurt and ever will, to publicke councell, Appius prevailed, and he missed verie little but he himselfe had beene made Dictatour. Which if it had come to passe, it would surelie have estranged and alienated quite the hearts of the Commons, in that most busie and dangerous time: when it happened that the Volscians, Aequians, and Sabines, were all up at once in armes.
But  the Consuls and elder Senatours, had great care and consideration to chuse such a one, as might by mildnesse of his owne nature alay and qualifie the exceeding rigour and sternnesse incident to soveraigne and absolute authoritie. They elect therefore to be Dictatour, Marcus Valerius the sonne of Volesus. The Commons albeit they saw well enough this Dictatour created for to curbe them, yet having got by this brothers law, the benefit of Appeale, they feared no severe and insolent proceeding from that house and name. The Edict besides, that the Dictatour set forth, which was welneere all one with that other of the Consull Servilius, much confirmed and selted their minds. For supposing now, they had more hold both of the man and also of his authoritie, and that they might with more confidence relie themselves on the one and the other, they gave over all debate, and entered their names into the muster booke: so there  were enrolled full ten legions.The like armie for number was never levied afore. Of which legions, the Consuls had the conduct of three a peece, and the Dictator commanded the other foure: and high time, it was: for the war might not be deserred any longer. The Aequians had alreadie invaded the territorie of the Latines, and their Embassadors were petitioners to the Senat, either to send succour, or to give them leave to put on armour themselves for the defence of their confines and frontiers. It was thought the safer and surer way, that the Latins without arming themselves should be defended, than to permit them again to take weapon in hand. So the Consull Vilucius was sent thither, and he staied them from further for aying and wasting. For the Aequians were departed out of the plains, and trusting rather in the vantage of the ground, than in their weapons, stood upon their guard, kept themselves safe from danger, upon the high tops of the hils and mountains.
 The other Consull who was gone against the Volscians, because he would not also loose any time, drew the enemie forth (by wasting the countrie especiallie) to encampe himselfe neerer, and so at length to fight a field. Now was there a plain in the mids betweene both camps: where each armie stood before their rampiers, embattailed, and ranged in array, with banners displaied readie to fight. The Volscians were somewhat more in number, where upon they began battaile disorderedly and as if they set light by the enemie. But the Romane Consull neither aduanced forward, nor suffered his men once to shoute and answere againe, but charged them to stand sti^l with their javelin^ fast in the ground, untill the enemies were come within the reach of hand fight, and then to lay about them lustilie with their swords, all that euer they could. The Vollscians out of breath with running and shouting, charged the Romanes, who seemed for  feare to stand astonied: but after they once perceived that they were hotly reen countered by them againe, and saw their swords glittering in their eies, they were troubled, therewith, as if they had beene entrapped and fallen into some traines laied for them, and so turned their backes. And by reason they came running before to battaile, their strength would not hold out now to run cleare away: The Romanes contrariwise, because against the beginning of the fight they had stood quiet, were fresh of body, and soon overtooke them thus overtoiled, woon their campe

by force,(...). and after they had driven the enemies out from thence, chased them into (...). Velitree, and  entred the towne pelmell one with another in a medley, the Victor togither with them that were vanquished. More bloudshed there was by execution of them one with another, of all ages and fexes, as they came in their way, than in the verie battaile. A verie few, euen such as without weapon yeelded themselves, were spared and pardoned.
Whiles these things were a doing amongst the Volscians, the Dictator discomfited and put to slight the Sabines, with whom he had much cruell warre: yea, and forced them to abandon and quit their campe. For hauing sent his horsmen into the maine battile of the enemies, which they had but slightly strengthened within-forth, and bestowed the ranks there very thin, and all to stretch out the wings on both sides more at large, he brake their arraies: and when they were once disordered, the footemen came in upon them: and in the same brunt were they  masters of their campe, and so the war ended. There was not in those daies a braver battaile sought and more renowned, setting aside that onely at the lake Regillus. The Dictatour rode in triumph unto the cittie. Over and above the accustomed honours, both he and his posteritie after him, were allowed a certaine place in the great Race or Theater, called Circus, for to behold at ease the solemne games, and there was set the yvorie chaire of estate, called Sella curalis. The Volscians thus vanquished, lost the territorie about Velitre, and new inhabitants were sent thither from the cittie, to people and to till the grounds, so that it became a Colonie.
Some what after this, there was a field fought with the Aequians, but in truth, full against the Consull his will, for that they were to climbe up a steep hill (to their disaduantage) for to meete with the enemie. But the Souldiours blaming him for trifling out, and making delaies, to the  end that the Dictator might be out of office before they made returne to the cirtie, and so his word and promise, like as the Consuls before him, should come to nothing; drave him perforce to leade up to his armie, rashly and at aduenture against the hils. This being an enterprise ill ordered, and an error escaped, fell out notwithstanding verie well through the cowardise of the enemie: who before they were come within shot and the darts cast, amazed at the venturousnesse of the Romanes, fortooke their holdes which they had in most defensible places, and leapt downe into the vallies ouer against them. There was bootie and pillage good inough, and abloudlesle victorie.
Hauing sped thus fortunately abroade in three several wars, the Senatours and commons were not carelesse of home-affaires, what would be the issue thereof. The Bankers and Vsurers, what with fauor, and what with subtile and cautelous pollicie, had devised aforehand and wrought such meanes, as might frustrate are and disappoint not onelie the commons, but also the Dictator, and put them by their expectation. For Valerius after there turne of Velasius the Consull, dealt, first and above all other matters and causes at the Counsell table,The speech of (...) the (...) in the Senate. in the behalfe of the people that had atchieved such victories, and propounded to know their minds, What should be done with those endebted, endangered, and imprisoned persons.
Which motion of his being disliked and rejected: I see well (quoth) he that I cannot please you, so long as I persuade to concord and unitie: with ye will (trust me truely) e're it be long, that the comminaltie of Rome had more Patrons and advocates like my selfe. As for me, I will neither beare my citizens any longer in hand to deceive them, nor be a Dictator in vaine, to effect nothing. Ciuile discord at home, and  forraine war abroade, caused the State to have neede of this office. Now, when peace is gotten without, behold it is crossed and hindered within: yet had I rather bee present at the fight of a mutinie and insurrection when I am a priuate person, than whiles I am a Dictatour. Thus went he out of the counsell house, and yeelded up his Dictatourship with all. The Commons saw plainly what the matter was, and how upon a discontentment and griefe that he tooke in their behalfe, for verie pittie and compassion of them, he gave over the place: and therefore, as if thehad fully discharged himselfe of this faithfull word to them giuen, (for that there was no default in him, but it had been performed indeed) they accompanied him along home to this house with hearty affection, praising and commending him all the way they went. The Lords of the Senate began then to feare, least if the armie were broken up and discharged, there would be some secret conventicles, and new conspiracies contrived: therefore, albeit the musters were taken by the Dictatour: yet because the souldiours had sworne alleageance to the Consuls, supposing they were still bounde to warfare by vertue of that oath, and pretending a colour that the Aequians renued war, they commanded the legions to be led forth of the cittie.
This hastened the sedition the sooner and set it forward. At first, as men said, they complotted

 and laid their heads together about murdering and making awaie the Consuls, to the end they might be acquit of their oth unto them: but afterwards being better schooled and advised, that no mans conscience can be clered of scruple, and discharged of an oth once taken, by committing a sinfull act and working mischiefe,They first revolt of the commons of Rome into mount dancer. they withdrew themselves out of the way by the persuasion of one Sicinius, and without conge of the consuls, departed as farre as mount Sacer, on the farther side of the river Anio, three miles from the citie. This is the riser report, and goeth more currant, than that whereof Piso is the author (namelie, that the commons retired themselves within a trench and rampiar, and kept quiet for certaine daies, neither taking nor doing harme; as having caried with them such things onelie as were necessarie for the sustenance of  their life. Great feare there was in the citie, and in this mutuall and reciprocall feare, all men were perplexed and to seeke what to doe. The commons sorlorne of their fellow commoners doubted the violence of the Senatours: the Senatours againe stood in feare and jelousie of the commons that remained stil behind; and were in suspense whither it were better they abode still among them, or followed after their fellowes. For how long trow ye, will a multitude once disbanded, rest in quiet? Againe, in case any forrain warre should arise in the meane time, what might ensue there upon in the end? In conclusion, there was no hope behind to be looked for, but in the concord of citizens. and therefore the commons one way or other, either by reasonable conditions or unreasonable, were to be reconciled again and reduced into the citie, there was no remedie. So it was thought good and agreed upon, that one Menentus Agrippa (a saire spoken  and eloquent man, gratious with all and welbeloved among the commons, for that he was from them d
escended) should be sent as an Orator to treat with them.
Who being received into the campe, after that old and harsh kind of eloquence in those daies, spake as men saith to this effect,Agr. Menenius his Oration to the commons. and told this tale and parable: Whilome (quoth he) when as in mans bodie, all the parts therof agreed not, as now they do in one, but ech member had a several intent and meaning, yea and a speech by it selfe: so it besel, that all other parts besides the belly, thought much and repined that by their carefulnes, labor, and ministerie, all was gotten, and yet all little enough to serve it: and the bellie it selfelying still in the mids of them, did nothing else but enjoy the delightsome pleasures brought unto her. Whereupon they mutined and conspired altogether in this wise, That neither the hands should reach and convey food into the mouth, nor the mouth receive it as it came,  neyet the teeth grind and chew the same. In this mood and fit, whiles they were minded to famish thepoore bellie, behold the other lims, yea and the whole bodie besides, pined, wasted, and fel into anextreme consumption. Then was it well seen, that even the very belly also did no final service, did no final service, but fed the other parts, as it received food it selfe: seeing that by working and concocting the meat throughlie, it digesteth and distributeth by the veines into all parts, that fresh and perfect blood whereby we live, we like, and have our full strength. Comparing herewith, and making his application, to wit, how like this intestine and inward sedition of the bodie, was to the full stomacke of the commons, which they had taken and borne against the Senatours, he turned quite the peoples hearts. Then began some treatie of unitie and concord: and among other articles it was conditioned and granted, that the Communaltie should have certaine sacred and inviolable  magistrates of their owne among themselves, such as might have power to assist the Commons ag
ainst the Consuls:Tribunes of the common people first created. Item, that it might not bee lawfull for any Senatour to beare that office. So there were created two Tribunes of the commons, C. Licinius and L. Albinus. And these elected three other fellow officers unto them. Of whom Sicinius, the author of the sedition or insurrection was one, who were the other twaine is not for certaine knowne. Some say there were but two Tribunes created and no more in the mount Sacer, and that the sacred law was there made concerning their immunitie.
During this insurrection and revolt of the commons, Sp. Casiusand Post humuis Cominius entered their Consulships. In whose time a league was made with the people of Latium. For the establishing whereof, one of the Consuls staied behinde at Rome: the other was sent unto the Volscian  warre, who discomsited and put to flight the Volscians of Antium, Chasing and driving them into the towne Longula, which he wonne. And immediatlie he tooke Mucamites a towne of the Vilscians, and after that with great force assaulted Corioli.
There was in campe, them among the flowre of gallant youths, one Caius Martius, A Noble yoong gentleman, right politicke of advise, active besides, and tall of his hands, who afterwards was surnamed Coriolanius. Whiles the Roman armie lay at siege before Corioli,

and were amazed whollie upon the townsmen within, whom they kept fast shut up, and feared no  present danger at all from anie forraine warre without: behold, all on a suddaine, the Volscian legions that came from Antium, assailed them: at which verie instant the enemie also fallied out of the towne. Which Martius, seeing, who by good hap quartered and warded there, with a lustie band of elect men, not onely repressed and stopped the violence of those that issued and brake upon him, but also whiles the gate stood open, fiercely rushed in himselfe: and having made a foule slaughter of people thereby, at his first entrance into the cittie, and caught up fire at a venture, flung it upon the houses that stood upon and about the wals. Whereupon arose a great outcrie of the folke within the towne, together with lamentable weeping and wailing of women and children, as commonly is seene in such a sight. Which at the very first, both hardened the Romanes, and also troubled the Volscians: and no marvell, seeing the citie taken before  their face, for which they were come to rescue. Thus were the Volscians of Antium defeited, and the town Coriolo won.(...) And Martius through his praise, so much obscured and stopped the light of the Consull his fame, that had it not been ingraven in brasse for a remembrance and monument, That there was a league with the Latines, and the same made by Sp. Cassius alone (for that his companion was absent) there had been no record at all, but forgotten quite it had been, that ever Sp. Cominius warred with the Volscians.
The same yeare died Menenius Agrippa, a man all his life time before beloved indifferently of the Senatours and the Commons: but after the insurrection, much more deere unto the Commons than before.(...) This truchman, this mediator for civile attonement, this Embassadour and messenger from the Senatours to the commons, this reconciler and reducer of the commons  home againe into the cittie, had not at his death sufficient to defray the charges of his funerals: the commons therefore made a purse and a contribution of a (...) Sextant by the poll, and were at the cost to interre and burie him worshipfully.
After this were made Consuls, T. Geganius, and P. Minutius. In which yeare when all was quiet abroad for any warre, and the dissention at home healed up cleane, and skinned: another calamitie farre more greevous entred the cittie. First a dearth of corne, and all manner of victuals, by reason that the grounds upon the departure of the commons were forelet and untilled. Hereupon issued femine, even such as usually is incident to men besieged. And verily the meinie of bondservants, yea and the commons too, had utterly perished for hunger, if the Consuls had not in time made the better provision: by sending purveiours all abroad to buy up come, not  only into Hetruria, by coasting along the river on the right hand from Hostia, and on the left hand by sea, (passing through the Volscians countrie) even as far as Cumes: but also into Sicilie, there to lay for graine. Such was the hatred of the borderers, that Rome was enforced to have need of succour and releefe from a farre. Now when they had bought certain corne at Cumes, it was no sooner embarked, but the ships were staied and arrested there, by Aristodemus the tyrant, for the goods of the Tarquines, whose heire in remainder he was. In the Volscian country and Pomptinum, they could buy none for mony. There, the very Purveiors themselves were in danger of violence, by the men of the countrey. Out of Tuscane there came corne up the Tyber, wherewith the commons were sustained and refreshed. And considering the streights they were in for want of victuals, they had been sore distressed and vexed with warres besides, and  that in a very ill time, and unseasonable for them: but that the Volscians, who now were in readinesse, and upon the point to make warre, had a pestilence that raigned hote among them. Which heavie crosse and affliction, the enemies were so discouraged with, that when the plague began to stay, even then they continued still afraid.
The Romanes both at Velitree augmented the number of the inhabitants, and also at Norba, sending a new Colonie into the mountaines, to be a fortresse and strength for all the territorie of Pomptinum. Moreover, when M. Minutius, and A. Sempronius were Consuls, great store of corne was brought out of Sicilie: and it was debated in the Senate house, at what price the commons should be served therewith. Many thought the time was now come to wring the commons, and keep them under, and to recover againe those roialties, which by their departure were  forcibly wrested and dismembred from the nobilitie,(...)
But above all others Martivus Coriolanus, and utter and capitall enemie to the Tribunes power and authoritie, If they will (quoth hee) have their corne and victuals at the old price, let them restore unto the Senatours their auncient right and preheminence. Why see I (as one brought under the yoke of servitude, and put as it were unto my ransome, by robbers and theeues) these Magistrates of the Commons?

 why see I Sicinius so mightie? Shall I endure these indignities longer than I needs must? I that could not beare T arquinius to bee King, shall I brooke and suffer Sicinius? Let him depart aside now, and take his commons with him: the way is open to mount Sacer and other hils: let them carrie away with them the corne out of our posessions and Lordships, as they did three yeares ago: let them enjoy, take for their use, and spend the store, which they in their follerie and furie haue prouided. I dare be bold to say, that when they are by this calamitie once tamed, they will rather till and husband the ground themselves, than with weapon in hand, and by way of insurrection, forbid and hinder the tillage thereof. I cannot so soone say, whether it had beene as meete, as I suppose it was possible and easie to effect, that the Senators by offering more gentle conditions in the prices of corne and victualles, might haue eased  themselues of the Tribunes authoritie ouer them, and also haue beene disburdened of those impositions which maugre their heads, were laide upon them. Well, this seemed to the Senate a sharpe censure and severe sentence of Cartolanus, and for verie anger also it had like to have caused the Commons to rise up in arms:The murmuring of the (...) against Co^^olanus.
For they muttered and gave it out in these tearmes, That now they were laide at and assailed with famine like enemies, defrauded and berest of their meat and pittance: that the outlandish corne, the onely sustenance and food which fortune had ministred unto them beyond all hope; was snatched and plucked from their mouths, unlesse the Tribunes be delivered and yeelded prisoners hand and foot bound to C. Martius, unlesse he might have his penniworths of the backe and shoulders of the commons of Rome. For he was now start up and become their tormentor and hangman, to command  them either to death, or to servitude. As he went out of the counsell house, they had run upon him with violence, but that the Tribunes, as good lucke was, served him with processe in time, to appeare at a day, and come to his answer. Herewith, their furious anger was suppressed. For now everie man saw, that he was himselfe to be the judge and lord of his enemies life and death. Martius at the first scorned the Tribunes thundering threats, and gave the hearing, as though he made smal reckoning there of, saying, That their authoritie had power granted by limitation, only to aid, and not to punish: that the Tribunes were Tribunes to the commons, and not to the Senators. But so spightfully were the Commons bent, and all so set upon mischeef, that there was no other remedie, but one man must pay for it, to save and excuse the rest of the Nobles. Howbeit, the Senatours did what they could to withstand them: by opposing hatred and displeasure againe, and  making all meanes, what either privately they were able of themselves, or jointly by their whole Order and degree, to procure. And first, this course they assaied to stop and overthrow the suite commensed; namelie, by setting their followers and retainers in sundrie places to deale with the commons severallie one by one, and what they could to affright them from meetings and assemblies together. Afterwards, they came all forth at once into the Forum or common place. A man that had seene them would have said they had beene the parties themselves in trouble and accused, readie to hold up their hand at the barre: such a beseeching they praying, such a beseeching they made of the commons, in the behalfe of this one citizen, this onelie Senatour; that if they would not in their love acquit him for their sakes, as innocent and unguiltie, yet they would give him unto them as an offender and faultie person. In conclusion, when his daie came, he made default  and appeared not, yet continued they still in their angrie mood against him. And being condemned in his absence, for contumacie, departed into banishment to the Vol^cians, menacing his own countrie as he went, and carying even then with him the revenging stomacke of an enemie.
The Volcians at his comming received him courteouslie, and friendlie increated him everie daie more than other, as they perceived his anger more and more toward his countriemen, by many complaints he made of them and threats withall that he eftsoones gave out against them in their hearing. He made his abode and sojourned in the house of Accius Tullus. Who at that time was a mightie great man among the Volscians, and one that ever bare mortall mallice unto the Romanes. And whiles the one of them was provoked with an old cancred grudge, and the other set on and pricked forward upon a fresh quarrell and occasion of anger, they both laid their  heads together and complotted to make warre upon the Romanes. This onelie thing stood in their waie to crosse their designes: They thought verilie their Commons would hardlie or uneth at all be brought, to rise and take armes againe, which they had so often unhappilie attempted: And besides, their courages were well cooled, and their stomacks abated, by the losse of their youth in manie and sundrie warres often times afore, and now at last, by the late pestilence and mortalitie. They were therefore to go cunninglie to worke; that for as much as the old hatred

against the Romanes was growne out and worne away, their hearts upon some new anger might  be chaufed and galled againe. There were by chance at that time in Rome, the great Games and Plaies in hand, to be set out a new the second time, the occasion whereof was this: A certaine houshoulder one morning betimes before the shewes and games began, had beaten with rods a poore slave of his under the forke which he caried on his shoulders, and driven him along through the minds of the Circus or Theatre: and with that began the plaies, as if there had bene no matter therin of scruple or religion. But not long after, one T. Latinius a meane commoner had a dreame or vision: In which he thought that Iupiter complained and said, that the dancer before the plaies pleased him never a whit: and unlesse those games were newlie exhibited againe, and that verie statelie and sumptuouslie, some great danger should befall the citie: willing him withall, to make relation heerof unto the Consuls. The man albeit in truth  he was not without some sense and feeling of religion and the feare of God: yet made he no such great scruple at the matter, but that the reverence he had of the majestie and countenance of the magistrates surmounted and dashed it cleane: for feare least haplie he should become a talking stocke in mens mouthes, and be mocked for his labour. But this delaie and sleeping of the matter, he bought full deere. For within few daies his sonne happened to die. And because he should be out of doubt what was the cause of this his losse and suddaine misfortune, whiles he was troubled in spirit, with anguish and sorrow, behold, the same vision appeared to him againe in his sleepe, and seemed to aske him whither he had not yet sufficientlie paide for this disobedience and contempt of God? threatning moreover, that in case he made no greater hast to certifie the Consuls thereof, there was a greater judgement and plague toward, and that verie  neere
. Now was the thing more evident thanbefore, and past all peradventure. Howbeit he neglected and drave it off still, until he was himselfe overtaken with a grievous disease, and brought to great weaknes in all his joints. Then verilie the wrath of the gods taught him to be wiser. And being over waried with harmes past, and in feare of more presentlie to ensue, he conferred with his kinsfolke and friends to be advised by them. When he had declared unto them what he had seene and heard, namelie, how Iupiter had so often appeared unto him in his sleepe, and that the fearefull displeasure and threatnings of the heavenlie gods were shewed plainlie by sundrie mischances fallen upon him: by the full consent of all them that were about him, he was brought in a litter to the Consuls, into the Forum or common place, from whence by the Consuls commaundement he was caried into the Counsell house. Where, when he had made report unto  the Senatours of the selfe same things, to the exceeding wonder and admiration of them all, see another strange miracle: He that was brought into the Senate house a lame creple of all his lims, after he had once delivered his errand, returned home to his house (as it is recorded) sound upon his feete. Herupon the Senate decreed, That the Games should be set out as magnificentlie as could be devised.
The these solemnities resorted, by the motion and persuation of Accius Tullius, a great number of Volscians. But before they were begun, Tullius according to the complot between him and Martius at home, made a step or errand unto the Consuls at Rome, saying, that he would willinglie commune and treat with them apart, of important affairs concerning the State. When voidance was made, and everie man gone, he began in this wise: Loth I am (quoth he) if otherwise  I could chuse,Accius Tullius to the Romane Consuls. to speake ought but well of my countrimen and fellow citizens.
Yet come I not to complaine of anie action of theirs alreadie pasted, but to give a caveat, and provide that nothing be practised hereafter. The nature and disposition (I may tell you) of our people, is too too unconstant and unstaied, more ywis than I would they were, a great deale: that have wee found and felt to our great cost and manifold damage, wee I say, who verilie at this day by your long sufferance, and not by good desart of ours, do stand in good termes of peace and safetie. There is now here a great multitude of Volscians, the Plaies and Games readie to be represented and celebrate. Your citie will be whollie amused in the beholding therof: I remember upon the like occasion, what was somtimes enterprised and wrought in this citie by the youth of the Sabines; and my heart doth tremble and quake for feare, least some inconsiderate, rash and  foolish part be plaied by ours: thus much, O ye Consuls, I thought good in our behalfe and yours both, to giue you ynkling of before hand. As for me, I am minded presentlie to go from hence home, least I being heere seene, might be thought in some word or deed accessarie uno them, and so culpable. Having made this speech he departed. When the Consuls had declared in the Senate this thing so doubtfull, and yet proceeding from the mouth of so sure and certaine

 an author: behold, the credite of the man (as commonly it is seene) rather than the likelihood of the matter, caused them to be warie and circumspect, yea, although there was no such need or cause at al. Wherupon the Senate made an Act, that the Volscians should be jogging out of the citie. And divers criers or Bedles were sent out sundrie waies, to command them to avoyd and be packing before night. At the first, the Volsciens were onely much affrighted, and ranne everie man to and fro into his Inne to fetch away his things. But afterwards in the way homeward, they began to thinke more and more of it, and to grow melancholie: thinking it a great indignitie, that like polluted and profaned persons, they should be driven from the Games, on festival holidaies, discarded (as a man would say) and excommunicate out of the companie both of God and man. Thus as they went along all on a row, as it were in one continued and joynt traine, Tullius (who was gone afore as far as the Ferentine head) received the formost and chiefe of  them, as every one came, and entertained them with complaints and words of indignation, and drew both them who willingly gaue eare to his words so fitly framed and tending to stir more coles, and also by their meanes the rest of the multitude,Accius Tullius to his countrimen. into a plain field, lying hard vnder the high way side.
Vnto whom, assembled togither as it were to here a sermon, he thus began to speake: Admit (quoth he) you could forget the old wrongs and abuses offered you by the people of Rome, the losses and ouerthrowes of the Volscian Nation, yea and all other quarrels whatsoever; how can ye put up this daies spightfull reproch and dishonour received at their handes? who to our great disworship and shame, haue begun their solemne Games? Perceiued you not how they haue triumphed ouer you to day? how as ye departed, ye were a spectacle and pageant to all men, cittizens and strangers, and to so many neighbour nations adjoyning? how your wives and children  were brought as it were in a shew, to make them sport, and to laugh at? what conceit was in their heads (think ye) that heard the voyce of the Bedle? what thought they that beheld you as you dislodged? what imagined they that happened to meete this ignominous troupe as they matched? Even this and no other, that there was some wicked sinne among us, not to be named, whereby we should as malefactors, haue stained and polluted their games if we had ben present at the sight of them, and haue committed some hainous act, that would require by some satisfaction of sacrifice to be purged? and for that cause were driven from having any conversation, fellowship, and societie of good and godly men? Over and besides, how can you choose but thinke of this, That we enjoy our liues still, onely because we hastned our remoove, (if this may be called a  remoove, and not rather a plaine taking of a flight and running away.) And yet you reason this no enemie cittie, where, if ye had staied but one day longer, you had died for it everie one. Defiance is giuen alreadie, and war denounced against you; but if ye be men indeede of courage, to their great cost and mischiefe that haue denounced it. Thus being of themselves kindled inough with indignation, and by these words enflamed and set on fire, they went ever
ie man his way from thence home: and so effectually sollicited each one the people where he dwelt, that in fine the whole nation of the Volscians revolted and rebelled. To mannage this war, were chosen Generall commaunders by one consent of all the citties, Accius Tullius, and Cn. Martius the banished Romane: in whome of the twaine they reposed greater hope, and this their hope failed them not. So as it soone appeared that the puissance of the state of Rome, consisted more in the  dexteritie of good captaines, than in strong armies of souldiours. For first he went to Monte Cir^ello. Circeios, from whence he expelled the Romane Coloners, and delivered the cittie cleere and free unto the Volscians. Then by crosse waies he passed into the Latine streete, called Via Latima: and regained from the Romanes, these their townes newly gotten asore, Satricum, Longula, Pollustia and Corioli. After this he wan Lanuvium againe, and so
forward he forced Civit^ indorin^ vique. Corbio, Vitelia, Trebia, Labicos, and Pedum. And last of all from Pedum, he marched on toward the cittie of Rome, and at Cluiliae Fossae, five miles off, he encamped and forraied the territorie about, sending with the forreiars certaine guides, to keepe them from spoyling and doing harme in the Noblemens lands: were it that he were more spightfull to the Commons, or that thereby some discord might arise,Coriolanus beseegeth Rome. between the Comminaltie and the Senatours: which doubtlesse had soone  growne, so mightily had the Tribunes alreadie by their complaints and accusations, provoked the Commons forward, (who of themselves were shrewed inoguh) against the heads and magistrates of the cittie, but that the feare of forraine dangers, the greatest bond of ciuile concord that can be, held them in and knit their hearts togither, were they never so jealous, suspected, and hatefull afore one to the other.
Herein onely was all their difference, that the Senate and Consuls, reposed hope in nothing else save onely in warre: the commons on the other side

were desirous of any thing whatsoever, but warre.
Now were S.Nautius, and Sex. Farius Consuls: who as they were surveying and mustering the legions, and disposing of a good Corpus de guard upon the wals, and other places wherein they thought it expedient to keep a standing watch and ward: behold a mightie number called and cried hard for peace,and with their sedicious clamors, put them in exceeding feare: yea and afterwards, forced them to assemble the Senatehouse together, and to propose concerning the sending of certaine embassadors to Gn. Martius. The Lords of the Senate seeing evidently the commons hearts to faile them, accepted and granted the motion propounded. Whereupon were Oratours sent unto Martius to treate for peace.The answere of (...) to the (...) Orators.
At whose hands they received this heavie and stout answere: If so be the Volsciens had their lands restored to them againe; then there might be some parle and treatie of peace: but if they will needs at their pleasure still enjoy that  bootie which by war they have gotten, then would he in remembrance of private wrongs done vnto him by his countrimen, as also of the friendship and courtesie shewed him by strangers that had given him entertainement, do his best to make it knowne unto the world, that his courage and stomacke is incensed, and not abated and quailed by his banishment. Then were the same Embassadors sent againe the second time, but they might not be admitted once to set foote within the campe. It is reported moreouer that the verie priests in their Pontificalibus, in their rich vestiments and goodly ornaments, went with supplication to the tents of the enemies, and turned his heart no more than the embassadors had done before them. Then the dames of the cittie came flocking all about Veturia the mother, and Volumnia the wife of Coriolanus. Whether this proceeded from any publike counsell and was done in pollicie, or came onely of  womens feare, I find but little in any records. But howsoeuer it came about, this one thing is certaine, they persuaded so effectually with them, that both Veturia an aged woman, and also Volumnia with her two little sonnes that she had by Martius, went toward the enemies campe, to see if women by their praiers and teares, might save the cittie, which men with speare and shield could not defend. When they were come into the camp, and word brought to Coriolanus, that there was an exceeding great traine of women thither arrived: at the first, he, as one that had relented, neither for that publike maiestie in the Embassadours, nor yet at the religious reverence, which he both conceived in mind, and saw with his eies in the clergie, stood much more stifly bent against the teares of seely women. But afterwards one of his familiar friends, who  had seen and knowne Veturia there, mourning and bewailing exceedingly above the rest, as she stood betwixt her daughter in law and her little nephewes:The speech of Veturia unto her so ^ Martius Cotiolanus. I^ mine eies be matches (quoth hee) and deceive me not, here is your mother, your wife, and children.
Whereat, Coriolanus, faring like a man well neare beside himselfe, arose from his seate, and ran to meete his mother, and to embrace her. But the woman falling in steede of praiers into a fit of choller: Let me know (quoth she) before I suffer thee to embrace me, whether I am come to an enemie or to a sonne, whether I be in thy campe as a captive prisoner, or as a naturall mother. And have I lived indeede so long, and rubbed on still in this miserable old age of mine for this, to see thee first a banished man, and after that to become an enemie? Couldest thou finde in thine heart to waste and spoyle that courtrey which bred thee, which fostered thee, and brought thee up? And be it  that thou hither marched with a cruell intent and full of threats, would not thine anger and fell mood slake, when thou didst set foote within the borders and marches therof? And being come within the sight of Rome, arose not this in thy mind and thought, Within those wals yonder is my house, there are my house goods, my mother, my wife, my children? Why then, belike if I had never been a mother, and borne a child, Rome had not been assaulted. And if I had no sonne at all, I might have died well ynough in my native countrey, whiles it remained free. But as for me, neither can I suffer ought, more for thy dishonestie and shame; nor more to mine owne calamitie and miserie than this: and most wretched caitife though I be, yet long time so I cannot continue. But for these here, looke thou well to it, I advise thee, and have pittie of them, who if thou goe on as thou beginnest, are like to feele untimely death, or indure long captivitie. Then his wife and children hung about him, and clipped him: whereat the women fell a weeping  on all sides, bewailing their owne case and the state of their countrey. So as at length the man was overcome. And after he had taken them in his armes likewise, he let them goe: and himselfe dislodged and removed his campe
backeward from the cittie. When he had withdrawne the legions out of the territorie of Rome, he gat himselfe, men said, such hatred and displeasure for this action, that it cost him his life: and murdered he was, some report one way,

 some another. But I find in Fabius a most ancient writer, that he lived untill he was an old man: who reporteth this of him: That oftentimes in his latter daies he used to utter this speech, A heavie case and most wretched, for an aged man to live banisht. The men of Rome envied not those women their due deserved praises. So devoid was the world in those daies, of depraving and detracting the glorie of others. For in memoriall hereof to all posteritie, there was a temple built and dedicated to Fortuna Muliebris. i.Fertuna Mul^re b^ir. Womens fortune.
After all this, the Volscians joined the Aequians unto them, and returned into the territorie of Rome. But the Aequians would no longer abide Accius to bee their Commander. And upon this strife between the Volscians and Aequians, whither of them should appoint a Generall over the armie raised jointly of them both, first they grew to a mutinie, and afterwards to a cruell  battell. Such was the good fortune of the people of Rome, that two armies of their enemies, were thus by civile discord and contention, no lesse mortall than obstinate, overthrowne and brought to naught. Consuls then, were T. Sicinius and C. Aquilius. To Sicinius were allotted the Volscians, and to Aquilius the Hernikes (who also were out and up in armes) for their severall province. That yeare were the Hernikes vanquished, but with the Volscians they fought so, as they departed on even hand, giving and taking the like.
After them were Sp. Cassius, and Proculus Virginius made Consuls. Then was there a league concluded with the Hernikes, and two third parts of their lands were taken from them. Whereof the one moitie, Cassius the Consul was minded to distribute among the Latins, the other among the Commoners. To this donation hee laid too also a good portion of ground, which being  commons by right, he found much fault, that it was in the tenure and possession of private persons. This act of his made diverse of the Senatours, namely, such as were great landed men and interessed therein, to starkle for feare of hazarding their estate. Over and besides, the Senatours all in generall were in great perplexitie, least that the Consull by this largesse, should rise by popular favor to such greatnes, as might prejudice their free hold, yea and endanger the very main chance of publick libertie.The law Agraria first published, concerning the division of wast lands among the commons. And this was the first time that the law Agraria was published: and forward unto this present hower, it was never debated of, but with exceeding great stirs and troubles of the State. The other Consull withstood this largesse, with the generall consent of the Senatours, and without contradiction of some commoners: who at the very first began to mislike, and utterly abhorre, that the donation was so commune, and from the naturall cittizens, extended  to their allies and confederates.
Moreover, they might oftentimes heare even the Consull himselfe Virginius, openly in his solemne Orations before the people, to deliver by way of prophesie, and as it were to prognosticate,Virginius against the law Agraria. That this was a pestilent largesse of his brother Consull, and that those grounds would in the end entherall the takers thereof, and that it was the very high way to set up a kingdome againe. For to what other intent (I pray you) were their allies, and the nation of the Latines associate in the same? To what purpose either, was a third part of the lands won by conquest, given againe to the Hernikes prosessed enemies but a while before, but that these nations might have Cassius to be such another captaine of their, as Coriolanus was. And thus by dissuading and crossing the law Agraria, he became now to be popular and gracious with the people. Then both Consuls strived a vie, who might please and gratifie the Commons most.Virginius, by giving out that he  would maintaine and suffer the lands to be divided, so they were assigned to none but to the citizens of Rome: Cassius againe, who in the largesse of the lands, seemed to court and currie favor with the allies, and thereby was of the citizens lesse regarded and reputed, to the end, that by some other benefite he might regaine the hearts of his countrimen, was of opinion, and made a motive, that the monie which was received for the Sicilian corne, should be repaied unto the people. But the Commons refused and abhorred that, as a verie bribe and readie bait for a scepter and crowne. So greatly were all his gifts, for the deepe rooted suspition and jelousie of his aspiring to a kingdome, loathed in the conceits of men, as if they had flowed in wealth, and been rich ynough.Sp.Cassius put to death for seeking to be king. And for certaine it is recorded, that so soone as he left his Office, he was condemned and put to death. Some report, that his owne father did the execution: and that upon examination  privately had at home within his house, he finding him faultie, whipped him first, and so killed him, and consecrated the goods and chattels of his son, as a Deodand to Ceres, whereof a Statue or Image was made, with this inscription or title, GIVEN OVT OF THE HOVSE OF, CASSIVS. I find in some records(which soundeth neerer to the truth) that he was by the Treasurers of the citti^. Questors Caeso Fabius, and L.Valerius, endited of treason, and being convicted, was by a verdite of the people condemned, and his house by order from the whole cittie, rased and pulled downe.

And at this day, it is the void yard that lieth before the temple of Tellus. But howsoever he had  his triall and judgement, privately or openly, condemned he was when Ser. Cornelius and Q.Falbius were Consuls. Long continued not the peoples anger and spight against Cassius. So sweet was the law Agraria in it selfe, that when the author and upholder therof was out of the world, they longed to have it on foot againe. Which desire of theirs was the rather set on fire, through the pinching niggardise of the Senatours, who having that yeare subdued the Volscians and Aequians, kept the souldiours fasting, and defrauded them of the spoile. For what prises soever were gotten from the enemies, the Consull Fabius sold and brought into the Exchequer or chamber of the cittie.
Now was the name of Fabius alreadie odious to the Communaltie, for the last Consuls sake: yet obtained the Senatours so much, and held their owne so, as Caeso Fabius was created Consull  with L. Aemilius. This made the Commons more malicious and bent to mischeefe. And sedition at home caused warre abroad. Forraine warre husht civile discord for a while. Both Senatours and Commons with one accord, under the conduct of Aenilius, fought fortunately with the rebellious Volscians and Aequians, and diffeated them. Howbeit more enemies perished in the chase, than were slaine in the battell: so hotly the horsemen pursued them when they were once discomfited and gave not over. The same yeare was the temple of Castor, consecrated in the (...) of a T^^ple. Ides of Quintilis.(...) It had been vowed aforetime in the Latines warre by Posthumius the Dictator. His sonne was created Duumvir, for that purpose, and dedicated it.
This yeare also the Commons hearts were set upon the law Agraria, and longed afresh after  the sweetnes therof. The Tribunes of the Comminaltie graced and credited their popular authoritie, with propounding a law as popular and acceptable to the people. But the Senatours supposing verilie that the multitude was furious and outrageous enough and too much of themselves, without anie hire and reward, stood in great dread and horrour of these largesses, as the verie allurements and provocations, of rash and headie attempts: and the stoutest champions of their side to withstand the lawe, were the Consuls. That part therefore and State of the citie had the better hand, nor onelie this present yeare, but for the next ensuing. For they chose M.Fabius, Caeso his brother for the one Consull, and L. Valerius for the other, a man of the twaine more odious in the eies of the Commons, in regard of his late accusation of Sp.Cassius. In which yeare also there was strifeand much adoe with the Tribunes. But both  law and lawmakers with their glorious bragging and vaunting of their goodlie donative, which they could not effect, proved vaine and came to nothing. Vpon this, the name of Fabij, who after three Consulships together one after another, by them born continuallie without intermission, were inured and tried in the broiles and contentions of Tribunes, was in great request and reputation: and in their house and familie remained still for a good while after, that dignitie, as an honour well and worthelie bestowed upon them. Then began the Veientian warre, and the Volscians likewise rebelled. But for anie warres abroad whatsoever, they had strength enough and to spare, is by jarres at home among their owne selues they had not abused the same.
Besides this disquienes and affliction of all mens minds, occasioned by these dissensions, there hapned(to amend the matter well) prodigious, and strange tokens from heaven, daily in a  manner threatning both in citie and countrie the heavie hand of God. And when as the forhsaiers and wizards were sent out unto, to search forth the cause of Gods wrath and indignation both in publike and private, as well by inspect of the inwards of sacrificed beasts, as by aspect of birds and foules, they could assigne it to nothing else but this, that there was some errour committed in their sacrifices and divine liturgie. Those fearefull and prodigious signes proceeded still so farre, that one Oppia a vestale Nun, convicted and condemned of incest, suffered death.
After this, followed Q. Fabius and C. Tullius Consuls. In which yeare the discord at home was nothing lesse, and the warre abroad farre greater. For the Aequians rose up in armes: the Veientians also entered the consines, and made much spoile. And whiles they were more and more careful about these warres what order to take, Caeso Fabius and Sp. Furius, were made Consuls. By this time the Aequians assaulted Artona a citie in Latium. And the Veientians having  sped themselues with prises and booties, made great cracks that they would give an assault upon the verie citie of Rome. These fearefull newes, which ought to have abated and taken downe the stomacks of the Commons, made them much more fierce and fel, and they returned of themselves unto their old biace of refusing warfare: but Sp. Licinius their Tribune, thinking now the time was come to enforce upon the Senatours the law Agraria, upon this exigent and extreame point

 of-necessitie, had taken upon him to stop the levying and setting out of an armie. But he drew upon his owne head the whole hatred and displeasure of the Tribunes themselves and their auctoritie. For the Consuls opposed themselves against him no more bitterlie than his owne companions in office by whose assistance the Consuls went through with the muster. And for two warres at once, there were enrolled two armies. The one under the leading of Fabius, against the Aequians, the other, against the Veientians commaunded by Furius. Against whom there was nothing done worthie of remembrance. As for Fabius, he had somewhat more to doe with his owne men than with his enemies. That man himselfe alone was he, that being Consull upheld the Common-weale, which his armie for hatred of their Consull, had as much as in them lay, utterly betraied. For when as he(above many other warlike feats and parts of a right worthie  Generall, whereof he shewed singular proofe, both in preparation, and also in managing of the warre) had so marshalled and raunged his battaile, that with sending out the horsemen onelie, he disordred and brake the rankes of his enemies host:The disobedience of soldiers to ^^eir captain^. behold, the footmen would not follow on after that disaray neither, when the exhortation of their leader whom they hated, prevailed not, could their owne shame at leastwise, and the publicke dishonour for the present, no nor yet the imminent danger like to ensue (in case the enemie had taken heart againe and made head) force them to amend their pace one jot, and make more speed. Neither could he possiblie make them (if to doe nothing else) so much as to march still in battaile aray: but full against his commaundement they retire with their ensignes: and as men sorie in their hearts and ill appaid, (he that had seene them would have said they had lost the field) cursing their Generall one  while, and the valiant service of the horsemen another while, they returne to their Tents. Neither wist the Generall what way to remedie this so pestilent an example and dangerous precedent. Thus we may see, that brave men, of singular and excellent wits, have beene more to seeke and faile in their skill, how to governe a subject than to vanquish an enemie. The Consull returneth to Rome, having purchased more hatred of his forward and stubbourne soldiors, than, won honour by his martiall prowesse. Neverthelesse, the Senatours prevailed so much that the Consultship kept residence still in the name of the Fabij. So, they created M. Fabius Consull, and joine with him Cn. Manlius for his collegue.
This yeare likewise, had one patrone and maintainer of the law Agraria, to wit, Tiberius Pontificius a Tribune. He taking the same course, and following the steps of Sp. Licinius, hindered  the musters for a while.The poll^ricke practise of Appius Claudius to abate the Tribunes auctorine.
And when the Senatours were herewith disquieted againe, then Ap. Claudius arose up and said, That the yeare before, the Tribunes power was overmatched, and the neck of it broken in proofe, only for that present, but in example for ever hereafter: for as much as it was well seen then by experience, that of it selfe even among their own selves it fell a peeces and never will there want at any time one good Tribune or other, that would be glad to get the start and victorie of his fellow, yea and the favour also of the better part, for to purchase the good of the weale-publike. And that there would be more Tribunes, if more were needfull, readie to assist the Consuls: and if there were but one, even that one were sufficient to stand against all the rest. So that, the Consuls and LL. of the Counsell would but do their indevour, to win unto the State and Senate, some certaine of the Tribunes, if they might not compasse all.  The Senatours being thus schooled and taught their lessons by Appius, both all in generall would courteouslie salute and friendlie intreat the Tribunes, and also in particular as manie of them as had beene Consuls, according to that interest that ech man had in any one of them privatelie, partlie by favour and friendship, and partlie by countenance and authoritie, prevailed so with them, that they were willing and well content to employ the Tribunes authoritie to the good and safetie of the Commonweale. So by the helpe of foure Tribunes, against one that hindred the good of all, the Consuls tooke muster of the soldiours. Then set they forward on their voiage to warre with the Veientians: unto whom from all parts of Hetruria they came to aide and succour; not so much for anie love that they bare to the Veientians, as in hope that the puissance of Rome through intestine and civile dissention, would decay and come  to nought.
For in all the Dietes and assemblies of the States of Hetruria, the Princes and Peeres gave it out and said,The speeches of the Tuscane pri^ces in their Counsels. That the power and greatnes of the Romanes was everlasting, if through mutuall discord they warred not so among themselves: which hath beene found the onely bane of welthie and flourishing cities, wherby mightie Empires became mortal and subject to a final end. Which mischiefe (say they) this long time hath bene prevented and delaied, partly through the fage advise and prudent government of the Senate, partlie by the patience and long sufferance

of the Commons: but now they are come to a great extremitie. Devided they are, and of one  citie become twaine: each part have their severall Magistrats and lawes by themselves. At the first, how ever they were wont to be at ods, and to fall out at the mustering of souldiours, yet in warre they would hold together, and obey their captaines. Howsoever they fared at home in the cittie, were the State never so farre out of order, yet so long as martial discipline, was on foot and tooke place, they might be reclaimed, and all troubles staied. But now, the former use and custome of disobeying Magistrates within the cittie, is taken up by the Romane souldiours in the verie campe. For no longer since than the last warre of all, in the time of battell and conflict, their whole armie agreed of their owne accord, not forced by any extremitie that they were put unto, for to give the Veientians, as much as in them lay, even after they had lost the field, the entire victorie and honour of the day. For they abandoned their ensignes, left their Generall alone in  the skirmish, and against his will, retired themselves into the campe. And surely, if they hold on still this course, Rome may be won by meanes of her owne souldiours: there needs no more to doe, but to proclaime and make a shew of warre: For even the verie destinies and gods themselves would performe all the rest. Vpon these hopes and deepe persuasions, the Tuscanes, who afore were wont otherwhiles to have the better, and sometimes to take the worse in their warres, put themselves in armes. The Romane Consuls likewise were in feare of nothing els so much, as of their owne power, their owne force and weapons: being affrighted at the remembrance of that foule and shamefull example, and that lewd part plaied in the last warre: least peradventure, they should put it upon this point of hazard, as to be in danger of two battels at once. And therfore in so doubtfull and perrillous a case, they held off fight, and kept themselves within their  campe, if haply time and space would assuage their anger, bring them into the right way again, and reclaime them to good and reasonable order.
The enemies hereat, as well Veientians as the other Tuscanes, made the greater hast, and were more sharpe set, and provoked them to the field: first by riding up and down before their campe, hard at the gates thereof, braving and chalenging them forth, at the last, seeing they could not prevaile, they fell to rating and railing, one while upon the Consuls themselves, another while upon the whole armie, in these and such like tearmes: A gay matter indeed, and a proper devise to salve their cowardise, and under a colour of civile dissention to cloke their fearefulnesse: and the Consuls forsooth mistrust more the faithfulnesse and loi^ltie of their souldiours in service, than they doubted their valor and sufficiencie of service. Marie, here is indeed a new kind of mutinie. What? Armed men to hold their peace, and sit still? Hitting them in their teeth besides, with their new start-up rising, and late sprong base beginning, letting flie against them lies and truths, one with an
other, and spared not. For all this soule stirre they kept, stouting and reviling them under their very trench, and hard at their gates, the Consuls themselves were not one jot troubled. But the foolish and ignorant multitude what with anger, and what for shame of these reprochfull tearmes, was much distempered: and one whiles wholly gave over to regard and thinke upon home troubles and dissentions, and had rather than their lives be revenged of their enemies: Anon againe, they would not in any case gratisie the Nobles and Consuls, nor wish them good successe. Thus the hatred both against the enemies without, and the Consuls within strove together in their hearts: untill at length, forrain occasions gat the mastrie over them: so proudly, so insolently, the enemie scorned and made a  game of them. Whereupon they came thicke by troupes to the Generals pavilion, calling upon them for to fight, requiring to put forth the banner and signall of battell. The Consuls laid their heads together, and as taki
ng good advisement, conferred on the matter a good while. To fight they were most willing and desirous: but this desire was to be kept back and dissimuled, and thereby augmented: to the end, that by holding off, by opposing themselves, and making some stay, they might set the souldiors on, and being once set on it, they might make them follow more eagerly at once. In conclusion, this answere was returned unto them: That they made too much hast: it was not yet full ripe, nor the time come, to give battell: they must hold themselves contented, and keepe within thir tents: proclaiming moreover, that no man be so hardie as to fight: and whosoever attempted it, without their warrant, and commission, they would proceed against  him with all rigour, as a professed enemie. Thus were they dismissed. And the lesse willing they thought the Consuls were, the more eager were they, and set upon a battel. The enemies besides, when they had intelligence, that the Consuls were not disposed to fight, and had tak
en order to the contrarie, were inkindled and inflamed so much the more. For now they supposed they might brave it, and insult upon them safely without danger. For why?
The Consuls durst not

 trust the soldiors with weapon in hand: now were their mutinies come to the height, and to break forth in extremities: now and never before the Romane Empire and Dominion was at an end. Presuming considently upon this ground, they run together unto the gates, redoubling a thousand villanous and opprobrious termes, and much a do they had to forbeare assaulting the camp. Now could the Romans on the other side hold no longer, and endure this contumelie and indignitie, but came running from all parts of the camp unto the Consuls. And now not leasurely as before, make they request, and by mediation of their chiefe centurians, but all on once on every side plied them with outcries and clamors. Now was the matter come to ripenes, yet hast the Coss. stil and hold off. Then Fabius, seing the tumult increased, and that for feare of a mutinie, his brother Consul had yeelded alreadie, caused silence to be made by sound of trumpet, and thus he spake: I know full  well O Manlius,The speech of Fabius to his brother Consull. that these fellows are able to win the victorie: but that they will so do I know not, and they themselves have caused me to doubt. I have therfore set down my rest, and fully resolved not to give the signal of battaile, unlesse they sweare to returne out of the field with victory.
Once did the soldiors in battaile deceive a Cos. of Rome: but the gods in heaven shall they never deceive. Then M.Flavolcius a Centurion, one of the formost that called for battaile so instantlie, Returne will I (quoth hee) O M. Fabius, victor out of the field: and if I faile then I beseech father Iupiter, Mars Gradivus and other gods to make me a fearefull example, and shew their wrathfull displeasure upon me. The same oth after him tooke the whole armie, everie man against himselfe. Thus when they had sworne, the trumpet sounded. Then buckle they themselues toward battaile, full of anger, full of hope. Now they bid the Tuscanes revile and raile their sill:  now being at all points armed, they wished they had afore them man to man their enemies, those that were so livelie and lustie with their tongues. Right valiantly bare themselues that daie, as well the Commons as the Nobles. But the name of the Fabij, the Fabij I say, passed all the rest and wan the spurs. Who in this peece of service purposed to gaine againe the hearts of the Commons, which in many civile contentions were set against them. And so they embattailed themselves. The enemies likewise; both the Veientians and also the Tuscane legions were nothing behind, as making almost sure reckoning that they should be fought withall no more than the Aequians had beene. Nay, they were in hope of some greater disorder amongst them, and that, considering they were so malecontent, and the occasion so doubtfull, they would play a more shamefull part, and shew their leaders a beastlie cast. But it fell out farre otherwise. For  never in any other warre afore, gave the Romanes a hotter charge upon the enemies: so much had they of the one side with spitefull taunts and reproaches netled them, and the Consuls on the other side with their long delaies whet them on. Scarce had the Tuscanes any time to put themselues in battaile array, but at the verie first encounter and shocke, casting their javelins careleslie from them (I know not how) rather than levelling and launching them against the enemie, they came presently pell-mell to hand strokes, and to deale with their swords, which is the cruellest sight of all other. The Fabij among the formost in the forefront fought valiantlie, shewing their countrimen a brave sight, and a noble example to follow. Where, Q Fabius who had beene Consull the third yeare before, the leader and forwardest of them all, whiles he advanced himselfe and rushed amongst the thickest of the Veientians, and skuffled with many of  them together, was not ware of his deadline enemie so neere: but behold a certaine Tuscane a mightie man of strength and skilfull at his weapon, ran him through the breast with his sword. Which was not so soone drawne forth of his bodie, but Fabius fell downe headlong upon his wound and died. Both armies felt the fall of that one man: and therwith the Romanes reculed.
With that M.Fabius the Consull, stepped over his bodie as it lay along, and holding forth his target betweene: Why, soldiors (quoth he) is the oth ye tooke, to run away and retire thus in to the campe? And are ye more affraid in deed, of these most dastardlie enemies, than of Iupiter and Mars, by whom ye sware? But I, who was not sworne at all, will either make returne with victorie, or else O Q. Fabius, fighting here by thee, I will live and die by thy side. To whom, Caeso Fabius, who the yeare afore was Consull, replied againe: Thinke you brother, with  these words to make them to fight? Nay, the gods are they that must doe it, by whom they have sworne. And let us like Noble knights, and for the honour of the Fabian house, stirre up and animate our soldiors by fighting rather than by exhorting. Thus rode the two Fabij with launce in rest into the forefront, and drewe the whole battaile with them. The fight of one side being thus renewed, Cn. Manlius the Consul in the other wing, bestirred himselfe, and did for his part as valiantly: Where hapned almost the like fortune. For as in the

one wing the souldiours followed Q. Fabius, so in this they cheerefully went with the Consull  himselfe Manlius, chasing the enemies afore him as discomfired. And when he was sore wounded, and thereupon gone out of the battaile, his men supposing him to be slaine, drew backe, and had indeede lost ground and given way to the enemie, but that the other Consull with certaine corners of horsemen, galloped amaine into that quarter, and cried aloud that his fellow Consul was living and that himselfe who had defeated the other poynt, was readie with victorie to assist them, and so upheld the medley, that now began to shrinke. Manlius also to encourage his men, shewed himselfe againe in open sight. Thus the knowledge and presence of the two Consuls, made the souldiours take heart afresh. Herewithall besides, were the enemies battalions the thinner and weaker, because they trusting upon their exceeding number, had drawen out those that were to serve for succour and supply, and sent them away to assaile the campe. In the surprising whereof, finding no great adoe and small resistance, whiles they had more mind to rifle for pillage, than to fight for the victorie, they lost time. In the meane space the Romane Triarq, who were not able to hold out the first assault and entrance, having dispatched to the Consuls certaine messengers, to give knowledge in what termes they stood, cast themselves round into a ring, and retired themselues to the Praetorium or Generals lodging, and of themselves alone, made head and renewed the fight. Likewise Manlius the Consull being ridden back to the campe, at everie gate set certaine souldiours in guard: and so enclosed them within, that they could not get forth. The Tuskanes being in this desperate case, fared more like mad men than hardie souldiours. For when as they ranne here and there everie way, according as  they had any hope to find issue and to escape, and had made sundrie offers and attempts in vain: behold one troupe oftal fellowes in a plumpe, made no more ado, but knowing the Consul, who by reason of brave and goodly armor was a faire mark, charged upon his own person. The first voley of their shot, was receiued by those that stood about him, but their violence afterwards could not be endured.(...) The Consull himselfe was wounded to death, and fell down in the place, and al the rest were discomfited. Whereupon the Tuskanes tooke more hart unto them, but the Romanes were so maskared, that they ran all about the campe in great feare. And in extreame jeopardie had they been, but that the Lie^enants caught up the Consull his bodie, and made passage at one gate for the enemie. Through which they rushed forth, and dismarched disorderly, untill they light vpon the other Consull presently after his victorie: where they either fell againe upon  the edge of the sword,(...) or were scattered and put to flight. This brave victorie thus atchieved, was heavie yet and sorrowfull for the death of two sonoble personages.
And therefore when the Senate had decreed a triumph, the Consull returned this answere, That willingly he could allow thereof in regard of the passing good seruice performed in that warre, in case an armie might triumph without a Generall. But as for himselfe, seeing that his house grieued and mourned for the death of his brother Q. Fabius, and that the commonwealth was halfe fatherlesse as it were, for the losse of a Consull, he would not accept the lawrell so deformed and foully blemished, both with publike and private sorrow. This triumph thus by him refused, was more honourable than all the triumph in the world. By which wee may see that glorie despised in due time returneth otherwhiles in greater measure. Then solemnized he with great honour the obsequies  one after another, first of his fellow Consull, and then of his owne brother. And he himselfe made the funerall orations for them both. But so as in yeelding unto them their due commendations, he went himselfe away with the greater part. And not unmindfull of that rule which he had learned in the beginning of the Consulship, namely to win again the harts and love of the Commons, he diuided the cure of his hurt and wounded souldiours among the Senators. With most of them the Fabij were charged, and of none were they better tended and looked unto, than of them. Wherupon the Fabij now waxed popular, and that, for no other pollicie and intent, but onely to do the common-wealth good: and therefore with the favour and good will of the commons, as well as of the Nobles, Caeso Fabius was created Consull, with T. Virginius. Whose principall care above all was this, even before war, before musters, before all things  els, that seeing now in some measure, there was good hope of concord begun alreadie, the hearts of the Commons might be perfectly linked and united togither with the Nobles, and that, with all speed possible. In the beginning therefore of this yeare, before that any Tribune of the Commons should prefer the law Agraria, he thought good and gave his advise, that the Nobles should prevent all, and go in hand first themselves to perform their part, and shew their bountie: namely in parting the lands gotten by conquest, and freely bestowing the same as equally

 as might be, among the Commons. For it was meet and requisite that they should be possessed therof, whose swet of brows, nay, whose bloud had paied for the purchase. But the Senators could not heare of that care, but misliked of the motion: yea, and some of them complained and said, that the lively spirit, and corageous disposition of Caeso, which sometimes he had, was now by reason of excessive glorie, growen to be toyish and full of vanities. And there an end of civile factions for a time.
But the Latines were much troubled with the reises and rodes of the Acquians. Thither was Caeso with an armie sent, who invaded and overran the verie countrey of the Aequians, ^orraying and spoyling as he went. The Aequians thereupon retired, and put themselves into their townes, and kept close within the walles, whereby there was no memorable field fought. But at their enemies the Veientians hand, they received an overthrow, and that through the rashnesse  of the other Consull: and had not Caeso Fabius come to the rescue in good time, the whole armie had beene utterly lost. From that time there was neither war nor peace with the Veientians: but their dealing was much what after the manner of robbing. For when the Romane legions were abroad, they would leave the field, and take to their cities: when they perceived the legions were remooved and gone, they would make excursions and waste the countrey. Thus plaied they mockholiday, and dalied with them, shifting off war with quietnesse, and quietnes againe with war, by turnes. So as, the Romane could neither all wholly rest carelesse and secure for them, nor yet go through stitch, and make an end once for all with them. Besides, other wars were either presently at hand, to with, from the Aequians and the Volscians, who could no longer sit still, than untill their fresh griefe, and paine of the last defeature was ouerpast; or else the  Sabines, never other but enemies, yea and all Hetruria, were like shortly to rise and take armes. But the Veientian a continuall enemie, rather than dangerous, provoked them to anger with reprochfull taunts, oftener than with any great perill or hurt. And yet as little as it was, it might no time be neglected,Caeso Fabius the Consull, in the Lords of the Senate. nor gave them leave to be employed in the meanewhile, otherwhere.
Then came the whole house and kinred of the Fabij unto the Senat, and in the name of them all spake the Consul in this wife: My Lords of the Senate, the Veientian warre had neede rather of a resident garrison, as ye know well inough, to keepe the fronties, than great forces for expedition. As for you, see ye to other warres. Let the Fabij alone to deale as private enemies with the Veientians. We dare undertake and warrant, that the State of Rome shall receive no dishonour nor danger there. We are fully minded and resolved at our owne proper cost and charges, to maintaine  and mannage that war, as appropriate and peculiar to our name and familie: the citie shal be charged neither with men nor money there.The linage of the Fabii, offer to maintaine wa^e with the Veien^^ens in their (...) persons, and at their proper charges. Great thanks were giuen them for this their forwardnesse. The Consul being come out of the Senat house, was attended home with the whole generation of the Fabij who stood at the porch of the Counsell Court, expecting the Senates decree. And being commanded to be readie in armour well appointed the next day, and to give attendance at the Consuls doore, they departed from thence home to their owne houses. The bruit hereof spread all over the cittie. All men extoll the Fabij up to the skie, saying, That one familie had taken upon them the whole burden of the cittie.
The Veientian war now, is become(say they) a private charge, and requireth the power and force onely that private persons could make. O that there were two such families more in Rome of that stomacke and valor:  that one of them might take the Volsciens in hand, and another the Acquiens. Surely all the nations bordering hereabout might soone be subdued, and the people of Rome sit still the while and rest in peace. The day following, the Fabij armed themselues, mounted on horseback, and repaired to the Rendez-vous aforesaid, as they were commaunded. Then came the Consull forth, clad in a rich cote of armes, and standing in his porch, beheld his whole bloud and linage armed and marshalled in order, and being receiued in the minds of them, caused the guidon and Cornets to be advaunced. Never marched there along the cittie, an armie either lesse in number, or more renowned for their same and the admiration of men. Three hundred men of armes they were and sixe, all nobly descended, of one stocke, of one race and name all. And of all them there was not one, that a sage and prudent Senate would haue refused at any  time as unsufficient, to be a leader and commaunder in the field. Thus furnished with the force and strength that one onelie familie could make, they advaunced forward, threatning and menacing the ruine and destruction of the Veientians. There followed a number and multitude of citizens: one priuate companie by themselues of kinsfolke, allies, friends, and feres, casting in their mindes no meane matters, neither of hope nor feare, but all exceeding measure and surpassing: another, of the common people, mooved with a carefull regard, andastonied

againe in a favourable applause and admiration of their enterprise, crying with one voice, Hold on right valiant knights, On forth a Gods name in happie houre; God graunt luckie speed, answerable to your magnanimous attempts and designements: and looke for, at our hands from hence forth, Consulshps, triumphs, all rewards and honorable dignities whatsoever. And all the way as they passed along the Capitoll, the castle, and other temples, they besought the gods, as many as were presented to their eie, as many as they could conceive in their minds, to vouchsafe that squadron to be attended upon with good successe and fortunate felicitie, and soone to returne home againe in safetie, to their native countrie and loving parents. But, alas the while, in vaine were all these praiers made. Then set they forward on their journey, leaving Ianus church on the right hand, taking the ungracious and unluckie way, from the gate Carmentaris, untill at length they came to the riverAt thi^ day (...) Cremera That was thought a convenient place to fortisie  in, and there to plant a garrison. After this were L. Aemilius and C. Servilius made Consuls. And so long as they adventured no farther than forraying the countrey, the Fabij were good ynough, not onely to defend their hold and fort; but all the frontier parts and marches where the Tuscane territorie adjoineth to the Romane, they so scoured and traversed, betweene the one consine and the other, that they kept all their owne in safetie, and mightily endammaged the enemies. Then surceassed they a while, but it was not long, from wasting and spoiling. By which time both the Veientians had gathered a power out of Hetruria, and assaulted the fort of Cremera, and also the Romane legions, under the conduct of the Consull L. Aemilius, encountred the Tuscanes in open field. And yet the Veientians had hardly time ynough to put themselves in order of battell: so suddainly at the very first buskling, whiles the files were entring into  array under their colours in the vauntgard, and the succours and supplies a placing and disposing in the rereward, a corner of Romane horse, charged them so hotely on the flancke, that unneath had they roome and space, either to begin fight, or to keepe their standing sure. Thus were they discomfited, and chased backe as farre as Saxa rubr^.i. Red rockes, (for there they were encamped) where they humblie craved peace. Which when they had obtained (see their inbred inconstancie so naturally engraffed) they were wearie of it, and repented thereof, before the Romane garrison could be withdrawne from Cremera. And so the Fabij once againe skirmished with the Veientian nation, without preparation of greater warre. Neither made they inrodes only, and suddaine violent incursions into the territories, but sundrie times they encountred with banners displaied, and joined battell in plaine field. And that one house and kindred of the Romane  people, carried oftentimes the victorie away, from that most mightie and rich cittie (in those daies) of all the Tuscanes. This, tooke the Veientians at the first, for a foule disgrace and indignitie. But afterwards they devised to lay traines, as occasion should serve, and entrap their fierce and hardie enemie: and well apaid they were and rejoiced, that the Fabij upon the good successe that still followed them, were become more bold and venturous. And therefore diverse times when the Romanes were abroad a boothaling, they would drive cattell in their way, but yet so, as they might seeme to light upon them by chance. The rusticall pezants made shew as if they sled out of the countrie, and left the fields wast: yea and the companies of souldiours sent out to restraine and stay their spoiling, made semblant of running away, pretending oftener they were afraid, than they had cause in deed. So as now the Fabij by this time, set so light by their enemies, and thought so well of themselves, that they beleeved verily their power was invincible, and might not be withstood in any ground, or at any time whatsoever. This conceit and hope of theirs set them so aflote, and made them so bold, that espying upon a time cattell, farre from Cremera, (for there was a large plaine betweene) although here and there they might descrie armed souldiours of their enemies, yet from their fort they ran downe, with bridle in their horse necke. And when unadvisedly without foresight, they were past the ambush, which was laid covertly about the very way that they were to passe, and were stragling here and there disorderly, driving the cattell away, which gadded in and out, as their manner is when they be scared and affrighted, then suddainely start the enemies all at once out of the ambushment: so as, both before and behind, and on everie side they were beset and environned with enemies. At the first the very howting  and outcrie they made round about, terrified them: afterwards flew their shot from all sides. And as the Tuscanes gathered themselves together, the Fabij were soone hemmed within a round battaillion of enemies, standing armed thicke and close one to another: and the neerer the enemies approched about them, in so much lesse roome were they enforced also to cast themselves into a ring. Which, considering their arraies were thrust so thicke together in

 so straight a compasse, made their small number appeare the lesie, and the multitude of the Tuscanes to carrie a greater shew. Then, forbearing to fight as they first entended, on everie hand a like and with all at once, they made head to one onely place. Thereto they endevour with might and maine, bodie and armour; and with a pointed battaile wedgewise pierced through and made themselves passage. And they tooke the way that led to a little hill, rising up with an easie ascent. From whence at first, they made resistance only and kept their ground: but soone after, when by reason of the vantage of the hill, they had some time to breath themselves, and to take heart againe after so great a fright, they forced the enemies also to give backe that were mounting up the hill. And as few in number as they were, yet by the benefit of the ground, they had gotten the better, if the Veienstians had not set a compasse about  the hill side,The Fabij all slaine. and gained the verie top and pitch thereof. Thus became the enemie againe to have the upper hand. And so were the Fabij slaine everie man, and not one of theme escaped, yea and their Fort overthrowne and rased. Three hundred and six there were that died as all writers doe agree. One onelie of the name was left behind at home, well neere 14 years of age, for to renew and increase as out of a stocke, the name of the Fabij, and to prove in time to come, the greatest prop and pillar that the people of Rome should have, in their dangers and extremities many a time both at home and abroad.
But ere this heavie losse and overthrow happened, C.Horatius and T. Menenius were Consuls. Menenius was sent forthwith against the Tuscanes, pussed now up with pride for this their victorie: with whom then also, he sought unfortunately and sped but ill. For the enemies surprised  and got the Ianiculum, and the citie had surely beene besieged, considering that besides warre they were greatlie distressed for want of victuals, (for the Tuscanes were passed over the Tyber) but that Horatius the Consull was called home from the Volscians. And so neere approached the enemies in this warre, and preassed to the verie wals that first there was a skirmish on even hand at the temple of Hope Spes: and another againe at the gate Collina. Where, albe^t the Romanes got but verie small ods of the enemie, yet did that conflict upon a little recoverie of wonted courage, prepare the soldiors to better service in the battailes ensuing.
Now were A.Virginius and Sp.Servilius created Consuls. The Veientians after this late disfeature, came no more into the field, yet they robbed and wasted still. And from the Ianiculum as from a fortresse and place of safe retreit, they would make excursions out into the territorie of  Rome all about, and neither cattell nor countrie people could any where be in safetie for them. But afterwards, they were overtaken themselves in the same wile that they had caught the Fabij with. For as they followed after certaine cattell, which were driven forth heere and there of purpose to draw and traine them abroad, they were plunged themselves headlong into an Amboscado laid for them. And the more they were, the greater was their slaughter. Vpon this foile, their cruell and fell anger, gave the occassion and ouverture of a greater overthrow. For having crossed the Tyber in the night season, they gave the attempt to make an assault upon the campe of the Consull Servilius. But being discomfited, and many of them slaine, the rest retired themselves from thence, and with much a doe recovered the Ianicle. Streight after this, the Consul also passed over Tyber, and encampeth himselfe stronglie hard under the Ianiculum. The morrow  morning by sunne rising, (so venterous he was by reason of his fortunate sight the day before, and more for the scarcetie of corne and victuals, which drave him to take, he cared not how rash and dangerous courses, so they tended to more quicke and speedie expedition) full fondlie he advanced forward and marched up to the steepe hill of the Ianicle, and charged the enemies hold: but being set backe himselfe from thence more shamefullie, than he had the day before repelled the enemies; yet by occasion that his fellow Consull came in the while to reskue, he and his armie both were saved: and the Tuscanes enclosed betweene both hosts, were forced to turne their backs both to one and the other, and were killed everie mothers sonne. Thus by a rash enterprise which (as good luke was) sped well, the Veientian warre came to an end. The citie then, as it enjoyed peace, so it came againe to be better stored of corne and victuall: both  for that there was some graine brought out of Campania, and also because the old store that was hoorded up came abroad, by reason that no man now stood in feare of death to ensue.
Afterwards upon plentie and ease, they began to be busie againe, and their heads to worke, seeking to broach old troubles at home, since they had none to occupie them abroad. The Tribunes they fell to follicite and infect the Commons, with their venome and poison, the law Agraria: inciting them against the Nobles that gainsaied it: not in generall tearmes onely,

but also by touching particular persons.(...) For, Q. Considius and T. Genutius, who were for the law  Agraria, framed an inditement, and sued T. Menenius. And this was laid to his charge, to wit, the losse of the fort and garrison at Cremera: for that, he being Consull say encamped not far from thence. But of this danger he soone stopped the course, both because the Nobles laboured and tooke his part, no lesse than they had done afore for Coriolanus: and also the affection and favour that men bare to his father Agrippa, was not worne out, and cleane forgot. The Tribunes used moderation therfore in the penaltie, for having commensed a capitall action against him, and convicted him thereof, they set a fine on his head of (...) 2000 Asses. Howbeit this cost him his life: for he grew, men say, into such a melancholike fit for shame of this disgrace, that he fel therupon from greese of heart unto apining sicknesse, which followed him to his dying day. Then, was there another accused and brought into trouble, to wit, Sp., Servilius, so soone as he was out of his Consulship, at what time as C. Nautius and P. Valerius were Consuls. In the beginning of  whose year the Tribunes L.C. editius and T. Statius, called him straightwaies to his answer. Who sustained the violence of the Tribunes, not as Menenius did, by his owne intreatie and the praiers of the Nobles,Sp. Servillius (...). but bare himselfe confidently upon his owne innocencie, and the good grace wherein he stood. Blamed he was likewise and charged, for the battell with the Tuscanes at Ianiculum. But being a man of an hot spirit and stout courage, as he caried himselfe before in the publicke danger, so now in his owne private perill, by refuting in a bold and stout speech that he made, not onely the Tribunes, but also the Communaltie, and casting in their teeth and reprooving them, for the condemnation and death of T. Menenius, by whose fathers meanes the Commons being in times past restored, had obtained first those very Magistrates and lawes, whereby  at this day they exercise such rigour: he went through all his troubles, and with much boldnesse avoided the present jeopardie he stood in. The testimonie of his colleague Virginius, stood him in great stead, who produced forth as a witnesse, made him parrener with himselfe, in all his worthie acts. But that processe of judgement which passed against Menenius (so altered were they now, and repented therefore) did him much more good, and strucke it dead sure.
When this broile and contention was ended at home, the Veientians warre began abroad; to whom the Sabines also had joined their power. Whereupon, the Consul P. Valerius, with the aid of the Latines and Hernikes, was sent out with an armie to Veij: and incontinently he set upon the tents of the Sabines, as they lay encamped under the wals of their consederats, and put such a terror amongst them, that whiles they ran forth scattering by bands and companies, some at  one gate, some at another, to repell the violent assault of the enemies, it happened that the gate which he first advanced his ensignes against, was woon. And within the trench, small sight there was, but more manslaughter. The tumult and noise hereof was heard from out of the campe into the cittie. And the Veientians in great feare ran hastily to their weapons, as if Veij had been surprised. Some make speed to succour the Sabines: others do what they can to assaile the Romans, who were wholly busied about the pillage ofthe campe. For a prettie while they were put to some trouble, disordered, and withdrawne from their purpose: but afterwards, they themselves advanced their banners, and made head against the one side and the other. The horsemen withall, sent in by the Coss. brake the Tuscanes array,S^^in^s and (...) vanquished. and put them to flight. And thus in one houre two armies were defeated, two most puiss^ant nations, and neerest neighbors to the Romans, vanquished.
Whiles these exploits were performed about Veij, the Volscians and Aequians, had encamped themselves in the countrey of Latium, and harried the marches thereof. Whom the Latins of themselves, with the helpe onely of the Hernikes, and without any leader or aid at all from the Romans, forced to abandon their rents: and besides the recoverie of their own goods again, atcheeved a great and rich bootie. Notwithstanding all this, the Consull Nautius was sent from Rome against the Volscians. They were not well plea^ed, I beleeve, with the maner of it, that their allies should wage war at all, with their owne power and direction, without the armie and conduct of the Romanes. He spared not to worke all the mischeefe he could, all abuse and spight possible against the Volscians: yet could not they be brought to sight a set field. Then succeeded L. Furius, and C. Manlius, Consuls. To Manlius sell the charge of the Veientian province. Howbeit, war there was none at all. But at their owne sute, a truce was graunted unto them of fortie yeares. And they were enjoined to find corn and souldiors pay. Peace was not so soon procured abroad, but presently ensued discord at home. For at the instigation of the Tribunes, by occasion of the law Agraria, the Commons were set a madding. But the Consuls skared neither with the condemnation of Menenius, nor yet with the perill wherein Servilius stood, resisted all they could.

 And when the Consuls were once out of their office,L. (...), and (...). Genutius a Tribune laid hold upon them, and arrested them: and L. Aemilius with Opiter Virginius enter their Consulship. In some Annales or yearely records I find Vopiscus Iulius Consull in steed of Virginius.
But in this yeare, whosoeuer then were Consuls, Furius and Manlius being indited before the people, went about araied in vile apparrell and mournefull weed to the younger sort of Senators,Th^ir ^e^onstrance to the same Nobles. as wel as to the Commons, persuading, advising, and warning them, to for beare and refuse all dignities and offices of state, yea, and al charge of common-weale. And as for the Consuls rods borne afore them, their purfled robes with purple, and chaire of estate, they should esteeme no otherwise of them, than of the pageants carried in a funerall pompe. And that with these gorgeous ornaments and ensignes, they were but destined to death: much like to beasts adorned with sacred white ribbands  and labels, appointed to sacrifice. But if the sweetenes of a Consulship were such, let them consider now with all, and persuade themselves, that it is become captivate and overswaied with the power of the Tribunes: and that the Consull, as if he were the Tribunes sergeant, must do all at his beck and command. For if he quetched never so little, if he seemed to regard the Senatours, or make account of any thing else in the whole State but of the communaltie, let him set before his eies the exile of Cn. Martius, the judgement and death of Menenius. The Nobles incenced with these speeches, from thenceforth began to consult and confer togither, not openly and in publike counsell, but privately, and apart from the privitie of many. And when they were resolved once upon this point, that those accused parties now in trouble, should be enlarged one way or other, by hooke or crook: then the cruel lest advise, and hardest course that could be deliuered,  best pleased them: and for to put in execution the most audcious dessignements whatsoeuer, there wanted not one or other to give counsel. Well, the law day of triall came, and when as the Commons gave attendance devoutly in the Forum, in great expectations of the sequel and issue, they began at first to maruel much, that the Tribun Genutius came not down in place: and suspecting somwhat because of his long carrying and delay, they imagined that he durst not for the great men and chiefe magistrates of the citie: and so they complained, that the common cause was forlorne and betraied. At the last, they that kept about the doore and porch of the Tribune his house, brought word that he was found at home stark dead. Which news being once noised through the assemblie, mark how an armie is disparkled and scattered, when their general is slain, even so in al the world,Ge^^tius a Tribune of the common people, murdered in his house, by (...) practise of the (...). the Commons sunke aside every one, some one way, some another. But above all others,  the Tribuns were in bodily feare, being thus by their fellow taught, how little help or none at all, their sacred and redoubted lawes afforded. The nobles could not dissemble this their joy, nor use it with moderation, but shewed it excessively: and so little repeated any one of them of the fact committed, that they avowed it and tooke it upon them, and would not seeme culpable in the action; but gaue it out in plaine termes, that the Tribunes by soule meanes were to be tamed, and their wings to be clipped in a mischiefe. Vpon this their victorie, so shamefull a precedent in time to come, there went out an^dict for the publishing of a muster: and whiles the Tribunes were in this feare daunted, the Consuls without any contradiction, went through with it cleare.
But then, were the Commons much more offended at their Tribunes silence and sitting stil, than at the Consuls rule and imperious government: saying, Farewell freedome now,  farewell liberties and all: now is the old world come againe, and the Tribunes authoritie is both dead and buried togither with Genutius. Now they were to go in hand and bethinke themselves of some other course, how they might withstand the Senatours proceedings: and seeing they were destitute of all other helpe to relie themselves upon, the onely way was for the Commons to trust to themselves, and stand upon their own guard. Wheras therfore, there gave attendance upon the Consuls 24. Lictores or Vergers, commoners all and no better, none more contemptible and base minded, if they met with those that would set them at naught: they might thank themselves onely, and their own timerous conceits and imaginations, that such things were so dread and terrible.Vol^io Publilius r^^^seth to be prest a souldier. Thus having animated and provoked one another with these speeches: there was a Sergeant sent from the Consuls to one Volero Publilius a commoner, who because he had  ben a leader in the field of certain bands, pleaded his immunitie for being a common souldier againe. Volero calleth for helpe to the Tribunes: but there being no man to rescew him, the Consuls commaunded the man to be stript out of his cloths, and the rods to be made readie for to scourge him.
Then quoth Volero, I appeale vnto the people, seeing the Tribunes had rather have a citizen and freeman of Rome beaten with rods in their presence, than be murdered themselves by you in their beddes. But the more fiercely he cryed on still, the more cruellic fell

the Lictor to cut and skice his apparrell for to uncase him.
Then Volero being himselfe the stronger  man, and assisted withall by some whome he called unto him, thrust the Sergeant from him: and where he perceiued the mainest outcrie and loudest noise of his adherents, that sumed and chased in his behalfe, thither retired he, to shroud himselfe among the thickest, crying: I appeale and beseech the Commons of their protection and succour. Helpe citizens, helpe fellow souldiours. Never stay and waite for the Tribunes, untill they come, who have themselves neede of your assistance. Here at folke were raised and gathered togither, and addressed themselves as to a Battaile. A soule peece of worke was toward, full of exceeding danger, and like it was, that no man would have had regard either of common law or private honestie. When the Consuls in this so great a broile and storme of outrange came in, to prevent further mischiefe, they knew soone by experience how slenderly guarded against danger, the majestie of Rulers is, where force is wanting. For their Lictors were beaten, misused, and ill intreated, their rods broken all  a peeces, themselves driven out of the Common place, and forced to take the Senate house, doubting how sarre forth Volero would proceede in the traine of his victoria. But when the riot was well appeased, they assembled the Senatours togither, and complained there of their iniuties received, the violence of the Commons, and the audacious presumption of Volero. After many opinions and sharpe censures delivered among them, the Ancients and Elders prevailed at length, who thought it not good to set the anger of the Nobles, against the head-strong rashnes of the Commons. And the Commons so highly favoured and embraced Volero, that in their next election, they made him their Tribune for that yeare, wherein L. Pinarius and P. Furius were Consuls. Who contrarie to al mens expectation, that thought verily he would have exercised  his tribuneship in molesting and vexing the Consuls of the former yeare, preferred the publike cause before his owne private greevance, and gave not the Consuls so much as one foule word. Onely he preferred a law unto the people, That the magistrats of the Comminaltie might be created in a ward-Leete, or assembley of the Tribes and wards. Thus under a title, which at the first sight seemed nothing hainous,Al ^ p^^p^^^ th^^ (...) the commons should be chosen in a Trib^, I (...),. passed a matter of no final consequence, but such as a bridged the Nobles of al power and authoritie, to create Tribunes whom they would, by the suffrages and voyces of their vassailes and favorites. But when the Senatours resisted with all their might, the going forward of this Act most pleasing and plausible to the Commons, and yet none might be found of the brotherhood of Tribunes, that by the authoritie either of Consuls or of Senatours could be brought to trumpe in his way by their negative voyce, which wasindeede, the  onely meanes to crosseit: the businesse, notwithstanding in itselfe so weightie to weeld, and so hard to be compassed, held out with much debating, the yeare through. The Commons then made Volero Tribune againe. The Senatours on the other side, supposing the matter would now come to a finall triall once for all, created for their Consull Ap. Claudius, the sonne of Appius: who even for the old contentions maintained by his father, was both hated of the Commons, and also hated them againe: and hee had for his compa^ion in gouernment T. Quintius. At the verie beginning, no matter was treated of before that law. But as Volero was the first deviser and brocher of it, so his fellow Lectorius was the more earnest and hore maintainer thereof, as he came more fresh unto it. The stouter he was besides, by reason of his great militarie glorie, for that in those daies there was not a taller man of hands, nor more active than he.
Now, when as  Volero went straight to the substance of the law in hand,(...) deth the pref^rring of Publius his law. without any circumstance of words, and forbare to in veigh against the Consuls person, Lectorius beganne his speech with chalenging Appius and his house, as most proude, and cruelly affected to the Comminaltie of Rome: avouching earnestly, that the Nobles had made, not a Consull, but a butcherly commentor, to afflict and mangle the Commons: but being a rough hewen souldiour, and not used to make Orations, his tongue could not frame to expresse his minde as freely as he would: And so his utterance failing him: Since that (quoth hee) O Quirites, I cannot so readilie deliver that in my speech, as I can make that good in deede which I have spoken: Be you heere tomorrow, and in this verie place I will either get this law enacted, or I will lie in the dust and die for it before you all. The next day the Tribunes weregotten into the Temple or Hall first. The Consuls and Nobilitie  abode still in the assemblie of the people, for to hinder the passing of the Lawe. Then commaunded Lectorius all the rest to avoid and depart, but those onely, that were to give their voices. The yong Gentlemen of the Nobilitie stood still, and gave no place to the Tribunes officer. Then willed Lectorius some of them to be attached. But the Consull Appius replied again, That a Tribune had authoritie over none but Commoners: for as much as he, was a Magistrate,

 not of the people, but of the Commons.
Neither could himselfe, of his absolute power (Consull though he was) observing the custome of his ancestors, command any man to avoid: for that the usual form of words ran thus, May it please you my maisters, O Quirities, if you thinke good, to depart. Soone was hee able, thus laying the law unto him, by way of scorne and contempt, to ourface Lectarius, and put him downe. Whereupon the Tribune chased, and set into an heat, sendeth an officer to the Consull: the Consull likewise, a Lictor to the Tribune, crying estsoones alowd, that he was but a privat person without command, without magistracie. And doubtlesse the Tribune had been hardly used, but that both the whole assemblie roose up in a rage, and tooke part with the Tribune against the Consull: and also there was a concourse of the multitude, raised out of all parts of the citie into the common hall.
Appius notwithstanding stood stiffely to it still, and  abid the brunt of this tempestuous storme: neither had this broile staied without some bloudshed, in case Quintius the other Consull, had not set some of the Aldermen that had been Consuls, to get his brother Consull by force (if otherwise it might not bee) out of the hall, whiles himselfe was in hand, one while with the Commons, to appease their furie, by way of intreatie and with faire words, otherwhiles besought the Tribunes to breake up the assemblie, persuading with them to take more leisure in this their heat and anger: for that time and space would abridge nothing of their power, but would joine counsell and advise therto: concluding withall, that both Nobles should be ruled by the people, and the Consull ordered by the Nobles. Hardly and with much adoe were the Commons quieted by Quintius, but farre more trouble had the Nobles to still the other Consull. At the length, when the assemblie of the people was dismissed, the Consuls  called the Senat together. Where after much varictie of opinions, proceeding from feare and anger, according as the one or the other swaied among them: looke how much longer time they had to reclaime their mind from violent courses, and sagely with deliberation to consider of the matter: so much the more their hearts went against all contention, and further strife: insomuch, as they yeelded Quintius heartie thankes, that by his travaile betweene parties, the discord was well allaied.
And to Applius they were petitioners, that he would bee content, that the majestie of the Consull might bee no greater than would stand with the unitie and concord of the cittizens. For whiles the Tribunes for their part would needes have all, and the Consuls on the other side draw all to them: betweene this plucking and haling, there was no strength lest in the midst: and to conclude, the Commonweale was rent, torne, and dismembred betweene the rulers thereof:  who strove rather for the managing and rule, than for the saferie and preservation of the State. Against whom Appius replied with a solemne protestation before God and man, and said, That the weale publicke was abandoned, forlorne, and betraied by nothing els but foolish fear: that the Senate wanted not a Consull, but the Consull wanted Senatours: who now yeelded to harder conditions, than they had before time in mount Sacer. Howbeit overweighed at length by the and generall consent and accord of all the Nobles,The ^ore said law enacted. he was content: and so the law passed quietly, was by roiall consent authorised. Then and never before, were the Tribunes created in a congregation of the tribes, and by their voices. Piso writeth, that there were three more made to the other, as if there had been but twaine before: and he nameth also the Tribunes, to wit, Cn. Siccius, L. Numitorius, M. Duellius, Sp. Icilius, and L. Mecitius. Then had the Volscians and Aequians, betweene  the civile sedition of the Romanes, and the beginning of warre, harried and wasted the countrey: that in case the Commons had made an insurrection, they might have retired to them, as to a sure place of receit and refuge. But when all was hush^, and matters compounded between the Nobles and Commons, they removed their campe backeward.
Appius Claudi^s was sent against the Volscians: and to Quintius fell the province of the AEquians. The same rigorous severitie continued Appius still in warfare, that he used at home in the cittie: but so much more freely, for that he was not curbed nor held in by the Tribunes. The Commons he hated, more than his father had done afore, seeing he was overswaied, and had taken the foile at their hands: and being the onely Consull, opposed against the Tribunes power, yet maugre his head, the law passed cleare away, which the former Consuls his predecessors, with lesse ado,  nor with so great hope and expectation of the Nobilitie, had ever hindered and staied. This his ire and indignation, gave an edge to that fell stomacke of his by kind, for to plague and punish his souldiors with imperious and lordly command. But so set they were to spurne againe and disobey, that by no forcible meanes they could bee tamed, doing all things that they did, litherly, slowly, rekelesly and stubbornely. Neither bashed they for shame, nor stood in awe for feare. If his will was they should march on a pace, they would for the nonce go faire and softlie: If he

encouraged them in propre person to plie their busines, they would all of them slacke their former  service,The (...) and (...) of the (...) to Appius Claudius their Generall. wherunto they were entred of themselves: whiles he was in place, they would hang downe their heads and looke on the ground, as he passed by they would secretlie curse him in their hearts. So as, that invincible stomacke of his against all hatred of the Commons, would now and then grieve heereat. And when he saw that all the shrewdnes and rigour that he used was in vaine, and that now he could do no good with his soldiors, he fell to checking the captains and centurions, saying, They had spoiled and marred the armie, terming them Tribunes of the Commons, and otherwhiles in taunting wise nicknaming them Voleroes. All this geere were the Volscians ware of, and therfore were they more eager and forward, hoping that Appius should finde the Romane armie as froward and disobedient, as they had beene against Fabius. And to say truth, they were more crooked and unrulie with Appius than with Fabius a great  deale. For they were not onelie unwilling to have the victorie as Fabius his armie was, but also desirous to loose the victorie and be overcome. Being brought forth and set in battaile array, they shamefullie tooke their heeles and fled into their tents: and never made head and resistance, before they saw the Volscians with banners displaied, advancing against the munitions of their campe, and a foule carnage committed upon the taile of their rereward. Then were they driven perforce to fight for verie necessitie, that the enemie thus farre forth victour, might be kept from the mure and trench: and yet so, as it was verie apparant, that the soldiors passed for nothing else, but only to save the campe for being won: for some of them rejoiced at their own losse and defeature. Whereat, the stout stomacke of Applius was nothing daunted, nor his heartbroken: but he minded to deale cruelly with them, and thereupon summoned a generall assemblie. Then the Lieutenants, Marshals and Colonels, came running unto him, advertising him in no case to trie maistries, and to inforce his authoritie, The verie ground and strength whereof resteth whollie in the accord of obedient people: adding moreover, that the soldiors commonlie gave out, that they would not go to the assemblie: but rather they might be heard everiewhere, calling upon them aloud, to dislodge and remoove out of the territorie of the Volscians: moreover that the enemie now Master of the field, was but a while since advaunced to the gates and rampier, and well neere possessed of them: whereby, they were not onelie to suspect, but might evidentlie see before their eies, some great matter toward of dangerous consequence. Wherupon at last he was overruled, and (for as much as his soldiors therby should gaine nothing but delay of their  punishment) remitted the assemblie for that time: and after proclamation made, to set forward in their journey the next day, and to depart in the morning verie earlie, he caused the trumpet to sound the remoove, and to march away. The armie being gone out of campe, and readie to bee set in order of a march at length, the Volscians who wer gotten up by the same sound of the trumpet, plaited upon the taile of the rereward: the noise whereof passed from thence to the vaward, and so disordred the ensignes, so troubled the ranks by reason of that fright, that neither could the direction and commaundement of the captaines be heard, nor the armie be brought into battaile array. No man minded any thing at all but to run away: and disorderlie in plumpes, they fled backe over the dead carcasses and armours that lay on heapes, and so escaped. And never stay they their flight, untill the enemie gave over the chase. At the last, the Consull having called  his soldiors together that were run away so scattering, (for with all the speed that he made after to call them backe, he could not reclaime them) encamped without his enemies ground in a place of securitie. Then he called them all together to an assemblie, and inveighed bitterlie, and not without just cause, against the whole armie, as having betraied the discipline of warre, and forsaken their colours: asking everie one of the them what was become of their banners? And what they had done with their weapons? And as many soldiors as were unarmed, as many ensignebearers as had not their ensignes, the Centurions also and those that received double allowance, and forsooke their bands and companies, he caused to be scourged with rods and to loose their heads. The whole number besides,(...) ^hey had the (...) do (...) Sig. de p^nus. were by lot tithed, and everie tenth man as it fell out, executed. But contra^iwise, in the expedition against the Aequians, the Consull and his soldiors, strove  to exceed one another in courtesie and kindnesses. Quintus was by nature mild and debonaire, and the crueltie of his brother Consull, that never sped well, made him take more joy in that his gentle disposition.Q^intus beloved of (...) Whiles the Generall and his armie consorted thus together, the Aequians durst not confront them, but suffered their enemies to range all abroad and forray the country: so as, in no former wars gat they greater booties from thence: and all was bestowed among the soldiors. Over and besides these gratuities, they had their due praises and solemne

 commendations, wherein soldiors take no lesse delight than in rewards and gifts. So, that armie returned home better affected to their Generall, and also to the Nobles for their Generals sake: reporting that the Senate had given to them a loving father, but to the other armie a lordly maister. This yeare thus spent with variable fortune abroad in war: with greevous discord as well at home as abroad, was above all most memorable and famous for the Tribe-Lie^. A matter of more note, in respect of their victorie that entered into the action, than of consequence, in regard of commoditie that grew thereof. For the very Liet it selfe lost more credite by voiding the Nobles out of that assemblie, than either the Commons gat strength, or the Nobles did forgoe thereby. But more troublesome was the year following, whiles L. Valerius and T. Aemilius were Consuls, both for the variance of the three States about the law Agraria, and also for the  arraignement of Appius Claudius. Whom, being a most bitter adversarie of that law, and a great maintainer and upholder of those that possessed and held the common lands, as if he had ben ever a third Consul, M. Duellius, and C^. Siccius arrested and endited. Never before that day came to the bar, a person to be tried before the people, so odious unto the Commons: charged with so many wrongs done of his owne,Appius Claudiu^ arraigned at th^ bar. so many of his fathers afore him, in regard whereof they were highly displeased and offended with him. The Nobles likewise had not lightly laboured so earnestly nor strained themselves so much for any one, as for him. Who being the patrone and protector of the Senate, the maintainer and upholder of their port and dignitie; a man ever opposed against all the troublesome broiles of Tribunes and Commons, was now delivered as a prey to the commons in their anger, and only for that he had overshot, and passed himselfe in heat of contention.  But of all the Senatours that ever were, Appius Claudius of himselfe alone was hee, that cared not a rush, either for Tribune or Commoner, nor yet for his owne arraignement. No menacing threats of the Commons, no earnest praiers of the Senatours could once make him, I say not to change his apparrell, and in humble manner to seeke and crouch unto men for to bee good unto him: no not so much, as when he came to answere for himselfe before the people, one whit to mollifie and let fall (as it were) that rough and sharpe kind of speech, that he was wont ordinarily to use. He kept the same sower countenance still, the very same frowardnesse and crabbednes of visage, the same spirit of boldnesse in his appologie and defence. Insomuch, as many of the Commons were no lesse afraid of Appius standing prisoner, there arraigned at the barre, than they had ben of him, sitting as Consull in his yvorie chaire of estate. In pleading of his cause, he  spake breefely and at once to the point, withthe same accusatorie spirit, that he had ever used in all his pleas and actions. With his boldnes and resolute constancie, he so amased both Tribunes and Commons, that they themselves deferred the day of giving sentence, and suffered afterward the suite to hang and depend still undetermined. But not long after, even before the law day appointed was come,App. Claudius diet. he sickened and died. Whose funerall praises when as the Tribunes went about to hinder, the Commons would not suffer, that the death of so worthie a man, should bee defranded of the due honour and solemne obsequies, and gave audience as quietly and attentively to the commendation of the man now dead, as they did afore to his accusation while he was alive: and with a goodly traine attended his corpes to the grave.
The same yeare Valerius the Consull made a voiage with an armie against the Aequians, and  seeing he could not traine the enemie forth to fight, he made a brava do to assaile the campe but there sell such a terrible storme and tempest from heaven, with haile and thunderclaps, that hee was disappointed of his enterprise. And, that which made it more strange and wonderfull, he had no sooner sounded the retrait, but the weather proved so faire and calme againe, that hee made some scruple and matter of conscience, to give a second assault unto the trench, as if it had been defended by the speciall power and providence of God. So, all the heat of warre turned to the wasting onely of the countrey. The other Consull Aemilius warred with the Sabines. And even there also, because the enemies kept within their walled townes, the territories were spoiled. But afterwards, the Sabines raised with the firing, not onely of their villages and hamlets, but also of the good townes and burroughes, whereof in those partes there were many, and those well peopled,  encountred the sorraiers: and after a doubtfull skirmish, they departed asunder, and the morrow after raised their campe, and retired themselves backe into a place of more securitie: which the Consul taking for a sufficient argument and proofe, that the enemies were defeated, left them so, and dislodged likewise, without any end of the warre.
During these warres, and whiles discord continued in the citie at home, were T. Numitius Priscus and A. Virginius created Consuls. Now seemed it that the Commons would no longer

abide the deferring of the law Agraria. And as they were about to put it to a jumpe and to  trie the utmost by extremitie, they took knowledge partlie by the smoke and flame of the villages on fire, and partly by the running away of the villagiers, that the Volscians were neere at hand. Which occurrent repressed and kept downe the sedition which was now come to ripenes, and readie to breake forth. For the Consuls forced by the Senate immediatly to the war, by taking the serviceable youth with them out of the citie, reduced the rest of the Commons to more quietnesse. And the enemies verilie made no further attempt, but after they had given a false alarme and set the Romanes in a foolish feare, dismarched away as spedelie as they could. Then Numitius went to Antium against the Volscians, and Virginius against the AEquians: where having welneer received a great losse and defeature by a train laid for him: such was the prowesse and manhood of the soldiours, that they recovered all againe, which by the negligence of the Consull  had like to be lost. But better was the conduct and government of the armie against the Volscians. For there, at the first skirmish the enemies were disaraied, put to sight, and chased as far as to Antium, a citie (for that time) of right great puissance and importance. The Consull durst not assault it, but wan from the Antiates Cenon, another towne, but nothing so wealthy. Whiles the AEquians and Volscians thus amused the Romane armies and kept them occupied, the Sabines were come robbing and spoiling to the gates of the citie of Rome. But within few daies after, they themselves received more damage than they brought, by occasion that both Consuls with two annies were entred in great anger into their consines. In the end of the yeare some peace there was, but disquieted, as at all times before, with the variance betweene the Nobles and Commons. The Commons in a peevish and angrie fit, would not be at the Election of the  Consuls. So, by the Senatours onelie and their followers, there were elected Consuls, T. Quintius and Q. Servilius. The like yeare to the former these Consuls had, seditious and troublesome in the beginning: but afterwards upon forraine warre, quiet and still. For the Sabines with a running campe having passed over the plaines of Crustuminum, and put all to fire and sword about the river Anio, were chased backe, well neere from the gate Collina and the wals: howbeit they drave away with them exceeding great booties both of people and cattel. Whom the Consull Servilius followed hard with a power readie to bid battaile, but could not overtake their maine armie in anie even ground meet to pitch a field in. Howbeit he harried and wasted the countrie all about, so as he left no corner cleere that felt not his fingers, and returned with purchase of many rich prizes of all sorts.
Likewise among the Volscians they sped wel and had a luckie hand by the good devoire both of captaine and soldior.Th^ (...) of the Consull Qui^^^s. First, they joined battaile vpon a plaine, and sought with verie great slaughter, and exceeding much bloodshed on both sides. And the Romans (who for their small number were more apt to seele the losse) had lost ground and dismarched, if that the Consull by making a lie for a vantage, and crying that the enemies fled from the other wing, had not encouraged them and renued the battel afresh. And so by giving a new charge, whiles they thought they had the better, they got the better in very deed. The Consull fearing again, by preasing too hard upon the armie, to enforce them to turne and make head, sounded the retrait. Few daies passed between, wherin they rested quiet, as though there had been a secret truce agreed betweene them. In which mean space, a great sort of people from all parts of the Volscians and AEquians repaired  to the camp, thinking verify, that if the Romans ware of them, they would depart in the night season. Wherupon, at the third watch they came to make an assault upon their campe. Quintius after he had quieted the tumult, which upon this suddaine al'arme arose, and given commandement that the soldiors should keep themselves within their pavilions, brought forth a companie of Hernicks to guard the gates, and caused certaine cornetiers and trumpetters on horsebacke to wind and sound before the trench and counterscarpe, and so to hold the enemie in suspense and expectation untill day light. The rest of the night, all was so quiet within the campe, that the Romans had time enough and good opportunitie to take their repose and sleep. This shew of footmen in their harnish, whom the Volscians imagined to be more than they were, and all Romanes: the neighing besides, and noise that the horses made by reason of their  strange riders that they were not used unto, and the sound also of their trumpets and hornes that made them to set up their eares, and to stamp and fare outragiously, amused the enemies waiting ever when they would charge upon them. When it was day, the Romanes being in heart and fresh as having slept their sill, came forth and embattailed themselves, and at the first shocke, discomsired the Volscians, wearied with long standing and overwatched withall. And yet the

 enemies rather gave ground and retired themselves, than seemed to be driven from their standings, because they had at their backes certaine hils, whereunto they might retire behind the Principia, and not breake their rancks, and so save themselves. The Consull seeing hee was come to a place of disadvantage, made a stand. The footmen hardly would be staied, calling and crying to the Consull to follow upon them seeing they were discomsited. The horsemen were more eager, riding all about the Consull, and with open mouth cried out, that they would advance before the ensignes. Whiles the Consul held off, in a mathmering what to do, for as he was assured of the valour of his souldiours, so hee finally trusted the ground; they all at once set up a shout, that they would set forward, come what would: and as they cried, so did they in good earnest. And pitching their javelins fast in the ground, that they might more nimblie get up the sleepe  place, they tooke their full feese, and ran up the hill. The Volscians having in their first brunt spent all their darts, and other shot which they had let flie, and made no spare, tooke up stones that lay under their feet, let drive at the Romans as they clambe up, and so thicke and threefold they bestowed them, that they annoied them sore, and beat them downe the hill. Thus the left wing of the Romanes was welneere overcharged, had not the Consul at the point, when as they were readie to recule, blamed them first for their rashnesse, and then for their cowardise, and made them for very shame to shake off all feare. First they stood to it stoutly, and kept their ground, and after, as their strength served them, considering the vantage of the place which the enemies had gotten, they adventured to set foot forward, and won ground with a fresh shout and outcrie. And taking their heire againe the second time, they straine all they can, and at length overcame  the disadvantage of the place. Now when they were almost at the point to win the very pitch and ridge of the hill, the enemies turned backe. Whiles they ran on heapes in disaray, both they that fled, and they that followed, happened both at once in one companie into the enemies campe, which in that fright was won. The Volscians, as many of them as could escape, ran as fast as their legs would carie them to Antium. And to Antium likewise was the Roman armie conducted: and after a few daies siege, was surrendred upon no fresh and new force of assault, but for that presently upon their unfortunat conflict and losse of the campe, their harts were done, and utterly quailed.


 THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

 The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the third Booke.
SEditions about the lawes Agraria. The Capitoll taken and held by banished persons and slaves. They were slain, and it recovered. A survey and Cessment was taken twise. In the former there were found of Roman citizens 124214, besides orphane children, and such as had no children at all, as well men as women. In the other following there were 132419. Vpon a great overthrow received in the war against the AEquians, L. Quintus Cincinnatus was made Dictator: and being in the country at his farme busie about his husbandrie, was sent for to the conduct of that war. He vanquished and subdued the enemies. The number of the Tribunes of the Commons, arose to ten, thirtie sixe yeares after their first institution. The lawes of Athens were set from thence by Embassadours, sent for that purpose: to the establishing and publishing wherof, there were ten personages elected in the roome of Consuls, which were called  Decemvirs, without any other Magistrates: and this happened in the three hundred and second yeare after the foundation of Rome. And as the government of the state was translated from kings to Consuls: so was it now from the Consuls to the Decemvirs. They having proposed ten tables of lawes, and borne themselves modestly in that high dignitie, were therefore by the consent of the people, permitted to remaine still in office the second yeare. But after they had committed many insolent parts, they would not give over their roome of Magistracie, but held it still the third yeare: untill such time as their obstinate and intollerable rule came to an end, occasioned by the filthie lust of Appius Claudius: who being in amoured upon a virgine suborned one to make claime unto her as his bondslave: wherupon her father Virginius was driven of necessitie to catch up a knife from a butchers stall next by, and to kill his daughter: as having no other meanes to save  her from the hands of him that purposed to abuse her bodie unlawfully. The Commons upon this soule example of filthie (...), made an insurrection, and tooke the mount Aventine for their hold, and compelled the Decemvirs to leave their place, and give over their government. Of whom, Appius and one of his collegues, (which two had principally deserved punishment) were committed to prison, and there kept, the rest were driven into banishment. This booke containeth besides the victorious warres against the Sabines, Volscians, and AEquians. And the unhonest abusement or award of the people of Rome, who being chosen Arbitrators betweene the Ardeats and the Aricines, awarded to themselves the land where about the strife and controversie was.


AFter the winning of Antium, T. Acmilius and Q. Fabius were created Cons^^ls. This was that Fabius that onely remained alive of all the name that perished at Gremera. Now had Aemilius in his former Consulship persuaded to distribute certaine lands among the Commons. And  therfore in this second likewise, both the favorers of the law Agraria were in good hope of the foresaid law: and also the Tribunes supposing verelie that now by the helpe of a Consull, that might be brought about and obtained, which oftentimes had beene enterprised against the pleasure of the Consuls; tooke the matter in hand and gave the attempt: and withall, the Consull still continued in the same mind. But the great landed men and many of the Nobles, finding themselves grieved, and complaining that the chiefe and head magistrate of the citie busied himselfe with the Tribunes suits, and was by large giving away of other mens possessions, become popular and gratious with the people, turned the whole burthen and odious heavie load of this  action, from the Tribunes upon the Consull his head. And a cruell broile was toward, had not Fabius, by a device and pollicie to neither partie offensive, made an end of the matter with expedition.
For whereas, there was certaine lands gotten by conquest from the Volscians the yeare afore, under the conduct of T. Quintius: There might (said he) a colonie be brought to Antium, a citie neere adjoyning, very commodious, and seated by the sea side: so should the Commons without any grudging or complaints of the possessors or landlords, be seazed of land, and the citie rest in quiet and unitie. This opinion of his was accepted of all hands. And they created three especiall officers or Triumvirs for the division of the said lands, to wit, T. Quintius, A^l. Virginius, and P. Furius. Then proclamation was made, That whosoever would hold any of the land, should give up their names in writing. But plentie, as the manner is, soone caused lothing: for there were so few that presented themselves, that to make up the full number of the inhabitants, they were faine to adjoine unto them certaine Volscians. The rest of the multitude had rather (as it seemed) to keepe a calling for land at Rome, than be possessed of land elsewhere. The Aequians craved peace of Q. Fabius, who was come against them with an armie: and they themselves by making a sodaine inrode into the territories of Latium, cancelled the same and made it void. But the yeare next following, Q. Servilius (for he was Consull with Sp. Posthumius) being sent against the Aequians, kept a standing campe in the countrie about Latium. But by the reason of a contagious disease or a plague, that rained in his armie, they were of necessitie forced to keepe quiet within their tents. So their warre was differred unto the third yeare, when as Q. Fabius and T. Quintius were Consuls. And for as much as Q. Fabius, had upon his victorie  before granted peace to the Aequians, hee had an extraordinarie commission directed unto him for the rule of that province.
Who being thither gone with full assured hope, that the verie fame of him, and noise of his armie, would quiet the Aequians, sent Embassadours to the Counsell of that nation, with this message: Q. Fabius the Consull, saith, that as he carried before peace from the AEquians unto Rome, so he bringeth now warre to the Aequians from Rome; having now his sword in the verie same hand, which he gave unto them before in friendlie manner unarmed. Whose trecherie it is and perjurie, that is the cause of this, the gods can witnesse now, and in some measure will revenge hereafter. Neverthelesse, he for his part, however the case standeth, desireth that the AEquians would yet bethinke themselves of their owne accord and repent, rather than stand to the extremitie and abide those calamities and miseries  that follow warres. If they would come in therfore and be sorie for that they have done, their submission should be received, and they taken into the safe protection of his clemencie, wherof alreadie they had experience. But in case they persist stil in their disloialtie, and take pleasure in being sorsworne; be they well assured, that they should have the yre and wrath of the gods more than their enemies to fight against them. These words so little or nothing at all moved

 any men there, that the verie Embassadors had like to have beene verie hardlie used and evill entreated, yea and an armie withall was sent forth as farre as Algidum against the Romanes. When these tidings were brought to Rome, the indignitie of the thing and the shamefull maner therof, rather than any fearful perill otherwise, raised the other Consull out of the citie. So two Consular or royall armies approched the enemie in order of battaile, readie to trie it out presently by the dint of sword. But the day being (as it fell out) welneere spent, there cried one aloud from out of the place where the enemie kept ward:
This is to make a shew of war only (ye Romans) and not to warre indeede: yee set your battaillons in array against night forsooth, that now draweth hard on: we had need of more dailight ywis, for the businesse in hand, and to trie this quarrell. To morrow therfore at sun rising, see you come again into the field, ye shall have sighting feare not,  your hands full. The souldiors netled and gauled at these words, retired back into the campe untill the next day, thinking the night was long, that kept them from barraile: and so for that time they refreshed their bodies with foode and sleepe.
On the morrow so soone as it was day, the Romane host being stirring somewhat more earlie, stood readie arranged in array: and at length the AEquians likewise shewed themselves in field. A sharpe sight there was on both sides, by reason that both the Romane souldiors fought in anger and deadly hatred; and also the AEquians upon prickt conscience, that bare them witnesse how they embarked themselves into this danger, and were out of all hope ever to be trusted againe, were forced to hazard all upon a cast, and venture the utmost. Yet were not the AEquians able to endure long, the violent fight of the Romanes, but were discomsited and put to fight.
And being returned within their owne  Frontiers, the unrulie multitude for all this, were never the more inclined to peace, but reprooved and blamed their Captaines, That they put the triall of the issue to a set field, in which kind of fight the Romanes had singular skill, and surpassed them. As for the Aequians, they were better at robbing, spoyling, and hurrying, in making reises and inrodes: and a better and safer kinde of service it was, here and there in sundrie places, to skirmish with forces divided, than reduce all into one grosse armie, and to pitch a field. Leaving therfore a guard to defend that camp, they went forth, and with such a tumult invaded the consines of Rome, that the verie terror thereof reached unto the cittie. This stirre, especially comming so sodainely and unlooked for, made the Romanes feare the more. For who would ever have doubted and suspected, that their enemies so lately vanquished, and in manner besieged within their owne campe, could possibly thinke upon  entring into the lands of others, and to drive booties. Besides, the rustical peazants came in at the gates, crying, and saying, That they were not pettie companies, and small handfuls of theeves and robbers, but (such was their foolish feare, augmenting and making everie thing greater) whole armies and legions of enemies were at hand, and marched apace with banners displaied full against the Cittie. From their mouths, they that were next made report unto others, and as they heard newes from they knew not whom, so they set them abroad they cared not how, but ever in the carriage they added somewhat of their owne, and coined lies good store. Here was running, there was crying al'arme, and generally such a confusion everie where, as if the citie had beene quite lost. By good happe Quintius the Consull was returned from Algidum to Rome. That remedie cured all and staied the feare. When the tumult was appeased, he rebuked  the people for fearing those enemies whome heretofore they had vanquished, and placed good guards over the gates. Then he assembled the Senat, and by the authoritie and assent of the Nobles, proclaimed Iustitium, or a generall cessation or vacation in all courts of law: and went himselfe forth in person with a power, to defend the marches, leaving Quintus Servilius Provost of the cittie: but the enemie he found not in the territorie all about. The other Consull performed his affaires passing well: who having certaine intelligence, which way the enemies would come, set upon them loden with prey, and (by that meanes marching more heavilie in disorder) made it a deere bootie unto them, even as much as their lives were worth. For few of them escaped the Ambush, and all the pillage was recovered. So the returne of Quintius into the Cittie, made an end of the publike Lawsteed, or above said vacation, which lasted but soure daies. Then  was a Cense or Assesment set of mens goods, and a muster or view taken of the number of Citizens, togither with a solemne purging of the people, called Lustrum, celebrat by Quintius. And there were numbred of cittizens 124214 polles, over and above men and women that lived single, or had no children, and all orphans beside. And among the Aequians afterward nothing was done worth remembrance: for they betooke them to their strong townes, suffering their territorie and villages to be consumed with fire, and spoyled. Thus the Consull, after hee had divers

times overrunne the countrie of his enemies, with a cruell armie wasting and spoyling as  he went, returned home to Rome with great honor and a huge bootie. Then were Coff. Aulus Posthumius Albus, and Sp. Furius. Some have written them Fusiij, who indeede are rightly named Furij. Which I note, least any man should thinke they were sundrie men, whereas the varietic is onely in the name. No doubt there was, but that one of the Coff. would warre with the Aequians: and therefore the Aequians sought for aide of the Ecetrane Volscians. Which being gladly graunted and sent with speed, (such a perpetuall hatred bare these Citties alwaies against the Romanes) there was great preparation for warre in most forcible manner. The Hernikes having an inckling and knowledge thereof, certified the Romanes afore hand, that the Ecetrans were revolted and banded with the Aequians. The Colonie Antium likewise was had in jealousie, for that when the towne was lost, many people fled from thence to the Aequians, who all the time of the Aequian warre, served in the field, and proved the most hardie souldiours and fiercest of all others. And now when the Aequians were driven into their townes, that multitude being slipt away and retired to Antium, withdrew from the Romanes the allegeance of the Coloners and inhabitants there, who were alreadie of their owne inclination unfound and not to be trusted. But before the matter was come to ripenesse, and they entred into any action, the Senate upon intelligence given that they intended onely, and were upon the poynt to revolt, gave the Coss. in charge to send for the chiefe men and head persons of that colonie to Rome, and to enquire and learne of them in what tearmes Antium stood: who being come willingly inough, without any great intreatie, and convented by the Consuls before the Senate, made answere to their interrogatories in such maner, that they were sent away more suspected, than at their first comming: whereupon they resolved fully of warre. Spurius Furius one of the Coss. to whom that province by lot fell, having taken his voyage against the Aequians, found the enemie spoyling and wasting in the territories of the Herniks: and being ignorant what number they were (for that in no one place they were all discovered togither) he rashly joyned battaile, and hazarded his power, being in number and force inferior to the other. And at the first encounter he was driven backe, and retired into the campe: and yet was he not past all danger and in securitie there: for both the night following, and the next day after, the campe was so streightly beset, and so hotly assaulted, that he could not dispatch so much as a messenger from thence to Rome. The Herniks sent word both of the infortunate fight, and also how the Consull and his armie were besieged. With which newes they so terrified the LL. of the Counsell, that they granted Posthumius the other Consull the solemne commission, TO SEE  TO THE STATE, THAT IT SUSTAINED NO DANGER AND DAMAGE. The forme of which order and decree, hath beene alwaies accounted to signifie some great extremitie of the Commonwealth. And thought best it was, that the Consull himselfe in proper person, should abide at home to enroll in the muster booke, all those that were able to beare arms: that T. Quintius should be sent as Pro-consull or vice-consull, with a power of confederat Allies to raise the siege and rescue the camp: and for the furnishing of this armie, the Latines, the Herniks, and the Colonie Antium, were commaunded to send vnto Quintius, Subitarie souldiers (for so they termed at that time, the aides and supplies taken up in haste and on a sodaine.) Many attempts were made, much skirmishing, and sundrie assaults for certain daies on each side were enterprised. For the enemies being more in number, assaied in divers places and sundrie waies to cut off and  diminish the power of the Romanes, as not sufficient and able to make head at al turnes. For at one time they both made an assault upon the campe, and with all sent out certaine of their forces to wast the territorie of Rome, yea, and to give the venture upon the verie cittie, if they could espie any good oportunitie to offer it selfe. L. Valerius was left behind to defend the Cittie, and Posthamius the Consull was sent out to restraine and withstand the wasting of the marches. No poynt of care or trauaile on any hand was slaked, watch and ward both night and day was set in the Cittie, a good Corps de guard appointed afore the gates, and souldiers bestowed upon the walles: and (that which was needfull in so great an hurlieburlie) for certaine daies it was no Terme, or interdiction of Law was observed. In this meane while, Furius the Cos. who at the first had quietly endured the siege and made no resistance, sodainely and at unawares sallyed  out at the broad gate called Decumana, upon the enemies: and whereas he might have chased them, he made some stay of that, for feare lest on some other side, they would have given assault upon the campe. But Furius the Lieutenant (who also was the Consull his brother) engaged himselfe too farre, and upon a hot desire of pursuit and following the chase, neither sawe he his

 fellowes as they retired, ne yet the enemies as they came to charge him on the backe. Thus being shut out from all the rescue, after many assaies made (but all in vaine) to make way through vnto the campe, manfully fighting he was slaine. The Consull likewise hearing that his brother was environed all about with enemies, returned againe to fight; but as he ran more rashly than warily into the middest of the skirmish, hee was sore wounded, and being hardly and with much adoe saved by those that were about him, hee both disquieted and daunted the hearts of his owne men, and made his enemies more fierce, lustie, and courageous. Who were so animated and set on fire, both with the hurt of the Consull, and ^lso with the death of his Lieutenant, that nothing afterwards could stand in their way: no force was able to stay them, but that they beat the Romanes againe into their campe: where they were besieged a fresh,  being nowe both in hope, and also for strength worse than they were before. So that their maine State thus lying a bleeding, had vtterly perisht, but that T. Quintius with a supplie of strangers, namely, a power of Latines and Hernikes, came to the rescue in time: who charging the Aequians behind, whiles they were wholly busied in assailing the camp, shewing them within the Lieutenants head in a great braverie and pride, at the same instant caused a sallie out of the campe, by a signall that he gave them a far off, and so inclosed round about a great number of the enemies. Smal was the slaughter, but great was the flight and scattering of the Aequians in the territorie of Rome: upon whom (stragling here and there, and driving their booties afore them) Posthumius, who in divers convenient places had bestowed certaine companies and bands of soldiors, ran violentlie. And as they fled everie way in disaray, they lighted upon Quintius  as he with the hurt Consull returned with victorie. Then the Consuls armie bravelie did their devoir, and had a goodly day of them; and was revenged both for their Consuls wound, and also for the death of the lieutenant and the squadrons with him. Many losses and overthrowes were given and taken on each side for certaine daies. But in so ancient a matter as this was, hard it is for a man vpon his credit, to set downe precisely the certaine number, either how many fought, or how many were slaine. Howbeit Valerius Antias boldly reckoneth the exact numbers, namelie that there died of the Romans in the Hernicks countrie 5300: and of the Aequian robbers, who went up and downe spoyling and pilling in the territorie of Rome; there killed by A. Posthumius the Cos. 2400. The rest of the multitude, which loden with spoile fell into the hands of Quintius, were not so quit, nor escaped with the losse of  so few mens lives: for of them the sword devoured 4000, and to account the number exactlie, 200 (quoth he) and 30 just. Then returned they on all hands to Rome, and the foresaid vacation or law-steed ended. The skie was seene much on a light fire, and other strange wonders either appeared indeed, or presented to the fearfull people vaine apparitions, and fantasticall illusions. How ever it was, for to avert the dangers by these prodigious and terrible tokens presaged, there were proclaimed festivall holydates for three daies together. During which time all the Churches were replenished with men and women, making supplications and praiers for the favour and mercie of the gods. The bands and squadrons of the Latines and Herniks, after great thanks given them by the Senate for their good service in this warre, were discharged and sent home. But the Antiate soldiors, 1000 in number, who after the battaile was fought came tardie,  and too late for tosuccour, were dismissed in manner with ignominie and shame.
Then was the great Liete or assemblie held, for the election of Magiftrates: wherein L. Ebutius and P. Servilius were created Consuls: and on the The first daie of August. Calends of Sex^lis (for on that day) began the year then, they entred their Consulship. A grievous and heavie time it was, and as it fortuned, a yeare of plague and great mortalitie, both in the citie and countrie, as well among brute beasts as men. And the receiving of the countrie peazants with their cattell into the cittie, for feare of robbing and spoiling, encreased the contagiousnesse of the sicknesse so much the more. For, that confused medlie of all sorts of beasts, both anoied and empoisoned the citizens with the uncouth and unusuall stinke, and also stifled with sultrie heat and overmuch watching the rusticall people, lying pestered together, and thrust up into close rowmes and  straight lodgings. Then mutuall recourse one to helpe and minister unto another, and the verie catching of the disease, set it all abroad. Thus whiles they had much ado to endure these present calamities, behold to mend the matter, all of a suddaine, the Hernicke Embassadours bring word, that the Aequians and Volscians hauing levied a power jointly together, were encamped within their limits: and from thence with a mightie armie wasted and harried their territorie. Now, besides that the small assemblie in the Senate house, was to these their allies an evident token

that the cittie was fore visited with the pestilence, they received also an heavie answere from  them, namely, That the Herniks themselves together with the helpe of the Latines, should defend their owne: as for the citie of Rome, it was with the heavie hand and visitation of the gods, dispeopled by the plague: but in case the sicknesse decreased in some measure and tooke up in any time, they would willingly aid their confederates, as they did the yeare before, and as they had done at all times besides. Thus departed these allies, and for their ill news they brought thither, they caried with them home again a worse answere and message, to wit, That they should by themselves sustaine that war alone which hardly they were able to support, if they had the power of the Romans to assist them. Long staied not the enemie in the Hernikes countrey, but went forward from thence into the territorie of Rome, desolate alreadie (God wot) without the injurie of war, and little need there was of calamitie that waies: where meeting with no man at all, no not so  much as any one unarmed, and passing over all the countrie, disfurnished not only of garrisons to resist, but also of people for husbandrie and tillage, at length they came to the third stone, i. within three miles of Rome, to the broad port high way, called Gabina, leading to Gabes. The Romane Cos. Ebutius, was now departed this life, and his brother Cos. Servilius, lay lingering on at the point of death, in small hope of recoverie. Most of the peeres and principall ancients were infected, and sick in bed, so was the greater part of the Nobles, and welneere all the serviceable men of war: so as they were not able to set forth an expedition or voiage abroad, as meet was in so great a tumult, no norscarse to keep any ordinarie set guard at home for the defence of the cittie. The Senators, such as age and sicknes would permit, tooke the charge in proper persons of watch and  ward. The Aediles of the Commons went the round, and had the charge to see all well and in good order: so that upon them now rested the whole government of the state, and the majestie of the Consuls regiment. Thus when all was forlorne, no head to direct, no strength of man to execute; the Tutelar gods, protectors of the citie, and the good fortune alone that ever waited upon her, preserved the maine chance. This made the Volscians and Aequians to carrie with them a mind and intent, rather to deale by way of robbings and spoilings, than to deale in any hostile maner like prosessed warriors: for so small hope had they, or none at all, of winning the cittie; so little heart, so much as to approach the wals, that even the very roofes of houses, which they descried a saro^, and the sight of the tombs and graves so neer at hand, turned their minds clean, and daunted their courages. So as over all the campe they began to mutter with themselves, What they  meant to spend time idlie, and fit still without preading, in a wast and desart countrey; within the mortalitie and putrified aire and corruption, both of people and cattell; when as they might as well invade those parts that stood cleare and sound, and namely the rich, plentifull, and fat fields of (...) Iusculum: and therwith suddainly at once they plucked up their ensignes, and by crosse waies pasted through the Valm^niore. Lavican countries, even to the mountains of Tusculum: and thither turned they the whole force and tempest of the war. In the meane season the Hernikes and Latines moved not with pitie and compassion onely, but also for very shame, in case they had neither withstood their common enemies, marching to Rome with a cruel armie, nor relieved their besieged friends; joined their powers together, and set forward to Rome: where not finding the enemies, and following the bruit that went of them, and tracing their fresh trackes and footing, they encountred them as they came downe from the hillie country of Tusculum, into the vale of Alba: Where they made no saving bargaine of it, but fought to their loffe, so as their fidelitie unto their allies, had but bad succesle for that present. And in Rome there was no lesse mortalitie of cittizens by the sickenes, than there were massacres abroad of their allies by the edge of the sword. For the other Consull, who alone survived hitherto, now died. There left this life also, other noble personages, M. Valerius, Titus Virginius, Augurs: and Ser. Sulpitius the Cumio maximas. But among the base and common sort, the violence of the disease raged and spread, I know not how farre. The Senate now destitute of all helpe and comfort of man, moved the people to devotion, to their beads, and praiers unto the gods. And commandement was given to all men with their wives and children, to goe in prosession, to poure out their supplications, and crave mercie at gods  hands. Thus being by publike authoritie called forth to performe that which every man was forced unto by his owne proper calamities, they filled all the temples and chappels. The dames and ancient matrons, lying groveling and sweeping the church flores and pavement with their haire and tresses, hanging lose downe, humblie be sought pardon of the gods, and an end once of the pestilence. Whereupon, were it that they had obtained the mercie of God, or that the more dangerous and contagious season of the yeare, was now well overpast; their bodies by little and little,

 having escaped the daunger of disease, began to recover and waxe more healthie.
Then set they their mindes about the care of the Common-weale, and after certaine interreignes determined or ended, P. Valerius Poplicola, the third day of his Interreigne or Regencie for the time, createth Consuls L. Lucretius Tricipitinus, and T. Veturius Geminus, or Vetusius whether yee will: who 11 of August. three daies before the Ides of Sextil^^, began their Consulship. By which time the cittie was growne so-strong againe, that it was able not onely to maintaine a defensive warre, but also to enter the field and assaile others. When the Herniks therefore gave them advertisements that the enemies were passed over into their borders: they made no delay, but readily and willingly promised their aide, and levied two Consular armies. Veturius was sent against the Volscians, to beginne with them, and to warre within their owne countrie. Tricipitinus was opposed in the Frontires of their confederates, to keepe them from invasion and wasting, and went no further forwarde than to the Hernikes. Veturius at his first encounter and confronting of his enemies, discomfired and put them to flight. But Tricipitinus whiles hee lay still encamped in the marches of the Hernikes, missed of the armie of the robbers: which was conducted over the mountaines of Preneste, from whence they came downe into the champaine, and spoyled the territories of Preneste and Gabes: and from thence they fetched a compasse about unto the mountaines of Tusculum. The Citie of Rome likewise was put in great feare, rather upon the sodaine occurrent of this al'arme, than for any want of power to resist their violence. Quintus Fabius at that time was Prouost of President of the Cittie, who put the youth in armour, disposed guards in places conuenient, and made all safe and in good  securitie. The enemies therefore who had raised a bootie out of the parts adjoyning, durst approch no neerer, but cast about with their armie and retired: and the further they went from their enemies cittie, so much the more carelesse they were, untill they light upon the Cos. Lucretius, who by his espials and scouts, was afore that time acquainted what waies they would take, and was readie also to trie battaile. So with resolute and prepared hearts, they set upon them, that with the sodaine feare were amazed. And albeit they were in number fewer, yet they discomfited and put to flight a mightie multitude of them, and drave them within the hollow vallies, where because they had no readie way to get out, they kept them inclosed on everie side. In such sort, that the whole name and nation welneere of the Volscians, there utterly perished. In some Chronicles I find that there were 13470 slaine in the fight and chafe, and 1250 taken prisoners alive, and 27 ensignes or banners brought away. It may well be that the number perhaps doth somewhat exceed the truth, yet a great slaughter certainely there was. The Consull having atchieved this victorie, and gotten a mightie great prey, returned into the same standing campe againe. Then pitched both Consuls togither, and the Volscians ioyntly with the Aequians, rallied their forces thus decaied and weakened, into one place, and made one entire armie. This was the third field fought, in that one yeare, and by the same good fortune the Romanes wan the victorie: and having vanquished the enemies, they were maisters also of the campe. Thus the cittie of Rome recovered her selfe, and returned to her ancient good estate. But this happie successe in war, immediatly stirred vp civile troubles at home. C. Terentillus Arsa, for that yeare a Tribune of the Commons,C. Terentillus inveigheth against the regiment of the Consuls. supposing in the absence of the Consuls, good opportunitie was offered to  set on foote the Tribunes actions, and their proceedings: for certaine daies togither gave not over before the Commons, to accuse the great pride and insolencie of the Nobles: but especially he inveighed against the Consuls regiment, as being too absolute, and in a free state intollerable.
For in name only (quoth he) lesse odious and hatefull it is than that of the KK. but in fact in very deed, more grienous and cruell. For why? In steed of one lord, the cittie hath received twaine, and those having authoritie beyond all measure, unlimited and infinite: who being themselves at their owne libertie and vnbrideled, turned the edge of all streight and dreadfull lawes, year, and the rigor of all punishment, against the Commons. But least this their licentiousnesse should continue for ever, he was minded to preferred and publish a law, by vertue where of there should be five men created, who should set downe certaine conditions, to limit and gage the authoritie  of the Consuls: and looke what authoritie and comission the people graunted out over them, the same should the Consull exercise, and no more, and not rule of themselves, and vse their owne will and licencious lust in steede of law. This act being once published, and the Nobles fearing, least whiles the Consuls were away, they should be taken downe and yoked. Quin. Fabrus President of the Cittie, assembled the Senate, who so bitterly and sharply inueighed against the law and the law-giuer himselfe, that if both the Consuls themselves had stood about

the Tribune of purpose to contradict and crosse his proceedings, The (...) of Q. (...) against the (...) of the Commons. there had been no threats nor  terrible menaces left for them, to have thundred out.
For he laid sore vnto his charge, that he had lien in waite, and now having spied the time to fit his purpose, had given the venture to assaile the C. W. and the State. And in case the gods in their wrathfull displeasure had sent among them such a Tribune as hee the yeare before, togither with warre and pestilence, there had ben no remedie then, but he must have had his way, and then they had beene all undone. For when the Consuls both were dead, and the cittie lay bedrid as it were, in a miserable confusion of all things, he would have made lawes then indeede, to the utter abolishing of the Consuls authoritie out of the Commonwealth, and beene a ringleader to Volscians and Aequians both, for to have assaulted the cittie. For what might not hee have lawfully done by vertue of his place? If the Consuls had either proudly or cruelly proceeded against any one Cittizen, hee might  have entered an Action against them, and convented them forsooth before those verie Iudges, of whome peraduenture some one had beene by them hardlie dealt withall. This would have beene the course and ende of it. And hee that thus did, should not cause the Consuls authoritie and rule, but the Tribunes power to become odious and intollerable: which having beene of late well quieted and reconciled unto the Nobles, began now afresh to come unto the old biace, and to be troublesome againe. Neither intreated hee him not to goe on still as he had begun. But ye my masters (qd. Fabius) that are the rest of the Tribunes, we would request you to consider well this one point especially: That this power you have, was brought in for the succour and releefe of everie particular person, and not to the generall prejudice and undoing of all. Againe, that ye are created Tribunes of the Commons, not enemies of the  Nobles. A heavie and lamentable case it is to us, odious and hatefull unto you, and will breed you much ill will and displeasure, in case the C. W. now forlorn, should thus be invaded and assailed. Yee shall leese nothing of your owne right, I assure you, nay you shall avoid much mislike and hatred of men, in case ye be in hand and deale with your brother Tribune, to put off this matter and deferre it wholly until the Consuls comming. Why, the verie Aequians and Volscians themselves the last yeare, when both our Consuls were dead of the plague, preased not hardlie upon us, to prosecute any proud and cruell war against us. So, the Tribunes communed and persuaded with Terentillus: and this his commensed suit or action being adjourned in outward shew, but in verie truth let fall quite and disanulled, the Consuls forthwith were sent for home. Lucretius returned enriched with a right great bootie, but with far greater honor and renowne. Who at his  verie first comming wan himselfe more glorie, by laying abroad in Mars field all the prises, that everie man for three daies space might know his owne and have it away. All the rest, that had no owners to come forth and make claime, was sold in port-sale. By all mens consent, the Consull was thought worthie of triumph: howbeit that matter was put off, by reason that the Tribune had not yet done with his law: which was the thing that the Consull thought meet should be first regarded. The matter was debated and treated for certaine daies, both in the Senate and also before the people. At last the Tribune yeelded to the majestic of the Consull, and gave it over. Then was due honor rendred both to the Generall and also to the armie accordingly. He triumphed over the Volscians and Aequians: and in his triumph his owne legions followed after him. To the other Consull granted it was that he should in a kind of triumph called Ovatio, ride into  the citie, but without his soldiors. The yeare next ensuing, the law Terentilla was by the whole colledge or fellowship of the Tribunes revived and propounded againe: which put the new Consuls P. Volumnius and Ser. Sulpitius to some trouble. Prodigious fights And in the same yeare the skie semed to be on a light fire, and there was an exceeding earthquake. And that which the yeare afore was no credit given unto, was now for truth beleeved, to wit, That a cow did speake. Among other strange wonders it rained flesh: during which showre, a huge number of foules flew among, and were reported to have snatcht it and caried it away as it was in falling. But that which fell downe and escaped their tallons, lay scattered here and there for certaine daies in such sort, as the sent changed not at all, nor the flesh one jot taken and corrupted. Then the bookes (of Sibylla) were perused by the Duumvirs deputed over matters of religion: who foretold of some dangers to ensue by a companie of strangers, and gave warning to look least happily some assault should  be made upon the highest places of the citie, and thereof a slaughter and massacre ensue. Amongst the rest, warning was given to abstaine from civile discord and mutinies: which the Tribunes found fault with, as a devised matter to hinder the law. Wherupon great debate and contention was like presentlie to grow. But behold, (that the revolution and course of troubles might

 turne about everie yeare to the same point.) The Herniks bring newes that the Volscians and Aequians for all their wings were well clipped, and their forces greatly decaied, began to gather and leavie new armies: Item, That in Antium lay the whole weight and importance of the affairs, and all depended upon it: That the Antiat coloners held their counsels and had their meetings in open show, at Ecetra, but Antium was the principall seat of the warre, and from thence came all preparations and forces whatsoever. As soone as these newes were reported in the Senate, order was given to muster soldiors: and that the Consuls should part betweene them the administration and managing of this warre, so as the one should have the charge against the Volscians, and the other against the Aequians. But the Tribunes rung it out openly in the common hall before the people, That this was but a made matter of the Volscian warre, and a tale  devised by the Herniks, who were suborned and framed to play their parts in the Pageant, and to serve the turne of the Nobles. The Tribunes oppose themselves against the Nobilitie. And that now verilie the freedome of the people of Rome was not oppressed or endangered by plaine prowesse and vertue, but finely shifted off and dallied cunningly withall, by slie and craftie inventions.
And for as much as now it was an unlikely thing and incredible, that the Volscians and Aequians after so great carnage committed upon them, whereby they were all in a manner killed up, should be able of themselves to wage wa^re, there were, forsooth, new enemies sought out: A faithfull Colonie neer adioyning, was now slandered and diffamed: warre was pretended for a shew against the guildesse and innocent Antiats, but in truth, intended with the verie commons of Rome, whom they ment to drive out of the cittie in all haste headlong, surcharged with heavie armour, and so (by, turning out their poore fellow  citizens into banishment, and sending them away, God knowes whether) to be avenged at length of the Tribunes. And thus the Law (say the Tribunes, for they must thinke their drift is to this end and to none other) should be troden vnder foote, vnlesse whiles all is entire and whole, and nothing done, whiles they remaine at home in their houses, whiles they be in their gownes, they take heede and looke well about them, that they be not dispossessed of the cittie, and take the yoke of servitude vpon their necks: assuring them that if their hearts onely served, they should want for no helpe: and that all the Tribunes agreed and were of one mind, that there was no cause of feare abroad, no forraine warre to trouble them: last of all, that the very providence of the gods the yeare before assured them, that their libertie might with safetic be defended. These and such like remonstrances gave the Tribunes out. On the other part, the Consuls causing their  chaires of estate to be set, even in their sight and presence, began to muster. Thitherran the Tribunes downe in all hast, and drew the whole assemblie of people with them. And, to make as it were a proofe and triall, some few by name were called, and straightwaies began a stir. For whomsoever the Sergeant by the Consull his commandement arrested, the Tribunes charged againe that hee should bee let goe. And neither side contained within the limits and compasse of their commission and rightfull authorities: but presumed of their might and strong hand, to attaine unto their desired purpose. For even as the Tribunes had demeaned themselves in forbidding the muster, semblablie the Senatours bestirred themselves to stop the law for going forward: which was propounded everie court day, and when the people might assemble. And evermore the brawle began, when the Tribunes commanded the people to avoid the hall, for that  the Patritij would not endure thus to bee set out and excluded. Few or none of the auncients would bee present at these troublesome sturres, being such as were not to bee managed and ordered by sage counsell, but wholly left to the rashnes and boldnes of young and greene heads. The Consuls also were much absent, and forbare to be in place, for feare least in such a confused hurliburlie their majestie and dignitie, might have ben subject to some shamefull contumely and disgrace. But there was among them one Caso Quintius, a lustie young gentleman and a stout, in regard both of his noble parentage, as also of the goodly tall personage and strength of his bodie. Besides these good parts that God had bestowed upon him, he had woon himselfe many ornaments by sundrie exploits atcheeved in wars: He had withall an eloquent speech and a good grace at the bar, so as, in one word, throughout the whole citie, there was not one thought to bee  more readie in toung, or raller of his hands. This Caeso standing in the midst of the Nobles, higher to be seen above all the rest, as one that in his speech and strength, carried asore him the countenance and authoritie of all Dictators and Consuls, was the only man that bare off the brunts of Tribunes, Ceso Quintius a bitter adversarie of the la^ Terenulla. and stormes of the common people. Many a time were the Tribunes driven out of common hall, the Communaltie defeated and put to flight by the conduct of this Captaine. Whosoever came within his reach, was sure to go away throughly beaten, and cleane stripped. So

as it evidently appeared, if this course might have ben allowed, the law had soone ben checked  and overthrowne. Now when all the other Tribunes besides, were herewith dismaied and welneere daunted. Aulus Virginius alone, being one of their fellowship, was so bold, as to enter an action against Caeso, of a capitall crime. By which deed of his, he rather fired, than feared his hot and furious nature. For so much the more eagerly withstood he the law, coursed and troubled the Commons, and persecuted the Tribunes as it were with open warre. The plaintiffe in the meane time, suffered the defendant to run on still, and with many outrages to kindle more coales of ill will, and hatred upon his owne head, and to minister further matter of crimes to bee charged with. And all the while he ceased not to preferre the law aforesaid, not so much of any hope to bring it to passe, as to provoke and set on worke, the giddie he^d and humourous vaine of Caeso. Whereby it came to passe, that many follies oftentimes were committed both in word and deed, by the yonger sort: and evermore the blame light upon poore Caeso: he alone was alwaies charged, because he had been once suspected. But neverthelesse hee gainsaied and crossed the law.
And Aulus Virginius ever and anone would entertaine the Commons with these and such like speeches. See ye not alreadie (quoth he) O Quirites, that yee may not now have Caeso your Cittizen, and the law which you desire both together. But what meane I to speak of the law? It is your libertie that hee insringeth and setteth himselfe against, and in pride and arrogancie hee exceedeth all the T arquines that ever were. But wait, ye were best, until he be made a Consull or Dictator, whom yee see alreadie, being but a private person, to beare himselfe so greatly of his strength and boldnesse, as to lord it over you, and rule as a king.
Many soothed the Tribune and said the like, adding moreover, how they had ben well knocked and beaten at his hands: and were forward  ynough of themselves to set the Tribune on, to proceed in his commensed action against him.
Now was the law day of judiciall triall come: and it seemed abroad, that all men verily thought that the very foundation of their libertie consisted in the condemnation of Caeso. In conclusion, driven he was with much indignitie and shame, to creepe and crouch unto every man, submissely craving their favor one after another. There seconded him his kinsfolke and neerest friends, the bestmen of the citie. Titus Quintius Capitolinus, who had been thrice Consull, spake in his behalfe: and after he had reckoned up many honours and dignities, both of his owne, and also of his familie,(...) affirmed, that neither in the house and race of Quintij, nor yet throughout the cittie of Rome, was ever seene so great towardnesse, no such shew and likelyhood of ripe and perfect vertue and prowesse as in Caeso: saying, that hee had been first his souldiour, and served under  him, and that with his owne eies hee had seene him oftentimes fight valiantly hand to hand with his enemies in the field. Again, Sp. Fusius made this good report of him, That upon a time, when himselfe was in great distresse and extremitie, Caeso was sent unto him from Quintius Capitolinus, to helpe at a pinch: and that there was no one man, by whose good service, as hee thought, the Weale publicke at that time was more releeved and restored, than by his. L. Lucretius the Consull last yeare before, glittering in his bright glorie so fresh and new, joined with the rest, avowing Caeso partaker with him in his praise-worthie acts: he recounted his brave combats, rehersed his noble exploits, both in his rodes and voiages, and also in the pight field: advising and counselling them, that in any hand they would retaine still for to be a citizen of their owne cittie, rather than of any other, this excellent young gentleman, furnished with all good gifts of  nature and fortune, like to prove a singular stay of the publicke affaires, into what cittie and state soever he should come. As for that heat and hastinesse (quoth he) which was in him misliked and offensive, age and time would daily diminish, and bereave him of it: grave and sage counsell, which now was wanting, would come on a peace everie day more than other. Seeing therfore his faults waxed old and faded, his vertues now were in their growth, flourished, and grew ripe unto perfection; they should permit so brave, so rare a person, to live still among them, and be a good old man in this their cittie. His father among the rest, L. Quintius, surnamed Cincinnatus, went another way to worke: who not by iterating still his praises, for feare of heaping more matter of envie and repine, but craving pardon for his wildnesse and youthfull demeanor; besought them for his sake at leastwise, to give the sonne as a present to his father, who neither in word  nor deede had ever offended any person. Some tooke no heede and gave a deafe eare to his praiers, either for modesty and reverence, or for feare. Others complaining how they and theirs had ben beaten and hardly used at his hands, bewraied and shewed plainly by their shrewd and churlish answeres what their iudgment was. Beside, the common mislike and malice conceaved against the defendant, there was one perilous matter and crime above all, that touched him

 very neere. And that was this: M. Volscius Fictor, who certaine yeares before had been Tribune of the Commons, came in against him as a witnesse, and deposed, how that not long after the plague was in the citty, he happened upon a company of youthes as they made a roiot and robbery in the Suburra: where there arose a braule and a fray, in which his elder brother, a man well in yeares, and not throughly recovered of his sicknesse, was by a buffet with Caeso his fist felled to the ground, and laie there for dead: so as he was faine to be had home betweene mens armes; and as he deemed, of that blow he died: yet might not he, as haynous as the fact was, bring his action and prosecute the law, for feare of the Consuls of these last yeares. As Velscius thus informed, the whole court was moved therwith, in so much that Caso escaped hardly, from being murthered, in that rage and fury of the people. Then Virginius commanded to lay hold  on the man, and to haue him away to prison. The Patritij againe by force resisted force. T. Quintius cried out, That he who was under arrest for to make his appearance, and answere at a day for his life, and who shortly should come to his triall and be judged, ought not before sentence of condemnation, and before he had pleaded for himselfe, thus violently be misused. The Tribune replied againe, That his meaning was not to punish him before he were condemned: howbeit, by his leaue he would be so bold as keepe him fall in prison, to be forth comming at the law daie; that he who had killed a man, might suffer therefore, according as the people of Rome should award. Then were the Tribunes called unto for their helpe, who by the meanes of an indifferent decree then made, shewed their lawfull favours with speede. By vertue whereof they sorbad expressely, that he should not be imprisoned, but pronounced that it was their will  and pleasure, that the defendant should personally appeare, and a piece of money be promised unto the people, in case he made default and failed of his appearance. Much question there was what summe of money should be thought reasonable to be promised. And the matter was put over to the Senate to be decided: and whilst the Senators sate thereupon, the defendant was kept still in ward within the common Haul. At length they thought good and set it downe, that he should put insureties. And they bound each suretie in 30009 lib. 7 sh. 6. d. sterl. Asses. But how many of these should put in band, was left to the will and descretion of the Tribunes, who assigned and determined ten and no more. With so many sureties the plaintife bound the defendant personally and peremptorily to appeare at his daie. This man was the first Roman that went under speciall baile and put in good pledges to make his publike answere. Thus being enlarged out of the common  hall and dismissed, the next night following, unawares to the Consull, he departed to the Tuscanes into exile. When the daie of this judgment was come, and that it was alleadged for his excuse, That he was out of the towne, and gone into banishment: yet neverthelesse Virginius assembled the people about this matter: but his fellow Tribunes being called unto for their helpe, dismissed the court and licensed every man to depart. But the foresaid money was cruelly exacted at his fathers hands, so that he was driven to sell up all that ever he had, and for a long time to live apart as a person confined, on the other side of Tyber, in a poore blinde cottage out of the way. This processe of judgment, and the preferring of the law abovesaid together, busied the cittie and kept it occupied. Quiet they were for any wars abroad. At what time the Tribunes like conquerors, seeing the Nobles appauled at the banishment of Caeso, supposed now their law was  in manner fully established and enacted. And for as much as the more ancient Senatours had dispossessed themselves as it were, of the Common weale, and medled not for their owne parts with the stare: the younger sort and such especially as were of Caeso his crue and acquaintance, were kindled the more against the Commons, and abated not their courage: marry, this good thereby was done upon them, that in some measure they tempered and ruled their furious affections and violent outrage. The first time after the exile of Caeso, that the law began againe to be proposed, they being well appointed and banded together, backed also with a mighty companie of their friends and favorites, set upon the Tribunes: taking the occasion when they charged them to depart out of the hall, in such manner, that no one of them above his fellowes was singular, nor carried home with him any speciall praise or blame more than another: but the  Commons complained that for one Caeso, there were now start up a thousand. All the daies betweene, wherein the Tribunes medled not with their law, none more quiet, none more peaceable than even they themselves. Courteously they would salute and speake unto the Commons, at all other times they would invite them home to their houses and make them good cheere, assist them and be present with them in the common hall, suffer the Tribunes themselves without any interruption or impeachment to keepe their courts and hold their assemblies whatsoever:

shewing themselves at no time to any of them either publikely or privately fierce and cruell, but  onely when they went in hand with the law, for otherwise the young Gentlemen were popular enough. And not onely in other causes made the Tribunes good dispatch, and went quietly through all their businesses: but also the same men were chosen againe for the next yeare following without any one foule and crosse word: so far were they from being offred any forcible violence: and thus by soft handling and gentle dealing, they had now by little and little won the Commons, and made them as it were come to hand. And so by these fine fetches and devises, for one whole yeare the law was shifted off, and pretily avoided. The cittie being now in more quiet state, C. Claudius the sonne of Appius and P. Valerius Poplicola, came to be Consuls. And no news this new yeare: for the same care still, either about preferring or admitting the law, held the citty occupied. As much as the punie Nobles insinuated themselves more into the favour and familiarity  of the Commons: so much more egerly againe on the other side, did the Tribunes labour and endevour with complaints and slaunders, to bring them into suspition and jealosie with the Commons. Saying, that there was a conspiracie intended and contrived: that Caeso was in Rome: that there were plots laid to murther the Tribunes, and to massaker the Commons: that they were set on worke by some great ones, even the Auncients of the Nobles, utterly to abolish the Tribunes aucthority out of the C. W. and to bring and reduce the city to the same passe againe, as it had been before the taking and keeping hold in the Mount Sacer. Besides all this, war was feared from the Volscians and Aequians (so ordinary it was, and so duly once every yeare it came about:) yea and withall, another mischiefe newly sprong, and unlooked for.
A rabble of banished persons, Outlawes and Bondslaves, to the number of 4500. having to  their Capitaine one Ap. Herdonius a Sabine, The Capitoll surprised (...) surprised in the night the Capitoll and Castle, and were masters thereof. Who immediatly killed in the castle as many as would not be of their conspiracie and take armour with them. The rest, amid this hurliburly ran headlong downe into the Market place for feare. The al'arme was given on al hands: and no crie heard, but Arme, Arme, the enemies are in towne. The Consuls were affraid to put the Commons in armes, and they doubted also to let them be unarmed, not knowing what suddaine occurrent this should be, that thus had entred and possessed the citty: whether it were forraine or domesticall, arising from the malice and hatred of the people, or from the treacherie and falshood of their servants. Yet they devised to appease the uprore: and as they were busie to represse it, the more otherwhile they stirred up new: for the frighted and amased multitude, could not be ordered by any  commandement. Howbeit at length they resolved to suffer them to take armes, and not all in generall, but onely (for that they knewe not what their enemies were) to have a sufficient and trusty guard about them, ready at all assaies and dangers whatsoever. In this carefull suspence and doubt, who were their enemies, and what their number was, they passed the rest of the night, disposing strong watch and warde in all meete and convenient places of the city. But the day light disclosed the warre and the Captaine thereof.The (...) Appius Herdonius, captain of the slaves.
Appius Herdonius from out of the Capitoll proclaimed freedome to all bondmen that would come and follow him: taking upon him forsooth to defend the cause of most miserable caitifs: namely, to restore home againe unto their native countrie all such exiled persons, as had beene wrongfully expelled, and also to take away the heavie yoke of slaverie and bondage. Which thing he could wish it might be effected  and brought about with the good will and helping hand of the people of Rome. But in case there were no hope and comfort there, then he would assay the Volscians and Aequians, yea and procure what meanes he could, by all hard courses and extremities whatsoever. Now the Nobles and Coss. began to see more into the matter: and besides those dangers that were in view, and presently threatened, they feared some practise from the Veientians or the Sabines: and least, there being alreadie so many enemies in the citie, the legions of the Sabines and Tuscanes should combine together, and come upon them Over and besides, least their old enemies and perpetuall, the Volsc. and Aeq. should now at once, not, as aforetime, invade their borders and drive booties, but give an attempt upon the very citty, which was already in some part, taken and possessed by enemies. Many and sundry were their feares. But of all other the dread and jealousie of their own bondslaves  presented unto them most imminent and present danger: for feare, least every man harboured his enemy at home in his own house, whom neither he could trust securely, nor yet mistrust without some jeopardy: fearing least being once discredited, he might proove the more malicious and bent to doe a mischiefe. And to such streightes they were driven, that with all their concord and agreement, they hardly were able to remedy the matter, and to stop the extremitie. So

 greatly the future troubles like to ensue, exceeded those that presently appeared and were in sight, that no man feared either Tribunes or Commons. That milde and gentle kinde of maladie, in comparison of others, and rising alwaies by occasion of rest from all other, seemed then by reason of a forreine terrour, stilled cleane and brought asleepe. And yet see, that was the only thing in a manner that late hardest upon them, ready to beare downe to the ground their state, which now began already to shrinke and reele. For so furiously and madly were the Tribunes bent, that they stifly would stand to it, and beare men in hand, That it was no warre, but a vaine illusion and colour of war, and no other, that had seised on the Capitoll; for nothing els but to withdraw the mindes of the Commons from intending and following their law: and that a sort of clients, followers, and favorites of the Nobility and Gentrie were gathered together, who is  they might once perceave that the law were passed, and that all the stirre they had made, tooke no effect, would slip away soone and be gon, in more silence y'wis, than they thither came. Wherupon they called the people away from their armour and weapons, and summoned them to an assembly, to go through with their law and enact it now or never. In the meane time the Coss. held a counsell, fearing a greater mischiefe like to ensue from the Tribunes, than the enemies had wrought in the night season. And when word was brought that armes were laid away, and that the people had abandoned their quarters where they were set in guard, The Oration of P. Valerius to the people. then P. Valer. leaving his colleague to keep the Senat together, departed hastely out of the court and went straight into the temple to the Tribunes. What worke is here my Maisters (qd. he) you that are Tribunes?
Are ye about to overthrow the State indeed, under the conduct of Ap. Herdonius? and who was not able  to sollicit and do any thing with your bondslaves and servants, was his hap so good as to corrupt and inveagle your selves? Is this your pleasure and to your good liking, whi^^s the enemie is over our heads, to have our armour laid aside, and lawes preferred? Then turning his speech to the whole multitude: If ye take no regard nor care (o Quirites) of the cittie, if ye passe not for yourselves, yet have some reverence, and stand in feare of the gods of your native countrey, which by your enemies are now taken prisoners and captivate: Iup. Opt. Max. that most boundtifull and almighty god, Queene Iuno and Minerva, with all the rest of gods goddesses (and heavenly hallowes) ar^ besieged: Outlawes and bondslaves are encamped about your Tutelar gods, and have in posse^sion the protectours and patrones of your citty. Is this, thinke ye, the forme of a wise and well governed cittie? is it in good case in deede and as it ought to be? So  many enemies not onely within the wals, but also aloft upon the cliffe within the Castle, overlooking and commanding both Hall and Court: and all the while, the people assemble in the hall, Senatours sit in Court, like as when we enioyed peace and were at rest: the Senatour he delivereth his opinion at the counsell boord: the cittizens of Rome besides, are busie in their scrutinies and giving their voices. And had it nor been more meet and decent that both Nobility and Cominalty, Consuls and Tribunes, God and Man, all armed together, should set to their helping hand, should run up into the Capitoll to deliver, save, and set in quiet that most stately and sacred house of Iup. Opt. Max.? O Father Romulus, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, that minde and that courage unto thy successours and posterity, whereby sometime thou didst recover and win againe this fortresse from these same Sabines, betraied and lost by corruption, and  for a summe of gold: command them to enter even that way, which thou first leddest, and thy valorous armie followed after. Lo, I the Consull, so far foorth as a mortall man possibly may, will follow thee an immortall god, and thy footesteps. The conclusion of his speech was this, That as he put himselfe in armes, so all the Romans shall doe the like. And in case any man went about to hinder this, he would without regard of Consuls rule and dignity, or Tribunes authority and might, passe for no sacred or inviolable lawes: but what or wheresoever he were, in Capitoll, in market place, all as one, take him for an enemie, and deale accordingly. Let the Tribunes (for as much as they forbad to take armes against Ap. Herdonius) commaunde hardly, and spare not, to arme against P. Valerius the Consull: It should be well seene that he would dare and doe that by the Tribunes, which the first of his house and name sometime had done by  the KK. A great broile was toward, and no other like, but that they would have gone together by the eares, and that the mutinie of the Romanes, would have been a goodly spectacle to the enemies for to beholde. But all this while, neither could the lawe be preferred, nor the Consull go up into the Capitoll. The night at length staied these braules begun, and husht all, The Tribunes fearing the armed forces of the Consuls, yeelded to the darknesse of the night, and gave over. Now when the principall authours of the discord were once gone out of the way,

the Nobles went about to the Commons, intruding themselves into their companies as  they were met in knots together: where they would enter into talke and discourse with them, according to the present occasions and the time, admonishing them to take heed into what danger they brought the State. For as much as now (quoth they) it is not a matter of debate between the Senatours and Commons: but both Senatours and Commoners, the castle and strongest hold of the citie, the temples of the gods, their houses both publicke and private, were readie to be yeelded unto the enemies. Whiles these things were a practising in the common place, for to appease the dissention: the Consuls for feare, least the Sabines or the Veientians, enemies both, should stirre and rise, were gone to the gates, and all about the wals. The same night came tidings also to Tusculum of the taking of the castle, the surprising of the Capitoll, and likewise of the troubleous state where in the citie stood.
At that time was L. Mamilius, Dictator of Tusculum: he forthwith called a Senate together, brought in the messengers of the foresaid newes, and thought it very expedient and needfull not to wait untill there came Embassadours from Rome to crave their aid: for that the present perill it selfe alone, the urgent necessitie, their sociall gods, and the faithfull bond of league, required no lesse at their hands, than to send succor: adding moreover, that the gods would never give them the like occasion and oportunitie again, to gratifie the Romanes; to bind and oblige unto them by a sound benefite and pleasure done, so mightie a cittie, and so neere a neighbour. Whereupon it was decreed, to rescue them with all speed. The able men of service were taken up and enrolled, munition and armour given them in their hands: who advancing toward Rome by break of day, seemed a farre off to be enemies, and were taken for the Acquians or Volscians. But afterwards, when this foolish feare was overblowne, they were received into the cittie: and marched downe in order of battell to the market place. Where, at the very same time Pub. Valerius having left his fellow Consul to guard and fortifie the gates, was setting his men in array. The authoritie of the man had prevailed with the people, for he promised and assured them, that if the Capitoll were once recovered, and the citie set in quiet, if they would suffer him to be informed what faiterous and secret mischeefe was underhand practised by the Tribunes under colour of this law, he would in remembrance of his ancestors, and of his(...) surname (which in regard of the affectionat love unto the people, by a speciall care, as it were by inheritance from his forefathers, was recommended unto him) not hinder and trouble the meetings and assemblies of the Commons, not crosse and thwart their proceedings. They followed  him therefore as their cheesetaine, gainesay the Tribunes what they could (for all would not serve) advanced forward, and marched up against the rising of the Capitoll hill. The Tusculane legion stucke close unto them, and followed after. Cittizens and Associats both, did their best, and strove who should regaine the Capitoll first, and have the honour of that day. Ech captaine exhorted and encouraged his men. Then began the enemies to feare, and wist not well what to trust unto, but onely the scituation of the place. The Romanes and their allies seeing their feare, came forward and advanced their standards against them. Now by this time were they broken into the porch of the temple.(...) Where P. Valerius fighting manfully among the formost in the vaward, was slaine. P. Volumnius a Consular man, saw him when he fell: who gave his men in charge to cover his bodie, and stept himselfe into the Consuls roome, and fought in his stead. The souldiours for heat and eagernesse of fight, tooke no regard, and came to no knowledge  of this so great mischance, but got the victorie, ere they knew that they fought without their captaine. Many of the outlawes were there slaine, and polluted the temple with their bloud. Many taken alive prisoners, and Herdonius himselfe was slaine outright. So the Capitoll was againe recovered. The captives, as they were either bond or free, were executed every one according to their condition and place. The Tusculanes had thanks given them. The Capitoll was cleansed, purged, and hallowed anew. The Commons, as it is reported, castQuadrans, a (...) and is (...) as a cue and^ Quadrants or mites into the Consull his house, that hee might with greater pompe of funerals bee brought to the ground.
When all was appeased and in quiet, the Tribunes were earnest with the Nobles to performe the promise of P. Valerius: they were instant also with Claudius, to assoile the soule, and keepe it  from blame of his fellow Consull late deceased: and to permit the law to be set on foot, and goe forward. The Consull flatly denied to suffer them to meddle with the law, before he had substituted a fellow in his place. And these contentions held unto the time of the grand Election, for the substituting of a new Consull. And in the moneth December, after much suit, and labouring of the Nobles, was L. Quintius Cincinnatus, the father of Caeso, created Consull, and presently to

 enter into his office. The Commons herewith were much troubled and strucken dead, now that they were to have an angrie Consull, and mightie withall: considering the favour of the Nobles wherein he stood, and his owne vertue and prowesse besides: by reason also of his three sonnes, of whom there was not one, that for hautinesse of mind came behind Caeso, and for wisdome, discretion,The Oration of L. Quintius Cincir natns, reproving the Senate and Commons of Rome. and moderation (when time and occasion served) went farre beyond him.
Who being once entred into his office, in all his publicke speeches and orations, continually ceased not as well to bridle, restraine and keepe in the Communaltie, as also to chastise sharpely the Senate; through the remissenesse of which degree, and want of courage, it was come to passe, that the Tribunes became now to continue still in office, and not as in the Commonwealth of the people of Rome, but as in some unrulie and disordered house, with their lavish tongue raigned  as it were, and ruled the rost: saying, That together with his sonne Caeso all vertue and constancie, all commendable qualities that graced young gentlemen both in warre and peace, were chased and utterly banished out of the citie of Rome. In lieu whereof, bablers, mutinous persons, and sowers of sedition and dissention, are become Tribunes the second, yea, and the third time: who by indirect courses and leaud practises live losely in the citie, like princes and kings. That same Aulus Virginius there, (quoth he) hath he deserved lesse punishment than Ap. Herdonius, because he was not in the Capitoll with the rable of other rebels? Nay much more a good deale, if a man will weigh the matter aright and truly. Herdonius, (if there were nothing else) yet by professing himselfe to be an enemie, advertised you, and gave you warning in a manner to arme your selves. But he, by bearing you down so confidently, that there was no warre, what did he els but disarme  you, and as it were, take your weapons from you, and offer you naked to the devotion and mercie of your bondmen and outlawes? And have yee (under correction bee it spoken, and saving the reverence and honor of C. Claudius here, and P. Valerius that dead is) advanced your ensignes up the Capitoll hill, before you had rid the market place and common hall of these enemies? It is a shame (before God and man I speake it) when our enemies were in the castle and Capitoll, when the captaine and ringleader of outlawes and slaves, abode and lodged within the chappels and sanctuaries of Iup. Opti. Max. to the prophanation and polluting of all, that they at Tusculum should take them to their weapons before us of Rome, and that it should bee doubted, whether L. Mamilius the Tusculane Generall, or P. Valerius, and C. Claudius, the Romane Consuls, should save the fortresse of Rome: and that wee, who heretofore would not  suffer the Latines in their owne defence, when they had their enemies in their borders, so much as once to take weapon in hand, should now our selves have ben surprised and destroied, had not they, the verie same Latines of their owne accord, put themselves into armour for our sakes. Is this your succouring and helping the Commons, (O yee Tribunes) for to expose and cast them unarmed before the enemie, to have their throats cut? Ywis, if the meanest or basest person of your communaltie, which you have dismembred from the whole bodie of the people besides, and made it, as it were the native countrey of your owne, and a Commonwealth peculiar onely to your selves; If any one of them I say, should bring you word, that his house were beset round about, with a meinie of servants and slaves in armour, you would thinke it meet that hee were aided and succoured: And when Iup. Opti. Max. was besieged with a power of armed outlawes and  bondslaves, was he not worthie of mans helpe? And yet these men would be counted and held for Sacrosancti, i. Sacred and inviolable, with whom the very gods themselves are not sacred and inviolate. And notwithstanding, that yee are thus overcharged and stained with sins both against God and man, yee goe up and downe, and say, That this yeare you will get your law to passe, and make it sure. Pardie, if ye prefer it againe, then I must needs say the Commonweale is ill bested, and had a shrewd turne that day whereon I was created Consull, yea and worse a good deale, than at what time P. Valerius the Consull was slaine. But now first and formost (quoth he) O Quirites, my colleague and I both, are minded to lead forth our legions immediatly against the Volscians and the Aequians; how the divine providence of God hath appointed it. I know not, but surely we find the gods more gracious and favorable unto us in our wars ordinarily, than in time  of peace. And in what danger we had stood of those nations, in case they had known that the Capitol was in the hands and possession of outlaws, better it is to guesse by that which is past, than to trie indeed by present experience. The Consull his oration moved and galled the Commons. The Nobles took hart, and were in a good beleef, that the world was well mended, and the state better reformed. The other Cos. more harty to follow than to lead, and who was well content that his fellow had broken the yce before, and taken in hand to deale first in so weighty a matter, willingly challenged

unto himselfe the charge to performe the part and office of a Consull, in the execution  and accomplishment of those designements. But then the Tribunes made a game therat, and setting light at the Consull his words, inferred againe and demanded, how the Consuls would lead out an armie, and no man suffer them to muster souldiors. Marry (quoth Quintius) we need no mustering at all: for, at what time as P. Valerius armed the Commons to recover again the Capitoll, they were all sworne unto him, and tooke their oath in this forme, To assemble together at the Consull his commandement, and not depart from their coulors without his leave and licence. Wee We will and charge you all therfore, that have taken this oath to present your selves to morrowe, with your armor, at the lake of(...) Rep de S. Severa Regillus without faile. Then the Tribunes began to cavil and wrangle, and would needes have the people discharged in their conscience of that oath: alleadging how when they tooke that militarie sacrament, Quintius was but a privat person. There was not as  yet, that neglect and contempt of the gods entered into the world, which now reigneth every where and is so rife: neither did men interpret their oathes, and construe lawes, to serve their own purpose, but rather attempered and framed their lives and demeanour therunto. The Tribunes therefore, seeing no hope to hinder the thing, began themselves to treat about setling forward the army: and the rather, because there ran a rumour abroad, that the Augurs were commaunded to attend at the lake Regillus: and that by them a place should be halowed and consecrate there, wherein the Consuls might duly commune and conferre with the people, concerning all matters, according to the flight of birdes: to the end that whatsoever at Rome had passed under a lawe, extorted by the violent force of the Tribunes; the same might there in a lawfull assembly and generall Session, be abrogated and made void by the suffrages of the soldiors, who all no doubt  would accord to that, which should stand with the Consuls pleasure. For by reason that there was no appeale in force without the citte, above one mile, the Tribunes themselves also, if they came thither, should be subject as well as the multitude besides of the people, to the commandement of the Consuls. These matters scared them indeed and put them in a bodily feare: but the greatest thing above all the rest that disquieted their hearts was this, that Quintius oftentimes had given out and said, That he would not cal an assembly of the people for the election of Coff. for that the citty was growen so farre out of frame and temper, that it might not be reformed and cured with ordinary and usuall remedies: but that the Common-wealth had more need of a Dictator, that whosoever went about to trouble the state of the citty, might well know that there was an absolute Dictatorship, that checked all appeales. The Senate was assembled at that time in the Capitoll; thither came the Tribunes with their Commons greatly disquieted and  troubled. The multitude cried out and besought one while the Consuls of their favour, another while the LL. of the Senate of their protection; but could not once remoove the Consull from his opinion (such a pitch had he taken) before the Tribunes gave their word and faithfull promise, that they would be wholy ruled and ordered by the Senators. Then the Consull propounded the demaunds and petitions of the Tribunes and Commons, and the Senate enacted these orders and decrees. First, that neither the Tribunes should that yeare preferre their lawe: nor the Consuls lead out of the citty any armie. Item from thence forth, the Senate deemed it not to stande with the weale publike, that Magistrates should continue still in place from yeare to yeare, and that the same persons should be more than once chosen Tribunes. The Consuls for their part, were  overruled and ordered by the Senators. But, say and gainsay what the Consuls would, the same Tribunes were chosen anew: and the Nobles also because they would not be one ace behind hand with the Commons, would needs choose L. Quintius likewise for their Consull againe. But all the yeare through was not the Consull more earnest and vehement in any action and speech whatsoever than in this.(...) against the Senate.
Should I mervaile my Lords of the counsell (quoth he) that you beare no stroke with the Cominalty, and your authority is so little worth among them? Why, you, even your owne selves set light therby: seeing, forsooth, the Commons brake the ordinance of the Senate, touching the continuitie of Magistrates; ye also, because ye would not seeme to yeeld one ynch in rashnesse and folly to the multitude, are as readie and willing to infringe the same: as who would say, this were to have more rule and authority in a cittie, namely, to use more levitie, inconstancie, and licentiousnesse. For it is a point of much more lightnes and vanitie, I assure  you, For men to disanull the actes and decrees of their owne making, than of others. Yee that be Senatours and Fathers of the C. W. imitate, and spare not, the ignorant, leawd, and inconsiderate multitude: ye that should give good examples to others, sinne ye hardly your selves, and doe amisse by the precedent of others; neither then let others by your example doe well: so

 long as I, for my part, take not after the Tribunes, nor suffer my selfe to be declared Cos. against an expresse act of the Senat. As to you, O Glaudius, I would exhort you, that both your selfe would restrain the people of Rome of this their licentiousnes, that thus they have not their swinge: and also that you would persuade your selfe thus much of me, That so farre off will I be from thinking my honour by you impaired, that rather I will take my glory to be encreased by the despising and refusing of a dignitie; and the il wil and envie abated and diminished, that might grow upon the continuation thereof. Wherupon, both the Consuls jointly together made an edict and proclamation, That no man should (by his voice) nominate Quintius, Consull: and if any man did, they would not allow of his election. So there were created Consuls. Q. Fabius Vibulanus the third time, and L. Cornelius Maluginensis.
 In this yeare was held a sessing and numbring of the citizens. But touching the Lustrum, there was some scruple of conscience, because the Capitoll had been taken, and the Consull skaine. When Q. Fabius and Lucius Cornelius were thus Consuls, sodenly in the very beginning of their yeare began great troubles: for the Tribunes on the one side, as their guise was, set the Commons a worke: the Latines and Hernicks on the other side, sent word of great wars from the Volselans and Aequians: That the Volscian legions were already at Antium, and the Colonie it selfe greatly suspected to rebell. Yet hardly could the Tribunes be brought to agree, that preparation should be made aforehand to prevent this warre. But upon these newes, the Consuls parted betweene themselves the charge of all affaires. Fabius was appointed to lead forth an armie to Antium: and Cornelius, to abide at Rome for the defence of the citty, for feare least some part of  their enemies, as the Aequians manner was, should in a running campe make rodes and harry the territories about. The Hernicks and Latines, were by vertue of the league, charged with the finding of certaine souldiors, so as the whole army should consist of ij. parts of consederates and one third of cittizens. When, at the day appointed the Allies were come, the Consull pitched downe his tentes without the gate Capena: from whence when he had taken a generall muster and purged his armie, he marched toward Antium, and encamped himselfe not far, either from the towne, or the standing campe of his enemies: where the Volscians seeing no forces yet come unto them from the Aequians, had no heart to fight, but made preparation how they might keepe themselves quiet and safe, within their mure and rampire. The morrow after, Fabius made not one entire battaile of Allies and cittizens mingled together, but three battaillons severally  by themselves, of three sundry nations, and raunged them along all about the counterscarpe and trench of his enemies. Himselfe was in the middest with the Romane legions, and gave commandement to observe heedfully and marke the signall: that the Allies also should both begin battaile and also retire, when he founded the retreat. In like sort he placed the horsmen behind the Principia at the backe of each battaile. Thus in three sundry parts he assailed the campe, and invironed it round about, and charging lustely hard upon them on every side, he beat the Volscians downe from their rampier, for they were not able to endure his violence. And having gotten over all their trenches and fortifications, he drave the fearefull multitude cleane out of their hold, that now were retired to a side and corner of the campe. The horsemen might not easily get over the trench, and stoode still of purpose to behold the fight, and to marke them when  they should flie: but having once gotten them in the open fieldes, they chased them as they ran away on heapes: and by killing them in their fearefull flight, deserved their part in that victorie. Great was the execution both within the campe, and also without the rampiers, as they fled: but greater was the pillage, for that the enemies had much ado to carry their armour away with them, and but that they shrowded themselves as they fled in the woods, they had perished every man. During these exploits about Antium, the Aequians having sent before them the tallest and lustiest young men they had, surprised the castle of Tusculum, upon a sodaine and at unawares in the night season: and with the rest of their power they were encamped not far from the wals of Tusculum, intending to intercept and stay the armie of their enemies. Tidings hereof came in post to Rome, and from Rome to the campe before Antium, which troubled the Romanes  as much as if newes had beene brought, that the Capitoll was taken. So fresh in remembrance was the late desert of the Tusculans: and the like jeopardy seemed to challenge and redemaund semblable aide and succour. Fabius setting all other thinges aside, caused the booty in all hast to be conveyed out of the campe to Antium: where having left an indifferent guarde, he hasteneth apace in order of battaile to Tusculum. By reason whereof, the souldiors could take nothing with them, but their armour, and such baked or boyled meats as were at hand readie.

The Consull (Cornelius) sent a convoy of victuals unto them from Rome. Thus for certaine  moneths continued the warre at Tusculum. The Consull (Fabius) with one part of his host assailed the campe of the Aequians: for the other part he had let the Tusculans have, to win again their fortresse. Against all force it was impregnable, but in the ende famine constrained the enemies to abandon it. To which extremity being at length driven, they were by the Tusculans disarmed and compelled to passe naked under theA kind of gallowe^ made with two juveline pitched endlong in the ground, and and a third fastned overthwart to the other. yoke. Who as they fled homeward with shame enough, were overtaken of the Romane Consull in Algidum, and put to the sword every one. After this victory, he encamped with the rest of his armie at Columen, for so the place is named. The other Consul likewise, seing that there was no danger threatning the wals of Rome, now that the enemy was discomfited and repulsed, departed himselfe from the citie. So the Consuls entering two waies the borders of their enemies, made sharpe war and spoiled the Volscians  of the one side, and the Aequians on the other. I finde in most writers that the Antiates in this yeare rebelled: and that L. Cornelius the Consull managed that warre, and won the towne. But for as much as there is no mention made of that matter in any ancient writers, I dare not avouch it for a certaine truth.
This warre was no sooner brought to an end, but the domesticall Tribunes warre at home put the Nobles in feare: for the Tribunes cried out that this was cautelous and fraudulent dealing, thus to keepe the armies abroad, for nothing els but to disappoint them for publishing the law. Yet neverthelesse, since they had begun it, they would not give over, but go through with it and see an end. Howbeit P. Lucretius, President of the cittie for the time, prevailed thus much with them, That al Tribunitian actions should hang and be deferred vntill the comming of the Consuls. There was besides a new occasion arose of fresh trouble. A. Cornelius and Quintus Servilius Treasurers or (...) Questours, gave summons to M. Volscius to make his answere at a day, who laide to his charge that he without all doubt, had borne false witnesse against Caeso. For by many presumptions and evidences it appeared, that neither Volscius his brother, from the first time that he fell sicke and tooke his bed, was at any time seene openly in the streetes, or so much as to have sit up, and mended any whit, but of that disease which held him many monethes, he languished and consumed away to death: nor about that time, wherein the deponent supposed the deede was done, was Caeso once seene at Rome: it being plainly affirmed and prooved by those who served together with him in the warres, that he was ordinarily all the time fighting vnder his colours as well as they, without any pasport or licence to depart. And to make this good, many there were  that of themselves privately challenged Volscius, and offered to traverse the law and to be tried by any indifferent and competent judges. But when as he durst not abide the triall and to be judged, all these things put together, and so consonant one to the other, made men doubt no more of the condemnation of Volscius than of Caeso, which was grounded upon the bare testimony of Volscius. The Tribunes were only the stay; who said plainly they would not suffer the Questors to holde any sessions or judiciall court, for the triall of the defendant, before they had a solemne assembly about their law. So were both these matters put off unto the Consuls comming. Who being entred with triumph into the citty, with their victorious armie, and no wordes made of the law, many men thought the Tribunes were cleane daunted and striken dead. But they (for that the yeare now was at an end) aspiring to be Tribunes the fourth time, left all their hoat contention  for the law, and reserved themselves wholy to argue and reason at the assembly for the Election of new Magistrates. And albeit the Consuls had bent all their might and maine against the continuity of the Tribuneship, as earnestly, as if a law had been propounded, tending to the impairing and abridging of their majesty, yet got the Tribunes the mastrie, and had the hand of them in the end. In this yeare peace was granted upon request and petition, unto the Aequians. And the Seffing, which the yeare before began, was now finished. And this was counted the tenth generall Survey and solemne purging of the cittie from the foundation thereof. There were numbred in the Cense-booke, of cittizens 132419 polles. A glorious and honourable yeare it was unto the Consuls, both at home and in warre. For they not onely procured peace abroad, but also the Cittie was, if not in perfect concord and unitie, yet in lesse trouble than at other  times. L. Minutius, and L. Ngutius, that were created Consuls, entred upon the reliques of the two matters begun the former yeare. And much after one sort, as the Consuls crossed the going forward of the law, so the Tribunes hindred the judiciall proceeding against Volscius. But the new Questours were men of more power and greater authoritie. For, together with M. Valerius, the sonne of Valerius, and nephew of Volesus, was T. Quintius Capitolinus created Questour,

 a man that had ben thrice Consull. Forasmuch therefore, as Caeso, the worthiest gentleman of all other, and the very ornament of the youth of Rome, could not be restored again, neither to the house of the Quintij, nor to the Commonweale, he pursued of meere pietie, with just and lawfull warre, that false witnesse, who would not suffer on any hand the innocent person to have the libertie to plead in his owne defence. And when Virginius, most of all the other Tribunes, was earnest to publish the law, the Consuls had two months respite given them to consider thereof, and looke into it throughly: to the end, that when they had advertised the people what secret fraud and inconvenience was hidden and lurked therein, they might afterwards suffer them to proceed to a scrutinie, and gather voices accordingly. This space between granted, brought the citie into a good and quiet state.
 But the Aequians would not abide, that long it should continue so. Who having broken the league, which the yeare before was made with the Romanes, chose Gracchus Clutlius for their governour and Generall, who was in those daies the greatest man amongst the Aequians. Vnder the conduct of this Gracchus, they enter first in warlike manner the countrey of Lanuvium, and from thence into the territorie of Tusculum, spoiling and ransacking as they went: and being loaden with preyes and booties, they pitch their tents inRoequa del (...) Algidum. Thither repaired from Rome into their campe, Q. Fabius, P. Valerius, and A. Posthumius as embassadors, to complain of wrongs received, and to demand amends and satisfaction according to covenant. The Generall of the Aequians seemed to graunt them audience, and willed them to declare what message and commission they had from the Senate of Rome, unto the oke; for that himselfe had some  other matters to dispatch the while. Now there grew a mightie great Oke hard by the Generall his pavilion, spreading his boughes even over it, and the shadow thereof served for a coole fitting place.
Then one of the Embassadors, as he went this way: Let both this sacred Oke (quoth he) and what divine power soever is seated in this place, hear and know, that by you first the league is broken, who now regard our present complaints, and shortly assist our valiant armies, when we shall prosecute and revenge at once the disloiall breach, both of Gods lawes and mans. So soone as the Embassadours were returned to Rome, the Senate gave direction, that one of the Consuls should lead forth an armie against Gracchus, into Algidum, and the other to have in commission, to wast the borders of the Aequians. The Tribunes, as their manner was, hindered the muster, and peradventure had staied it altogether, but for a new fearefull occurrent that suddainely  came in the necke of the other. For a mightie power of Sabines were approched welneere to the wals of the cittie, robbing, spoiling, and destroying all afore them with sword and fire. The territorie was piteously round about laid desolate, and the citie therewith sore terrified. Then the Commons stomackes came downe, and gently they tooke weapon in hand: and (say what the Tribunes would against it) two great armies were enrolled. Nautius had the leading of the one against the Sabines: and being encamped at Eretum, with small rodes and incursions, and those for the most part by night, made such foule worke and wast in the Sabines countrey, that in comparison thereof, the lands about Rome, seemed as if they had not beene once touched. Minutius in his exploits, had neither like good successe, nor yet egall courage and valour of heart. For having pitched his tents not far from the enemie, and received no great foile and  losse at his hands to speake of, yet hee kept himselfe for feare within the campe. Which when the enemies perceived, they grew more bold (as commonly the cowardise of one increaseth the courage of another) and assailed the campe in the night season: but seeing that plain force smally prevailed, the morrow after they raised mounts, and cast trenches round about. But before they had with their countermures and rampires stopped up all passages, five horsemen being sent even amongst the guards of the enemies, brought newes to Rome, that the Consull with his armie was besieged. Nothing could there have happened so little thought of, and unlooked for: whereupon there was such feare, trembling, and quaking, as if the enemies had besieged not the campe, but the very citie. Nautius the Consull they send for, and because they thought him like to do but small good, they agreed therfore to create a Dictator, who might restore again the distressed  state of the C. W. And L. Quintius Cincinnatus by consent of all men was nominated. Now a world and wonder it is to hear them speak,I. Quintius nominated Dictator, sound digging his ground with his owne hands. that in regard of riches despise all things else; and suppose there can be no great honor and vertue, but where wealth and riches doe flow in excesse. This L. Quintius, the only hope of the Romans, the man who was to set upright their Empire now distressed, occupied then a peece of ground, to the quantitie of some foure acres, called at this day Quintia prata, i. Quintius his meddowes, on the other side of Tyber, overagainst that

very place, where now the Arsenall and Shipdockes are, and there was hee found digging a ditch, and bearing hard on his spade, or els a plowing the ground, I wore not whether, but busie and earnest about some rusticall worke, no doubt he was: and after salutations passed on both sides, betweene him and the Embassadors that were sent, he was requested by them, that he would put on his best gown, and (that which might turne to the good of himselfe and the Commonweale) heare a message from the Senat. First, he marvelled what the matter should be, and estsoones asking of them if all were well? he willeth his wife Racilia to bring him forth his Senators robe straitway, out of his sorie cottage: which he put on his back (but first he brushed off the dust, and wiped away his sweat, and made himselfe somewhat mannerly) and then came forth unto them, who in joyous manner, by way of congratulation, stiled him by the name of Dictator: calling hard upon him to repaire unto the cittie, and declaring in how doubtfull tearmes the armie stood. Then  was there a barge provided readie for Quintius, at the citties cost: and being ferried over the river, his three sonnes met him and received him first, then other of his kinsfolke and friends, and after them the more part of the Senatours. Thus attended with this frequent companie, and with the Sergeants going before, was he brought to his house. Great concourse there was also of the Commons: but nothing so joyous were they, to see Quintius, supposing that government of his overgreat and absolute, and himselfe a man in time of his rule, too imperious. And for that night verilie, nothing was done, but a good standing watch kept in the cittie. The morrow after, the Dictatour being come into the common place of assemblie before daylight, appointed Generall of the horse, L. Tarquitius, of Noble bloud descended: a man who for meere povertie had ever served on foot, but of all the flower of Rome was reputed  and taken to bee a brave servitour, and an excellent souldiour. Then Quintius with his Generall of horsemen, mounteth up into the pulpit aloft: proclaimeth a publicke vacation or Lawsteed: commaundeth all shop windowes through the cittie to bee shut, and chargeth that no man should follow any private businesse of his owne. Then, as manie as were of age to fight, were willed to shew themselves in their armour, before the sunne set, in Mars field, everie one with victuals dressed for five daies, and with twelve forked stakes a peece, for to pitch in the rampart. And that whosoever were above that age, and were unweldie, and not meet for service, should dresse and provide victuals for the next souldiour unto him, whiles hee himselfe made readie his armour, and fought for stakes aforesaid. Thus ran the young and able men to and fro, to furnish themselves with stakes, and tooke wheresoever they could find, and whatsoever  was next hand: no man was forbidden, and so they were all readie with heart and good will, according to the Dictator his proclamation.
Then went the Dictator forth with the legions of footmen, the Maister of the horse likewise with his men of armes, in such good order and array, as might not onely serve for a speedie march to rid ground, but also for a set battell if occasion served. In both regiments they spared not to encourage and exhort their souldiours, according as the present time required: willing them to set foot forward, to mend their pace and make speed, that by night time they might reach to their enemies: and not (say they) before there was great need: for that the Romane Consull and armie were besieged, and had now three daies alreadie been pent up fast inclosed: and what might happen in one day or one night, no man knew: for oftentimes in the twinckling of an eie, and in the very turning of an hand, there fall out accidents  of right great moment and importance. On afore apace, Ensigne, crieth one: follow souldior, saith another. Thus went they also lustily forward, and all to gratifie and pleasure their captains. So that by midnight they were come into Algidum: and so soone as they perceived their enemies to be neere at hand, they pitched downe their ensignes. Then the Dictator rode about as farre forth as he could see in the darke, and having viewed well the situation, coasting, and fashion of the campe, commanded the Marshals and Colonels to give direction, That all the carriage and baggage, should bee laid up together in one place, and that the souldiours with their armour and stakes only, should come againe into their rancks. What he commanded was soone done. Then in the same order that he marched, he draweth out his host in length, and compasseth the campe of his enemies, and commandeth them all (upon a signall or watch word given) to set  up a shout, and presently upon the shout to cast a trench, and every man stucke downe his pale in the rampier. Having given this charge, straightwaies the signall followed. The souldiours doe that which they were bidden: the shout was heard over all the campe of the enemies, yea and into the Consull his campe: causing in the one great feare, in the other exceeding joy. The Romanes rejoicing one with another to heare the shout of their fellow cittizens and countriemen,

 with a conceit of their comming to rescue, begin of themselves from their sentinels and Corps de guard, to threaten and terrifie their enemies. The Consul set them forward and said, there was now no staying for the matter, nor delaies to be made: for that it appeared by that al'arme, that not only their friends were come with succours, but also had begon to skirmish: and that it was all to nothing, that their enemies campe, was alreadie on the outward side assaulted. Wherupon, he commandeth his souldiors to arme, and to follow hard after him. Thus in the night began the skirmish, and the legions of the Dictator by their outcry and shouting made signification, that the enemies on that side also were driven to their shifts and in great hazard. By this time the Aequians had addressed themselves to impeach them in their trenching and making of their rampier, to the end they might not be compassed about: but the al'arme was given and the skirmish  alreadie begun by their enemies within: fearing therfore, least they would breake through the midst of their campe, they turned from the pioners and workmen without, to them that fought withinforth, and therby gave the other leave to plie their worke and labour all the night long at their pleasure: and so they maintained skirmish with the Cos. until daie light. Now by the breake of day, they were entrenched on every side by the Dictator, and were scarce able to hold out battaile with one of the armies. Then the host of Quintius, which presently upon the finishing of the trench returned to their weapons, entered upon the mures and rampiers of the enemies. Here began a fresh conflict againe, and yet the former nothing abated. The enemies then, seeing themselves thus distressed and so hardly driven on every side, left fighting and fell to intreating: they besought the Cos. on one side, and the Dictator on the other, that they would not get the  victorie by effusion of bloud and cruell massacre, but would permit them to go their waies naked without their weapons. The Consull he posted them off to the Dictator: who being in great wrath and displeasure, would not be contented without their shame and ignominie besides. But commanded that Cluilius their general, with other Colonels and Captaines should be brought bound unto him. Item he enjoyned them to abandon and quit the towne of Corbio: as for the Aequians bloud, he sought not for it, he had no neede therof: they might depart with their lives. Howbeit, because he would have it now at length, maugre their heads, confessed, that their nation was vanquished and subdued; his will and pleasure was, they should passe al under the yoke or gallowes: the manner whereof is this. They tooke three speares or javelins, and set two of them pitched in the ground endlong, and the third overthwart fastned to the other. Vnder this kind of  gallows the Dictator compelled the Aequians to go.
Thus having gotten the tents of his enemies full of al kind of store (for naked he sent them under the yoke) the whole pillage he bestowed upon his own souldiors only: and rebuking sharply the Consuls armie and the Cos. himselfe, Yee shal (quoth he) souldiors, go without your part of bootie won of the enemie, whose bootie ye had like yourselves to have been. And as for thee, O L. Minutius, until thou begin to have the heart and courage beseeming a Consul, thou shalt be a Lieutenant onely over these legions. So Minutius being discharged of his Consulship, remained still as he was commaunded, with the armie. But so well were men content in those daies, willingly to yeeld obedience to them that better could command, That this armie in remembrance hereof, as of a favour received, rather then of a disgrace offered,36 Lb. angel gold L. Quintius triumpheth. both ordained for the Dictatour a coronet of gold of one  pound weight: and also when he went homeward, saluted him by the name of their Patron. At Rome the Senate being assembled together by Q. Fabius Provost of the cittie, decreed that Quintius should enter the citie in triumph with his armie marching in battail array as he came. Before his chariot were led the commanders of his enemies: the ensignes are carried afore, then followed the armie laden with spoile and pillage. Great cheere and banquets were set out, men say, upon tables at every mans dore. Thus making merry, they followed the chariot with songs of triumph, with sports and merrie conceits, as they are wont to doe at their great and solemne feasts. The same day L. Mamilius the Tusculane, with the approbation and good liking of all men, was enfranchised citizen of Rome. And forthwith would the Dictat. have resigned up his office, but that the court, held for the triall of M. Volscius, endited of bearing false witnesse, staied him, and in truth, the Tribunes would have hindered the judiciall proceeding against him, if they had not stood in awe of the Dictatour. But Volscius was convicted and had sentence, and departed to Lanuvium in exile. And Quintius having taken the Dictatorship for six moneths, gave it over the sixteenth day after he entred into it. About the same time the Consull Nautius fought valiantlie with the Sabines at Eretum: who besides the wasting of their fields, had an overthrow in fight. Fabius was sent into Algidum, to succeede in the roome of Minutius. In the end of

the yeare, the Tribunes began to stir, about their law: but because the two armies were absent, the  Senatours prevailed so much at that time, that no bils were propounded unto the people. The Commons likewise obtained, that they might create the selfesame Tribunes, now the fifth time. The report goeth, that there were seene in the Capitol, wolves chased away by hounds: for which strange fight, the Capitoll was purged. And these were the acts of that yeare. Then followed Consuls Q. Minutius and M. Horatius Pulvillus.
In the beginning of which yeare, whiles all was quiet abroad, the same Tribunes and the same law caused dissention and sedition at home: which would have growen to a farther mischiefe, in such heates men were, had not word been brought, as it were of set purpose, that the garizon at Corbio was surprized in the night by the Aequians and put to the sword: wherupon the Consuls called the Senate together: and order was given, that they should lead a Subitarie armie, and with a running campe invade Algidum. Then was the strife about the law laid aside cleane, and a new contention arose about the musters. But the Consuls with all their authoritie, were overswaied of the Commons, by the help and assistance of the Tribunes. At what time a new trouble put them in feare: for intelligence came, that a power of Sabines were come downe alreadie into the territories of Rome, for to fetch booties and make spoile: and from thence advanced against the cittie. Vpon which feare, the Tribunes were content that souldiors should be prest, yet not without this covenant indented: That for as much as they had now themselves these five yeares been trifled off and deluded, and that this Protectorship of theirs stood the Commons in little steed, in regard of their small number, therefore, there should from thenceforth be ten created Tribunes of the Comminaltie. The Nobles were so neere driven  and to such streights, that will they, nill they, yeeld they must thereto: with this provizo, that they should never after elect the same men Tribunes twise. And for feare that this act should after the warre was once past, turne to nothing, like as others had done before, they went in hand immediatly,(...) to call a Court for the election of the Tribunes. So in the 36. yeare, from the first Tribunes of the Commons chosen, there were ten created; out of every Ciassis, two. And by an act it was provided, that in such sort they should be created ever after. The Musters then being taken and souldiors enrolled, Minutius went with a power against the Sabines: but found not the enemie. And Horatius, because the Aequians after they had put the garison at Corbio to the sword, had won Hortana besides, fought with them in Algidum. Many a man there he slew, and drave his enemies not onely out of Algidum, but also out of Corbio and Hortana. As for Corbio  he utterly rased it, for betraying the garison there. After this, were M. Valerius and Sp. Virginius made Consuls. At quiet they were both at home and abroad. But great scarcitie there was of corne, by reason of the untemperate and unseasonable raine that fell. A bill there was preferred, That the mount Aventine should be turned to Commons.
And the same Tribunes were made againe: who, all the yeare following, when T. Romulius and C. Veturius were Consuls, in all their Haules and assemblies, still published the law: saying, It was a shame, that their number was thus increased to no purpose, in case their affaires should lie dead in their two yeares, as they had done in the whole v. yeares past. Whiles they were earnestly debating these things, fearfull messengers came in all hast from Tusculum, with newes, that the Aequians were in the territorie of Tusculum. The fresh desert of that nation would not suffer the Romanes for shame to defer  their helping hand. Wherupon both Consuls were sent with an armie, and met with the enemies in Algidum in their wonted haunt and accustomed place, where they encountered and struck a battaile: in which were slaine about 7000. enemies. The rest were put to flight. A huge bootie there was gotten, which the Consuls sold outright, by reason of the want of mony in their common treasurie. But this caused the souldiors to repine and grudge, and in the end ministred matter unto the Tribunes, to accuse the Consuls unto the Commons. As soone therfore as they were out of their office, when Sp. Tarpeius and A. Aeternius were Consuls: Romulius was arrested and put in suite by C. Claudius Cicero, Tribune of the Commons. And Veturius was likewise troubled by L. Halienus an Aedile or Warden of the Commons. Condemned they were both the one and the other, to the great indignation of the Nobles. Romulius was fined in(...) 10000 Asses. Veturius in(...). 15000. But for all this hard hap and calamitie that befell to those former Consuls, the new were never a jote more remisie and coole in the quarrell: saying, Well may we also be cast and condemned: and both Commons and Tribunes never the neerer to compasse and enact their law. Then the Tribunes giving over the law, which now by propounding onely so oft, was waxen stale and old; began more gently to deale with the Senatours, praying them to make an

 end once of all strife and contention.
And in case that the laws of the Commons so disliked and displeased them, they requested them to suffer certaine Lawmakers to be created indifferently out of the Communaltie, as well as of the Nobilitie, who might devise acts commodious and profitable to both parts, and for the equall libertie and freedome of all. As for the substance it selfe of this motion, the Senatours refused not: but they flatly said, that none but of the Nobilitie should have the making of those lawes. Seeing then they agreed thus about the lawes, and differed only and squared about the Lawgiver,Embassadours sent into Greece for an (...) of that lawes. there were Embassadors sent to Athens, Sp. Posthumius Albus, A* Manlius, and P. Sulpitius Camerinus: who were commanded to exemplifie and copie out, the famous and worthie lawes of Solon: to search out and learne the ordinances, customes, and rites of other citties in Greece. For any outward warres, this yeare was quiet, and the yeare following  more quiet, when P. Curiatius, and Sex. Quintilius were Consuls, by reason of the continual silence of the Tribunes: which, as the expectation of the Embassadours that were gone to Athens, and of strange and forraine lawes, first and principally procured: so, two mightie great calamities that rose both at once, to wit, famine and pestilence, noisome and loathsome both to man and beast, afterwards continued. By meanes whereof, the fields lay wast and desolate, the cittie was dispeopled with continuall burials: many right worshipfull and honourable houses, thereby mourned. Sergius Cornelius, the Flamine of Quirinus died thereof. C. Horatius Pulvillus the Augur went of it likewise: in whose roome the Augurs (his confreers) chose C. Veturias: and the rather, because he had been condemned by the people. Quintilius the Consull departed also this life, and foure Tribunes of the Commons. So that this was a yeare, with manifold losses  and calamities foulie destained. But for enemies, all was quiet. After this were C. Menenius, and P. Sestius Capitolinus made Consuls. In which yeare likewise there was no warre abroad, marry at home some troubles arose. By this time were the Embassadours returned with the Athenian lawes. And therefore the Tribunes were so much the more earnest and urgent, that once at length they would set on, to describe and put downe some lawes. And agreed it was, that there should be created Decemvirs,Ten Magistrates called Decemvirs, in (...) for the making of lawes. above all appeale: and for the yeare being, there should no other officers and magistrates be in place. Now, whether any of these might be of the Commons or no, that was a question: and hereupon some debate and controversie continued for a good while. At the last, the Nobles went away with it, and had the preheminence, upon this condition, that neither the law Icilia, concerning the Aventine mount, nor other sacred lawes should be repealed. Thus  in the three hundred and second yeare after that Rome was built, was the forme of the citties government changed the second time, and from the Consuls to the Decemviri, was the soveraign rule translated, like as before, from the kings to the Consuls.
This change was lesse notable, in that it long continued not. The beginning of this Magistracie was faire and goodly to see to, but grew too rancke, and exceeded in overmuch licentiousnesse. The sooner therfore it faded and fell away, and the former government was taken up again, and both the name and jurisdiction of Consuls returned, and was conferred upon twaine. The Decemvirs created were these: Ap. Claudius, T. Genatius, P. Sestius, L. Veturius, C. Iulius, A. Manlius, P. Sulpitius, P. Curiatius, T. Romulius, Sp Posthumius. Claudius and Genutius, because they had been Consuls elect for that yeare, had this dignitie bestowed upon them, in lieu of the  other. And Sestius, one of the Consuls the year before, because he had preferred this matter unto the Senatours, against his fellow Consuls will. Next to these were counted the three Embassadours that went to Athens, both for that they should be rewarded with this honourable dignitie, for their embassage into so farre and remote a countrey, and also because men were persuaded, that by reason of their insight and skill in forraine ordinances of strange nations, they might be well emploied in setting downe, and making of new. The rest made up the number. They say, that in the last scrutines and suffrages at this election, choise was made of those that were more aged, and farther stept in yeares, to the end they might not so fiercely and stoutly gainesay and crosse the opinions and constitutions of the other. In this new state of government, Appius was the man that bare the greatest stroke, he ruled the rost and swaied all the rest, so highly stood he in  grace and favour with the people. He had so altered his nature, and became such a new man, that all on a suddaine, of a cruell and terrible persecutor of the commons, he proved a very Publicola, and courter of the Communaltie, and one that lay for to get every gale of popular love and favour that might be had. Everie one fat his tenth day in place of judgement, and ministered justice in their severall turnes unto the people. On which day, the twelve knitches of rods were born by the Lictors before the soveraigne judge: as for his nine brethren, they had each of them one

serjeant to give attendance. In this agreement among themselves, (which accord otherwhiles  when they were private persons, had been hurtfull unto them) rested only and wholly the greatest equitie towards others. A proofe and argument of this their moderation, it shall be sufficient to observe now in the example and instance of one onely matter: For whereas they were created absolute, and past all appeale, it fortuned, that in the house of P. Sestius, a Nobleman, there was a dead bodie found buried, and brought forth openly into the publicke assemblie of the people. The thing being no lesse apparent in view, than hainous and horrible in fact, C. ^lius a Decemvir, brought Sestius in question therefore, put him in suit to answere at a certain day, and became plaintife unto the people, and accused that defendant, whose competent judge he was by order of law. And so he yeelded of his owne right: adding so much to the freedome of the people, as was taken from the power of his owne jurisdiction and governement. When as now both high and  low gave out, that this authoritie was sound and uncorrupt, and fet as it were from Oracle, and Gods owne mouth, and all men willing to accept of justice at their hands: then set they to it, and went about the making and giving of lawes.The (...) tables of ^^^^ne Lawes. And with great expectation of men, they set out t^^ Tables, and called the people to a generall assemb^^, commanding them in a good hower, and in the name of God to go, and (that which might turn to the good, to the benefite, and happines of the Commonweale, of themselves, their children and posteritie) to read the law there published: protesting, that they so farre as ten men could withall their wisdome foresee and provide for, had devised indifferent lawes, and equall for all sorts of calling, as well the best as the meanest. But for as much as the wits and heads of many men, were of deeper reach to see farther into things, they gave them good leave, to cast in their minds, and ponder with themselves each particular, yea and  to reason together from point to point, and thereof to deliver their opinion openly, what was short and wanting, or what was superfluous, in everie article: and looke what lawes the consent of all men seemed to bring in, those should the people accept, and none other: that it might appear they were not so much to approve of them, and give their assent after they were propounded, as to propose and preferre them their own selves. And when as they were thought sufficiently corrected, according to the speeches of men, and as every one spake to the severall titles and chapters of the lawes, as they were set forth: then in the high court of parliament, assembled of all the Centuries and degrees of men, the laws of ten Tables were enacted and established. Which even at this day, among that infinite number of statutes, heaped and hudled one upon another, are the verie well-spring and fountaine of all justice, both publicke and private. After this, there ran a rumour  abroad, That two tables were yet wanting, which if they were put unto the rest, then might the complete bodie as it were of the whole Romane law be finished and made perfit. The expectation thereof, now that the great Liet-day drew neere for the Election, made men very desirous to create Decemvirs againe, the second time. Now the Commons abroad, besides that they hated the verie name of Consuls, as well as of Kings, sought not greatly for the protection of the Tribunes: seeing that the Decemvirs one after another, yeelded in their prerogative, and admitted in some sort the appeale. But after that the solemne assemblie for the chusing of Decemvirs, was published against the(...) Trinundinum, or third market day next insuing, to such an heigth was the ambition and desire of this dignitie growne, that the verie cheese men, and principall heads of the cittie (for feare, I beleeve, least the possession of so great a governement, in case they were  not invested themselves in the place, should lie open unto some unmeet and unworthie persons) went about and made court to everie man, suing in humble maner to those verie Commons, with whom they had been at strife and variance, for that honour and dignitie, which they themselves had with all their power and might impugned. The worthinesse and reputation of men of those yeares, and having borne and gone through such offices, being now come in question, and submitted to the choise and judgement of others, pricked on Ap. Claudius, and set him forward. So as a man could hardly know whether to reckon him among the Decemvirs, or those that stood to be Decemvirs againe. For otherwhiles he was more like one that sued for an office, than him that presently bare office: blaming personages of best qualitie in the citie, and laying hard to their charge: but extolling the vainest and basest of the Competitors. Himselfe in person sorting among  the Duillij and Icilij, and such like as favoured the Tribunes, went swinging and squaring in the common place, using them as instruments to venditate himselfe forth to the common people. So long, as at length his verie brethren in office, who untill that time had beene singularly addicted and affectionated unto him, cast their eyes upon him, and began to marke, and marvaile much what his meaning was: reasoning thus among themselves: Surely there is no foundnesse

 nor goodnesse herein, but all meere dissimulation and hypocrisie.
Cerres, it is not for nought, that in such pride of his, there should appeare so much courtesie. What? to force his owne nature too much within compasse: to debase himselfe, and suffer private men to bee his fellowes, was a signe of one, that made not so much hast to forgoe a dignitie and promotion, as sought meanes to keepe it still. Openly they durst not presume to checke and withstand his ambitious desire, but assaied by pleasing and soothing him up, to represse and bridle his foolish affection. And seeing he was the youngest of his companie, they all with oneaccord laid upon him the charge, to hold the high court for the Election of Decemvirs. Their drift and pollicie was, that he should not elect his owne selfe: athing, which unless it were the Tribunes againe, (and that was a most dangerous precedent and example) no man ever had don  before. And he, with all his heart accepting therof, made profession that he would be President of that honourable court and Session, and praied to the gods that he might performe it for the benefit of the weale publike. And so, tooke the vantage of that opportunity, to set forward his owne designe, which they meant should have stopped and crossed the fame. And after he had by secret packing and canvasing with the other competitours, and given the repulse unto the two Quintij(Capitolinus, and Cincinnatus) and put beside the qui^hion his owne Vnckle by the fathers side (C. Claudius, a most stout and resolute champion of the Nobilitie) with other cittizens of like marke and qualitie: he creareth Decemvirs, such as were not for worth, port, and haviour, to them comparable, and his owne sweete selfe with the first. Which as there was no man thought he ever would have done, so all good men misliked when it was done. With him were  elected M. Cornelius Maluginensis. M. Sergius. L. Minutius. Q. Fabius Vibulanus. Q. Petilius. T. Antonius Merenda. Caeso Duillius. Sp. Oppius Cornicen. M. Rabuleius. And there an end of Appius playing another mans part. Off went his maske and visour now, and so from thenceforth, he began to shew himselfe in his owne likenesse, and to live in his kinde: yea and to frame his new companions to the bent of his bow, even before they were entred into office. Daie by daie had they their secret meetings by themselves apart from all other: and being once hereby furnished with ungratious and proud designments, which they had closely complotted together, they could no longer hold and dissimule their pride. Few might have accesse unto them: seld would they be spoken with, shewing themselves strange; surly, and churlish to those that came unto them. Thus drew they the time on, unto the15, day of May, Ides of Maie, which was the usuall and solemne daierhen, of entring  into offices of government. In the very beginning wherof, they made the first day of their magistracie noted, by an intimation and evident shew of exceeding terrour. For whereas the Decemvirs their predecessors, had observed this order, That one alone should have the rods of State borne before him, and that these regall ornaments should passe round through them all in course one after another: Behold, these came all of them abroad, and each of them had his xij. bundles of rods caried before him. So that these Lictors, 120 in number, with their rods and axes too, fastned within the rods, tooke up and filled the whole Forum or common place, as they went. And for as much as they were created absolutely, and their commission ran without all appeale, men made this exposition, That to go with their axes or without was all one, and made no matter at all. Thus there was a shew and representation of ten KK. And this terror grew more and more  not with the meanest and basest sort only, but also with the chiefe and best of the Patritians: supposing that they sought to pick a quarell, and to minister occasion and ouverture to some massacre: that if any man should offer either in the Senate or among the people, to speake one word concerning libertie, forthwith there should be exemplarie whipping and heading, to the terror of all others. For, besides that, from the people there was no remedie and succour to be had, by reason that the appeale unto them was quite disanulled and taken away: the Decemvirs themselves, drew so all in one line together, and were so combined and linked, that there was no hope at all, that one would thwart and crosse that which another did: whereas the former Decemvirs could well abide, that their judgements and sentences should be censured and corrected, by the appellation or appeale to one of their brethren in commission: yea and in some cases put off  some matters from themselves to be decided by the people, which seemed properly to belong unto their owne jurisdiction. For a while, the feare was to all indifferent: but by little and little, the Commons onely began to feele the smart. The Nobles were forborne and escaped cleare and scotfree: the meaner persons went to the wals, and with them they dealt according to their lust and pleasure right cruelly. The person wholy they regarded, and never respected the cause, as with whom favour and friendship prevailed as much as equity and right should have done. At

home in their houses, they determined of matters how they should passe: and in open place  they pronounced sentence accordingly. If a man had appealed to one of their bench, from him unto whom he fled for reliefe, he went his waies again by weeping crosse, repenting that he stood not to the order and injunction awarded by the former. It was thought and spoken also abroad, but the first author would not be known, That they had conspired together, not for the present time onely to doe wrong and injurie, but also were confedered betweene themselves privily, yea and had bound it with an oath, to call no assembly at all for the electing of newe magistrates: but being now once invested in the soveraigne rule, to hold the possession of the Decemvirship for ever. The Commons then began to looke about them, to behold and advise well the countenances of the Nobles, to see if they could from them, catch some good gale of wind, some hope againe of libertie, at whose hands they fearing bondage, had brought the commonweale  to this hard passe. The LL. of the Senate hated the Decemvirs, they hated also the Commons. They liked not of things as they went, and yet were persuaded that the Commons were well enough served, and deserved no better: who gaping greedily after libertie were now fallen and plunged into servitude and thraldome. Helpe they would not with the least of their fingers, but rather heape more wrongs upon them: that having a wearisome and tedious lothing of the present state, they might fall to a longing desire after two Consuls, and wish the old world were come againe.(...) more added to the (...). By this time now was the better part of the yeare gone and past: and the two tables of laws were annexed to the other ten of the former yeare: which if they might be once confirmed and ratified by a parliament of the Centuries, there remained nothing behind, for which the common-weale should need these magistrate: but expected it was certainly, that the assembly  for Election of Consuls should out of hand be published and proclaimed. Marry, there was one thing hammered in the Commons heads, By what meanes they might revive againe the Tribunes authoritie; the very grand bulwark of their freedome, and a thing that now had discontinued and lien dead. But all this while there was not a word of the new Election. And the Decemvirs, who at the first presented usually unto the Commons sight, a crew of those that favoured the Tribunes, for to attend upon their persons, (a thing right plausible and pleasing unto the people:) were guarded now, with certaine tall pensioners of their Nobilitie: whole troupes of them stood about their Tribunal feares and places of judgment. These made havock and spoile of the Commons and their goods: and looke what the mind of a mightie man stood unto and lusted after, it was his hap to have it, whatsoever. Nay, there was no spare now made of their backs and sides: some were scourged with rods, some lost their heads by the ax. And because this crueltie should not go unrewarded; lightly there was none executed, if he were worth any thing, but his goods went after, and were begged or given away. The youth of the Nobilitie, by this kind of hire well fleshed; not onely opposed not themselves to withstand these wrongfull dealings and hard courses, but carried it afore them, openly professing and avowing that they wished rather their own licentiousnes, than the liberty of al. The15 day of May. Ides of May were now come about, and no new magistrates elected in the others roome. Forth come the Decemvirs, (who to say a truth and to give them their right, were no other than privat persons) neither with mindes abated for the exercising of their imperious rule, nor with fewer regal ensigns, to set out and shew their honor and dignitie. When the people saw that, they made no other reckoning, but this was plaine usurping of  the Kings government, and no better: And now farewell freedome for ever and a day. For neither had they presently, nor hereafter were they like to have any man to recover it againe. So that now, not they onely let fall their hearts and were discouraged in themselves, but also grew to be contemptible in the eies of their neighbour-nations: who disdained highly, that they should have soveraintie of rule, who were not free themselves, nor enjoyed their owne libertie. For the Sabines with a strong power invaded the Territories of Rome: and when they had harried farre and neere, and driven away booties both of people and of cattaile, without impeachment, they gathered their armie together againe, that had raunged here and there up and downe, and retired to Eretum, where they encampe themselves: laying this for a ground, and building their hope upon the discord at Rome, that it would stay their mustering. Not only the newes  that came hereof, but the flying of the countrie pezants, put the whole cittie in great feare. The Decemvirs fall to consulting what were best to doe. And whiles they were to seeke what course to take, and betweene the hatred of the Nobles and the Commons utterly forlorne and destitute, there happened also another fearfull trouble in the taile of the former. The Aequians from another side were encamped in Algidum. And from Tusculum Embassadours brought

 tidings that their countrie was wasted with excursions from thence, wherupon they craved their help and aide. These fearefull occurrents so troubled and perplexed the Decemvirs, that considering the cittie was now beset at once with warres from two places, their stomacks were come downe to consult with the Senate. They commanded therfore the Senatours to be summoned to the Curia. And well they wist, what a great fit and storme of anger; displeasure and blame was toward namely, that they would burden them and lay to their charge, how they were the onely cause both of the countrie wasted alreadie, and of the perils like presently to ensue: looking for no other, but that there would be given an attempt and shrewd push, to abolish utterly their government, unlesse they stuck closely together to it, and by extending their authoritie sharpely upon some few of the stourest, quaile and crushe the attempts of others. After the voice  of the Bedell was heard in the Forum or common place, citing the Senatours to repaire into the (...) to the Decemvirs: the noveltie and strangnesse of the matter, (because they had laid do (...) for along time the manner of calling them to counsel) caused the Commons to marvaile and muse what was befallen, that they should after such discontinuance, take up a thing so forlet and out of use. And thus they conceived of it, that they were much beholding to their enemies, and might thanke war for this, that any auncient guise and custome of a free cittie was come up and in ure againe. They looked about on every side of the Forum, to see if they might espie a Senator: but few or none could they heare off, anywhere. Then looked they into the Curia, and behold, none at all appeared about the Decemvirs. Wherof, their owne selves, even the Decemvirs could gather no otherwise, but that in the conceipt and consent of all men, their government  was become odious: and the Commons also thus collected and interpreted, That the Senators met not together, because privat men (such as the Decemvirs were indeed) had no authoritie to assemble a Senate. And now, said they, is the way and entrance made to recover their libertie againe, if so be the Commons would joine with the Senate: and as the Nobles being called, meet not together in counsell, so the Commons likewise would refuse to be mustered. In this wise muttered and whispered the Commons. And in truth, scarcely was there any one of the Senatours about the common place, and but few within the cittie : for very griefe and indignitie to see that things went as they did, they had withdrawn themselves into the countrie to their lands: and forgetting the state of the common-weale, they became carefull of their owne privat affaires: thinking themselves so farre forth freed from oppression and wrong, as they were remote  and sequestred from the societie, meeting and conference, with so lordly and imperious rulers. When they would not assemble at their summons, the officers were sent unto their houses, both for to streine and take away stresses for their contumacie and disobedience : and also to enquire and learne, whether they refused to come at their commandement, of set purpose or no. And word they bring backe, that the Senators were in the countrie. The Decemvirs were better apaid to heare that, than if answere had come that they were at home and refused to obey. Then they gave commandement that they should be sent for: and they warned a Senate house against the next day following: where they assembled in more number than they looked for. Whereupon the Commons supposed that their libertie was bought and sold and utterly betraied by the Nobles, for that the Senate had yeelded obedience to them (that now by right were our of their office) as if they had given lawfull summons, who being private men had no power at all, so to do. But they shewed more obeisance and submission (as we have heard say) in comming to the counsell house, than any disposition to deliver their mindes and opinions there, to the liking and pleasures of the Decemvirs. First, L. Valerius Potitus, as it is recorded, after that Appius Claudius had proposed unto them the cause of their meeting, before they were required their advise in order and course, claimed the libertie of the house, to speak in the behalfe of the common-weale. But when as the Decemvirs denied it flatly, yea and forbad him with threats, upon paine of their high displeasure: he inferred againe and menaced, that he would go foorth unto the Commons, and so began a broile and tumult.M. Horatius Barbatus against the Decemvirs.
M. Horatius Barbatus likewise tooke part with him, and was nothing behind in stournesse to maintaine the quarell, terming them the ten Tarquines : and  are ye avised (quoth he) how the Kings were in times past expelled by the Valerij and Horatij? And yet the name it was not of Kinges, that men were so wearie of and loathed in those daies. For why? It was right lawfull to call Iupiter by that name: wherby Romulus also the founder of this Cittie, and other Princes his successours have beene called : yea and the name hath beene used and is retained still as a solemne title,A King Sacrificer instituted in the free state. in the sacred rites of holy Kirke.
Nay, it was the pride and oppression of the king, that then was odious, and nothing els: which enormities,

 if they were in those daies in the king himselfe, a lawfull prince, or in the king his sonne  intollerable, who can abide and endure the same in so many private persons? I advise you therefore to take heed how you debarre men of their libertie of speech in counsell house, least ye drive them thereby to speake their mind and complaine without the counsell house. Neither see I any reason at all, why it were not as lawfull for me a private man, to assemble the people to an audience, as for you to call the Senate together to a counsell. Make triall whensoever yee will, ye shall find how much more forcible our just greefe will be, in recovering our libertie againe, than this greedie desire of yours, in holding and upholping still your usurped, unlawfull, and tyrannicall rule. You have propounded here unto us, for sooth, concerning the Sabines warre: as who would say, the people of Rome can be at greater warre with any than with those, who having ben created Magistrates onely for the publishing and enacting of certaine lawes, have left now neither  law nor justice at all within the cittie. Who have taken away their Comices, i. Courts, and Lietes of Election, their yearely Magistrates, the successive change and course of bearing rule, the only thing that maketh Isonomise, and equalitie of freedome. Who being but private men, are possessed both of regall ornaments, and also of roiall government. After the expulsion of the kings, the Magistrates that succeeded were of the Nobilitie: in processe of time, upon the rising of the Commons and their departure, there were officers chosen out of the Communaltie. I demand of you, and I would gladly know, of whither State and bodie are yee? Are yee, I pray you, popular, and of the common people? What have yee ever done with advise and approbation of the people? Are ye Nobles and Peers? who now for a whole yeares space almost, have held no counsell of Senators. And now that ye have assembled them, you restraine them from speaking  for the Weale publicke. Well, presume not too much, neither beare your selves upon the timorousnesse of others. For, trust me truly, the indignities that men alreadie suffer, seeme more irkesome and unsupportable, than whatsoever els they can doubt and feare hereafter.
As Horatius spake these words aloud, and the Decemvirs could not be thinke themselves of some indifferent and meane course, either in anger to be revenged, or in lenitie to pardon and put up all, nor wist whereto this matter might tend and proceed in the end:(...) then C. Claudius, uncle to Appius the Decemvir, began to speake, rather by way of praier and intreatie, than in checking and reprooving wise, and besought Appius for his brothers soule sake, who was his owne father, to remember and regard more that civile societie wherein he was borne, than this ungracious and wicked confederatie, contracted with his fellow Decemvirs. And this request I make (quoth he) tendering  your private estate more than the Commonweale. As for her, if she might not by faire meanes, and with their good wils, obtaine her owne due and right, she would by soule waies, and in spight of their hearts recover it in the end. And for as much as, of much debate and strife there en^ue commonly heats of anger and cankred rancour, I am in dread and horror what the sequell and issue will be of these jarres. Now when as the Decemvirs would not permit the rest to speake, but only to the point proposed and occasion of their meeting, yet they were abashed to interrupt the speech of Claudius and to cut him off: but suffered him to go on untill he made an end. And in conclusion his opinion and sentence was, that he would not (to abide by it) agree, that any Act of the Senate should for that time passe in that behalfe. And all that were present tooke his words so, as if Claudius deemed no otherwise of the Decemvirs, than of private men. Many of them also, such especially as had been Consuls, were of his mind, and said as much. Another opinion there was, more rough and sharpe in outward shew, but farre lesse forcible and effectuall in deed: advising and willing the Nobles, to make no more adoe, but to goe together and chuse and Interregent. For this man seemed yet, to account and judge them Magistrates, (bad though they were) that had called a Senate, and held them in counsell: whereas the former, that would not abide any Act to passe,(...) reckoned them but for private persons.
Thus when the Decemvirs cause began to shrincke and goe downeward, L. Cornelius Maluginensis, brother to Cornelius the Decemvir, being reserved of purpose to give his opinion in the last place of all the Consular Senatours, such as had been Consuls, pretending a care that he had of the warre, tooke part with his brother and his Colleagues, saying, that he marvelled much by what misfortune or destinie it  happened, that the Decemvirs should be challenged and oppugned, especially by those that had stood for the Decemvirship, or by their friends and associates: and how it came about, that in so many moneths space, whiles the cittie was at rest and without feare of warre, no man made question or doubt, whether they that were in place, and governed the State, were lawfull Magistrates or no: and now at last, when the enemies are in manner at the gates, they should sow civile dissention,

 unlesse this were the meaning of it, that in a troubled state it would not be so clearly seen and perceived, what they went about. But no man is able (qd. he) to set down a true doome, and alledge a ruled case in so great a matter as this is, to men, whose minds are busied and wholly possessed of a greater care. And therefore my opinion is, that concerning that point which Valerius and Horatius charged the Decemvirs with, namely, That before the Ides of May their government was determined, and they out of office; the Senate should discusse and debate, when as the warres now at hand were dispatched, and the Commonweale brought once againe to quietnes. And that Appius Claudius should make this reckoning even now aforehand, and know, that hee is to tender a reason of that high court of parliament, which for the election of Decemvirs hee called and held, being a Decemvir himselfe: namely, Whether they were created for one yeare  only, or to continue still, untill the other laws which yet are wanting, were ratified and confirmed. As for the present time, he thought good that all other matters should surcease, and bee passed over, save the warre only: the rumour wherof, if they thought to be false, and that they were but tales that not only the messengers, but also the Embassadours of the Tusculanes reported, then his advise was to send out espials, who upon their discoverie might bring more certaine tidings. But in case they gave credence to messengers and Embassadours both, then with all speed possible to muster, and the Decemvirs to have the conduct of the armies, and to lead them whither they thought meet: and that nothing els should be thought upon before this. Which opinion of his, that it might prevaile and take effect, the punie Senatours by importunat canvassing, obtained. Then Valerius and Horatius both, rose up the second time more fierce and eager than before, calling upon them alowd, that they might bee permitted to speake concerning the Commonweale: and in case they might not bee suffered by reason of the side, to have the libertie of speech in the counsell house, they would speake their mind without, before the people. For neither could private men (as they were) debarre them in Senate house, or in open assemblie; and to give place unto their imaginarie, and pretended imperiall ensignes, they would never be brought. Then Appius supposing the matter wel-neere come to this passe, that unlesse the violence were resisted with like boldnesse, their rule was at an end, and their authoritie conquered: Yee were not best (quoth he) to speake but to the matter, whereupon we sit in consultation. And when Valerius replied againe, and said plainely, That he would not hold his tongue for a private mans commaundement: Appius sent a Sergeant unto him. Whereupon, Valerius cried  for helpe to the Quirites, from the porch of the Counsell house. Then L. Cornelius clasping Appius about the middle, without regard to content him whose good hee pretended, staied the strife. So by the mediation of Cornelius, leave was graunted to Valerius for to say his mind at his owne pleasure. But, for as much as his libertie proceeded no farther, than to some few words, the Decemvirs held on their purpose still, and had their desire. The Nobles also, such as had been Consuls, and the Ancients, upon an old cankred hatred that they bare still against the Tribunes authoritie, where unto they supposed the Commons were much more devoted and affected, than unto the government of the Consuls, were rather inclined and willing that the Decemvirs of their owne accord should themselves afterwards forgoe their office, than that upon hatred and malice received against them, the Commons should take heart of grasse, and hold up head againe. For if with gentle handling of the matter, without stir and clamour of the people, the regiment returned againe unto the Consuls, it would haply come to passe, that either by meanes of warres comming betweene, or through the moderation of the Consuls in their government, the Commons might in time forget the Tribunes quite.
Thus whiles the Nobles were silent and made no more words, a muster was proclaimed, and the younger sort of the people, seeing the governement of the Decemvirs absolute and without appeale, made answere to their names. And when the legions were enrolled, the Decemvirs took order and agreed betweene themselves, who should goe forth to the wars, and who should have the command of the forces. The cheefe and principall of the Decemvirs were Q. Fabius, and Appius Claudius. And for that there seemed greater warre at home than abroad, the Decemvirs  supposed the violent nature of Appius, sitter to represse all troubles and mutinies in the citie: and considering with all the disposition of Fabius, to be lesse constant and resolute in goodnesse, than active and quick in militarie service, (for this man having been in times past of great worth, both at home, and also in warre; the Decemvirship, and the conditions of his colleagues together, had so greatly changed, that he chose rather to bee like Appius than himselfe) to him therefore was imposed the charge of the warre against the Sabines, together with M. Rabuleius and Q. Petilius

joined in commission with him. M. Cornelius was sent into Algidum, with L. Minutius, T. Antonius, Caeso Duillius, and M. Sergius. And they ordaine and appoint Sp. Oppius as assistant to Appius Claudius, for the defence and government of the cittie, and to have the full authoritie of all the ten Decemvirs. But the Common-weale sped no better abroad in warfare, than it fared at home. The onely fault in the Generals was this, That they had made themselves odious to their souldiors and cittizens: all the weight els lay in the souldiors themselves. Who to the end that nothing might go well forward and prosper under the leading and conduct of the Decemvirs, suffered themselves to their owne shame, and dishonor of their captaines, to be defeated: for the armies were both by the Sabines at Eretum, and also by the Aequians in Algidum discomfited. They that sled from Eretum in the dead of the night, had encamped and fortified upon an high ground nearer unto the cittie of Rome, betweene Fidene and Crustumenia. And when the enemy pursued them still and provoked them to fight, they would never come foorth into the plaine and even ground, to encounter with them in a pight battaile, but stood upon their guard and defended themselves, trusting in the situation of the place and their rampier, and nothing upon their owne manhood and force of armes. But in Algidum they committed a more foule and beastly fault, and receaved with all a greater losse and overthrow: insomuch as having lost their campe with all their tents, the souldiors being turned out of bag and baggage, their harneis and implements of necessarie use, retired for refuge to Tusculum, hoping there to be entertained as guests, and to live upon the protection, mercie and devotion of their hoasts and freinds: who failed and deceaved not their expectation. But to Rome there came such fearefull news, that the Senatours and Nobles laying apart now all hatred against the  Decemvirs, thought good to keepe watch and ward in the cittie: and commanded as many as were able to beare armes, to keepe the wals and guard the gates: they gave order also to send harneis and armour to supply their want at Tusculum: moreover, That the Decemvirs should abandon the castle at Tusculum, and with their souldiors take the field and keepe the campe: That they likewise should dislodge and remove from Fidene, that lay fortified there, and remove into the countrie of the Sabines: so that by making wars upon the enemies first, they might scare and divert them from pursuing their intent of giving assault unto the cittie of Rome. Besides these damages and foiles sustained at the enemies hands, the Decemvirs committed both in warre abroad,(...) and also in the cittie at home, two most wicked and horrible facts. For whereas one L. Siccius, during their aboad in the Sabines countrie (upon an odious conceit and malice against  the Decemvirs) had gone up and down, and in secret talke whispered in the eares of the common souldiors, some mention of creating Tribunes, and of another insurrection and departure: him the Decemvirs dispatch afore, to espie out a convenient plot of ground to encampe in. Now they had given those souldiors in charge, whom they sent to accompanie him in that expedition, to set upon him in some fit place of advantage and to kill him. And kill him they did, but to their owne cost: for whiles he sought in his owne defence, some of those that laid for his mischiefe, died for it, and lay along about him for companie: for being a right stout and strong man of his hands, he stood to it couragiously: and notwithstanding he was beset round about, he defended himselfe very manfully. The rest that escaped bring word into the camp, that Siccius was fallen unawares into an ambushment, and whiles he fought lustely, was with certaine other  of the souldiors slaine. At the first, credit was given to him that brought the newes. But afterwards, when as there was a band of souldiors thither sent by the permission of the Decemvirs, to burie them that there lay dead: they observing none of their bodies there, to be disarmed and dispoiled, and Siccius lying in the middest in his armour, and all the rest of the dead with their faces towards him: no corps of enemie, nor footing of them departing thencefro, brought away with them his dead carcasse, and made report, that undoubtedly and past all peradventure, he was murdered by his owne companie. Hereupon was the whole campe fulfilled with hatred and detestation of this fact, and generally it was agree, that Siccius forthwith should be convaied to Rome, had not the Decemvirs made hast to solemnise his funerals souldior like, at the publike charge of the common treasurie. So, enterred was he with exceeding sorrow and mourning  of the souldiors, but to the most shamefull obloquie and infamie of the Decemvirs, amongst the common sort.
The (...) Now followeth the other heinous deede committed within the cittie: which began of wanton lust, and had as foule and shamefull an end, as that, which upon the carnall abusing and bloudie death of Lucretia, cast the Tarquines out of the cittie, and deprived them of their regall

 dignitie: that both KK. and Decemvirs, might have not only the like successe and issue, but also one and the selfesame cause, of loosing their rule and dominion. Appius Claudius enamoured upon a virgin, a commoners daughter, lusted to the abuse and spoile of her bodie. The father of the maiden L. Virginius, was of good calling, and in place of credit in the camp that lay in Algidum, and had the leading there of a companie: a man of honest example and conversation of life, both at home and also abroad in warfare. His wife likewise of vertuous disposition: so were their children nurtred and taught accordingly. He had espoused and affianced his daughter in mariage to one L. Icilius, a man of stout courage (as having been Tribune) and whose vertue and valour, had been well tried and approved in the quarrell and defence of the comminaltie. This damsell in the prime of her yeares, passing faire and beautifull withall, Appius (I say) cast a fancie  and liking unto, and so burned in love of her, that he assaied with gifts and faire promises to win her good will. But seeing all guarded and surely fenced with maidenly shamefastnes and honestie, he bent his mind wholy to cruell and proud violence. He suborneth and setteth on a favourite and follower of his, one M. Claudius, to make challenge and lay claime unto her as his bondmaid: and not to give place nor yeeld her unto them, that required to have her at libertie out of his hands, during the suite, and untill she brought proofe of her freedome: supposing, because the father of the virgin was absent, he had good opportunitie to worke this feate, and compasse his intended injurie. As the maiden therefore was comming into the market place, (for there were the schooles for peties kept, of reading and writing) the Decemvirs man (a broker to serve his masters lust) laid hold upon her, avowing that she was his bondservants daughter, and therfore his bondmaid: commanding her to follow him, and threatning besides, that if she made any staies, he would have her away perforce. The fearfull girle here at was amazed, and her nurce withall cride to the Quirites for helpe: wherupon the people came running and flocked together all about them. Now was the name of Virginius her father, and likewise of Icilius her spouse, verie gratious and popular: so that the love and favour wherein they stood, raised friends and acquaintance: and the indignitie of the thing besides, moved the wole multitude to tender the cause of the damosell. When as therfore she was now past danger of violence, the partie that made claime unto her, said there was no need that the people thus should gather togither, for his meaning was to proceede onely by order of law, and not with any violent course. And so he cited her to the court, minding to commense his action against her, and put her  in suite. Then they that were present to assist her, persuaded her to follow. Now when they were come before Appius, sitting judicially upon his tribunall seate, the plaintife or challenger aforesaid, declareth against her, and telleth a tale full well knowen to the judge himselfe, being the authour and deviser of the whole matter and argument: Namely, that the maiden was borne in his house, and by stealth was from thence conveied home to Virginius, and so was his supposed and reputed daughter: this he averred to have certaine knowledge of, by pregnant evidences and witnesses: and would make proofe thereof to be most true, and let Virginius himselfe be the judge, whom the greater part of this wrong deeply touched: in the meane while, it was but meete and reason, that the bond maid should go with her master. The friends and advocats of the damosell, having alleaged and pleaded in her behalfe, that Virginius was absent and emploied in the affaires of common-weale: and if he had word therof, would not faile but be at home within two daies: that it was no reason, that whiles a father was away, he should be in contention and controversie about his children: they required of Appius therefore to defer and put off the hearing of the whole matter, untill her fathers comming; and that according to a law by himselfe in that case made and provided, he would grant her to be at large and stand at libertie, for to bring in proofest that she was not bond: and that he would not suffer a maiden of those yeares, ripe and readie for a husband, to be more in hazard and danger of her good name, than prejudiced in the triall of her freedome. Appius made a long preface and discourse before his decree, namely, how much he favoured and tendered the cause of libertie, and to that effect, alledged the selfesame law which the friends of Virginius pretended for their purpose  and demaund. But so farre forth, and no otherwise, should there be in that law assured safegard of freedome, as the case altered not in circumstance of causes and persons. For, this priviledge and benefit held onely in those that were claimed to bee free, where any man whosoever might goe to law and plead. As for her, who was in her fathers hand and at his disposition, there was no other man els, unto whom the Maister that maketh challenge, is to yeeld the right of his possession. His pleasure therefore was, and thus he decreed, That the father should be sent

for: and that in the meane reason, hee that made title to her, should not bee prejudiced thereby, but that he might lead away the wench, promising and assuming to have her forthcomming, and to present her in court, at the returne of him who is pretended and nominated to bee her father. Against this injurious decree, when as many men rather muttered and murmured, than any one durst refuse and contradict it, P. Numitorius, the maidens uncle by the mothers side, and Icilius her espoused husband, happened to come in place: and having way made them through the throng and prease, the multitude thought verily, that by the comming, especially of Icilius, Appius might have been resisted and crossed.
But then the Lictor pronounced that Appius had passed an order and decree alreadie, and put Icilius backe: who cried out alowd, (for so manifest and horrible a wrong had been ynough to have mooved a very Saint, and set on fire a right mild natured person) Nay Appius (quoth he) thou hadst more need to set me backe with force of arms,(...) if thou wouldest goe cleare away, and not be spoken to, for that which thou wouldest doe in hucker mucker. This maid, I tell thee, I meane shall goe with me: I purpose to have her to my selfe, an honest and pure virgine, and enjoy her in lawfull marriage, as my wedded wife: call therefore unto thee all the Lictors besides (thou were best) that belong to thy companions: cause both rods and axes to be made readie: I tell thee, Icilius his espoused wife, shall not abide in any place without hir fathers house. What? although yee have taken from the Commons of Rome the Tribunes assistance and protection, and the priviledge of Appeale, two principall bulwarkes for defence of their libertie: yee are not therefore allowed to rule and tyrannise, and to fulfill your lust upon our children and wives too. Exercise your rigour and crueltie, and spare not, upon our backs and sides in scourging us, yea upon our necks and heads also, in taking them from our shoulders: so yee forbeare to assaile our chastitie and honestie. Wherunto, if any violence shall be offered, I will for my part, call for the helpe of the Quirites here present, in the behalfe of my spouse: and Virginius for himselfe will call to the souldiours, in regard of his onely daughter: we will crie for helpe of God and man: and cost it shall our lives before thou goe away with this decree, and put it in execution. I require and charge thee, O Appius therefore, to be well advised, and looke how farre thou doest proceed. Let Virginius when he is come, see to his daughter, how he dealeth about her: and let him know thus much for certaine, that if he give place to his plaintifes assertion, and forgoe the present possession of her, he shall goe seeke his estate and proprietie that he hath in his daughter. As for me, in this quarrell of maintaining the freedome of my spouse, I wil lose my life, before I faile in my faithfull promise to her made. Hereat the whole multitude was  moved, and like it was, that some mutinie and fray would presently have ensued. For the Lictours had hemmed in Icilius on everie side.
Howbeit they proceeded no farther than to big words and high threats: whiles Appius laid hard to Icilius, That he did not this so much in the behalfe and defence of Virginius, as, (being himselfe an unrulie person, and even alreadie breathing forth a Tribunes spirit) sought meanes, and picked occasion of an uprore and sedition. Howbeit for his part, he would not that day minister unto him any matter thereof. And that he might now well know, that he did not this to feed his malapert saucinesse, but in regard of the absence of Virginius, and for the name of a father, and the tender respect of freedome, hee would not that day fit to heare and determine the matter, nor award a definitive judgement in that case: but would request Mar. Claudius, to suspend his action, and to forbeare and yeeld so much of his owne right, as to suffer  the maiden to be bailed and goe under sureties, and to be at her libertie untill the next day. But in case her father appeared not in court the morrow after, he gave Icilius, and such as hee was, to wit and understand, that neither the law should want the patronage of the maker, nor the Decemvir faile in courage and resolution: neither would hee call together his fellowes officers and sergeants, for to keep under such seditious and turbulent spirits as he was: but would content him selfe with his owne Lictors, and doe well ynough. The time now of effecting this injurie, being thus deferred, and the maidens advocates gone aside, they agreed first of all upon this point, that a brother of Icilius, and a sonne of Nymitorius, two lustie and nimble young men, should be dispatched streight from thence to the gate: and that with all speed possible Virginius should bee sent for home from the campe: for that it stood the maiden upon, as much as her whole estate  and life was worth; that he would be present and readie in due time the day following, to preserve her from this hard course, and wrongfull proceeding. According as they were bidden, they set forward, and spared no horseflesh, untill they brought tidings hereof to her father. All this while the plaintife that made challenge to the maiden, was very instant with Icilius to baile her, and put in sureties. And he again made answere, That he went about it as fast as he could, and did nothing

 els: but indeed, trifling out the time for the nonce, untill the messengers that were sent to the campe, were gotten afore well onward on their way. Then the whole multitude on all sides held up their hands, in token that they offered themselves everie one unto Icilius, readie to become bound. Whereupon, he burst out into tears for tender heart. Gramercie (quoth he) my maisters all, to morrow I will use your helping hand: for this time I am sped of sureties ynough. So was Virginia set at libertie, and bailed by the suretiship of her kinsfolke. Then Appius, after hee had staied a while, because hee would not seeme to have sitten for that matter alone, when hee saw all other suits and causes ommitted, in regard they had to it, and no man comming to him for justice, he arose gat him home to his house, and wrote unto his brethren Decemvirs into the camp, that they should not give Virginius his pasport, but keepe him fast in durance, and in ward. This  wicked practise (as God would have it) came short. For Virginius alreadie had gotten his discharge, and was departed forward on his journey, in the evening by the setting of the first watch. And verie earely in the morning came the letters for to stay him, but all in vaine. For Virginius by breake of day was arrived: by which time the whole cittie resorted into the common place, standing and waiting wistly for his comming. And thither, he himselfe being in soiled and simple array, brought his daughter in her old worne clothes, accompanied with certaine wives, and a great number of advocats and friends: Then and there began he to go from one man to another, and to labour them hard: and not onely besought their assistance by way of intreatie and praier, but also required it as due and deserved: saying, that he stood daily in field readie to sight in defence of their wives and children: neither could there be reported of  any man more hardie exploits and valiant pieces of service in warre, than of himselfe. But what booteth or availeth all this (quoth he) to save the cittie from enemies, in case our children be forced to abide the utmost extremities that befall unto citties taken by the enemies? thus went he about preaching as it were from one man to another. Semblably Icilius cast foorth and redoubled like speeches freely and spared not. But the traine of women, with their still and silent weeping, moved men more than any words utteted. All this notwithstanding, Appius in his obstinat mind (so disquited was he and wholly possessed with a forcible spirit of humorous madnesse rather than of amarous passion) ascended up into the tribunall. Where, as the plaintife first of himselfe was framing some short complaint, that by reason of partiall favour and making of great friends, he could not have law and justice the day past: before that either he had made an  end of his demand, or given leisure to Virginius for to put in his answere accordingly: Appius interrupted the speech, and began himselfe. What preamble it was that he made before his decree, peradventure some auntient writers have for truth recorded. But for as much as I cannot any where find, in so shamefull a decree, that which carrieth but a shew and soundeth like a truth: therfore, that only which is of all agreed upon, I thought best to set downe, even the sentence barely without any preface at al: namely, That he iudged her in the behalfe of the Plaintife to be his bond-servant. First, all men there, wondered at this unworthie and foule act: and being strucken therwith astonied, for a good while after, stood still and held their peace.
But afterwards, when as M. Claudius, went to lay hand on the maiden, amongst the dames that stood about her, and was received with a piteous lamentation,Virginius his words to Appius. and crie of the women: Then Virginius beckning with his  hands and shaking them at Appius: To Icilius (quoth he) have I betrothed my daughter and not to thee O Appius: brought her up I have for honest and chast wedlock, and not for uncleane and filthie whordome: to be a wife another day, and not an harlot. Is this the manner of it, like bruit and wild beasts without all regard, to leape and run upon you care not whom, and to fulfill your fleshly lust? How these that be here will suffer such prancks, I know not: but they that are in camp with sword in hand, I hope, will never put them up. Now when as he that challenged the maiden was by a knot of women and advocates that stood about her repelled back, then proclaimed the bedell and commanded silence. And the Decemvir having his head intoxicate, and altogither carried away with unbridled lust, brake forth and said, That he had certaine intelligence and was informed of a truth, by manifest and assured evidences, (and not induced and led thereto by the  reviling taunts of Icilius yesterday, and the violent proceedings of Virginius, whereof he had the people of Rome to beare witnes, and which might give some light and presumptions) That the night past, there were meetings and conventicles in the cittie, and all to raise a mutinie and insurrection: and therefore, he not ignorant of such a broile and roiot toward, was come downe into the common place with a guard of armed men: not minding to hurt any one that would keepe the peace, but onely by vertue of the majestie of government and authoritie, to represse such as

troubled the peaceable state of the cittie: therefore it were best for them to be still and quiet. Go  Sergeant (quoth he) cause the people to avoid the place, and make roome for the master to lay hand upon his bondslave: and after he had thundred out these wordes full of ire and wrath, the multitude of themselves gave backe and made way: so the poore silly wench stood all forlorne and left as a prey to their injurious clutches. Then Virginias seeing all past helpe and no other remedie: Well Appius (quoth he) pardon me first I beseech thee, if upon a fatherly affection and griefe of heart, I have letfall some shrewd and curst words against thee more than was be seeming: Then, give me leave here before the virgin, to enquire of her nourice the truth of this matter, that if I have fathered her untruly, I may goehence better apaid and satisfied in my mind. Leave being granted, he led his daughter and the nource apart from the rest, neare to the church of Venus Cloacina, hard at the shops, called at this daie Nova Taberna, i. the new shops or  standings: and Virginia (...) killed by h^r in her Virginius. and there having caught a knife from a butcher, he thus spake: My sweete daughter, no other meanes have I but this onely to set thee free: and so he strake the damfell to the heart: and looking presently to the judgement seat, Here with this bloud I sacrifice thee Appius,and thy head to the divell. Appius with the crie that arose upon so horrible a fact, being much troubled, commanded Virginius to be apprehended: but he with bloudie blade in hand, made way where he went, untill with a number that followed him apace to beare him companie, he recovered the gate. Iulius and Numitorius tooke up the bloudlesse corps, and held it alost to the people: blaming and cursing the wickednesse of Appius: pittying the unhappie and unfortunate beautie of the damsell: and bewailing the hard exigent and extremitie of the father. The Matrones followed after and cried: Is this the condition and fortune allotted unto parents for getting and bearing  children? Is this the hire and guerdon of chastitie and virginitie: with other like speeches, which in such a case, women in their griefe of mind use to utter: whose sorrow as it is more heavie, proceeding from weake and tender hearts, so it yeeldeth and affordeth more pittifull and lamentable words, as they make their plaints and dolorous mones. But the men, and Icilius above the rest, had no other talke but of the Tribunes authoritie, and the appeale unto the bodie of the people, how they were taken away from them, and of other publike indignities and common discontentments. The whole multitude partly upon the hainousenesse of this wicked acte, and partly for hope by this occasion to recover againe their liberties, were all up at once in an uprore. Appius one while commanded Icilius to be called, another while for his disobedience and contumacie to be attached and convented before him. At the length, seeing no way made  unto the Apparitours, for to come by him, passed himselfe with a crew of tall gentlemen of the Nobilitie that were of his guard through the throng, and commanded to have him away to prison. By which time, there were gotten about Icilius not onely the multitude, but the chiefe captaines and ringleaders of the multitude, L. Valerius and M. Horatius: who having thrust the ferjeant backe, said withall, that if Appius had anything to charge him with by order of law, they would baile Icilius, and maintaine his cause against him, who was but a privat person: but if he went about to offer violence, he should soone meet with his matches. Hereupon grew a fierce braule and broile. The Decemvirs officer serreth upon Valerius and Horatius to lay hold upon them: but his rods were by the multitude broken to fitters. The Appius gerreth him up into the commonplace of audience, for to speake unto the people. Horatius and Valerius follow  after him up, to doe the semblable. Them the assembly heard with patience, but they hissed at Appius and cried out against him. Then Valerius tooke upon him, and commanded the Lictors to give attendance no longer upon a privatperson. Whereupon,Appius his heart was done and his courage quailed:and to standing in fear of his life, he was same to cover his face and to withdraw himselfe in disguised manner,and tooke an house over his head, neare unto the common place (unknown to his adversaries)there to save himselfe Sp.Oppius,for to rescue and succour his colleague, rushed from another side into the place: and there he might see force and might, to have gotten the upperhand of authoritie.After many devises and consultations, wherwith he was distracted,and framing himselfe to yeeld consent on everyside, at length by the advise and persuasions of many there about him, in great fear he commanded the Senat to be called togither. This appeased the multitude, for that they were in hope that(by meanes of the Senatours, who many of them, seemed to mislike the acts and proceedings of the Decemvirs) that government of theirs should come to an end. The Senat devised and tooke order, not to provoke the Commons too farre: and withall to have a more provident and specialleie, that the comming of Virginius into the campe, bred no mutinie in the armie. Whereupon were sent certaine of the punie

 Senatours unto the hoast, that lay encamped upon the hill Vecilius, who advertised the Decemvirs from the Senat, to endeavour all they could to keep the souldiors in good order, from commotion and sedition. But there Virginius raised a greater uprore and tumult than hee had left behind him in the cittie. For besides that, he was seene comming with a crue and traine almost of foure hundred men, who incensed with the indignitie of the late accident, accompanied him voluntarie from the cittie, his naked drawne knife, and himselfe bespreint and embrued with bloud, caused the whole campe to turne their eies upon him. Moreover, their gownes seene in fundrie places within the campe, made a greater shew of citizens in number than was indeed. Being demanded of them what newes, and what the matter was, hee wept, and for a good while held his peace. At the last, when as now the multitude, that for feare ran confusedly togither, began to  stand still and keepe silence:The complaint and more of Virginius in the campe. he declared orderly from the beginning to the end, everything in particular, as it was done.
Then lifting up his hands to heaven, and calling to all his companions and fellow souldiors, hee be sought them not to impure that soule act unto him, whereof in truth Appius Claudius was the authour and cause: nor to detest and abhorre him as a parricide and murderer of his owne children: saying, that his daughters life was more deare unto him than his owne, if she might have lived free and honestly, But when he saw her once haled by force, as a bondmaid to be ravished and made a strumpet, he thought it better to be berest of his children by death, than by contumelie and reproch: and so upon meere pittifulnesse incurred the shew and apparance of crueltie. And but that hee reposed some hope in the aid of his fellow souldiors, trusting that they would be revenged for his daughters death, he would not have remained  a livesman after her. I know well (faith he)that you also have daughters, sisters, and wives of your owne: And it is not the death of my child that hath killed and mottified the lust of Appius, but rather the longer it escapeth unpunished, the more outrageous and unbridled would it be. So that by the calamitie of another man, yee are well taught and warned to beware of the like injurie. As for me, I have burried my wife before, who died on Gods hand: and now my daughter, for that she might not finish the course of her daies, with the safetie of her maidenhead and chastitie, hath died, I confessed, a pitifull and lamentable, but yet an honest kind of death. As to Appius, (quoth he) now can he not fulfill his lust in this my house: and for any other violence of his whatsoever, I carrie the same mind and heart still, to defend mine owne bodie, wherewith I have alreadie saved my daughter. Nowlet other men looke to themselves and their children, as well as  they can. As Virginius uttered these speeches alowd, the whole multitude with one accord cried and protested, they would not faile, but both revenge his greese, and maintaine their owne freedome. The citizens also in their side gownes, intermingled among the souldiors, made the selfesame complaints: shewing how much more horrible those things were in the eie to bee seene in fact, than they could found unto the eare by bare relation: and withall reported, how at Rome the matter was welneere dispatched alreadie, for that there were certaine come after them, even hard at their heeles from thence, who brought word that Appius had like to have been murdered, and was departed into exile: and so far prevailed they with them, that they gave the al'arme, plucked up their standards, and tooke their way to Rome. The Decemvirs being fore troubled, both at these present occurrents which they evidently saw, and also to heare these news, in what  bad tearmes all things stood at Rome, ran up and downe, here one, and there another, into sundrie parts of the campe, for to appease the tumult. When they went to worke mildly and gently, they had not a word of them againe: but if any one laid his commaundement upon them, and extended his authoritie, they would beard them and answer, That they were men, and more than that, men in armes and souldiors. Thus march they in order of battell toward the cittie, and take the amount Aventine, and there settle themselves. And as they encountred any, all their song was this, to exhort and encourage the Commons to recover their franchises, and to create Tribunes of the Communaltie. Not a word was heard els, tending to any violence. Oppius assembled the Senate together: where it was agreed, not to proceed by way of rigour in any case: for as much as they themselves had given the occasion of sedition. But three auncient personages,  such as had been Consuls, were sent Commissioners in Embassage, as it were, Sp.Tarpeius, C.lulius, and P.Sulpitius with commission, to demand of them in the name of the Senate, by whose commandement they had abandoned the campe, or what their intent was thus in warlike maner to keepe the Aventine: and why leaving to war with their enemies, they had thus invaded their native countrie? They were not to seek of an answer, only there wanted a man to give the answere: for as yet they were growne to no certaine head, upon whom they might relie: and singly

by themselves they durst not incurre the hatted and dangerous displeasure that might ensue. This onely the multitude with one voice cried alowd, to send L. Valerius, and Marcus Horatius unto them, for to those they would make a resolute answere. The Commissioners being dismissed, Virginius putteth the souldiours in mind, and advertiseth them, how erewhile, in a matter not of the greatest importance, they were in feare and perplexitie, because the multitude was without an head: and how an answer was returned, although not altogether unprofitable and besides the purpose, yet agreed upon at a venture, and not proceeding from any publicke counsell. But now his opinion was, that there should beeten chosen to beare soveraigne rule: who for the honour of warfare and souldiers, should be called militarie Tribunes.And when this dignitie was to him offered first,You speech of Virginius, refusing a dignitie. Nay (quoth he) reserve still these your good persuasions and judgements of me, unto more happie daies and favourable times both to me and you.
For neither  doth the remembrance of my daughter suffer me to take joy of any honour in this life, nor(as the state standeth now troubled)is it good for you to have them to be your Magistrates, who of all other are most exposed to ill will and displeasure, and in neerest danger to be hardly thought of.If I may serve you in any stead, you may make bold, and have no lesse use of mee, remaining still a private person. So they create Tribunes militarie, ten in number. But all this while was the armie as unquiet in the Sabines countrie. For even there also, by the instigation of Icilius and Numitorius,the souldiors fell away from the Decemvirs and departed. For their minds were no lesse troubled and disquieted with the remembrance renued, of the late murder of Siccius, than kindled and set on fire by the fresh newes of the death of Virginia,so villanously, so shamelessely laid unto and challenged, and all to satisfie the lust of another. Icilius, so soon as he heard  say, that there were ten militarie Tribunes created in Aventine, fearing least the Election in the cittie should follow the prerogative of the militarie Election in the campe, as a precedent to create the selfesame men Tribunes of the Commons, being a man well seene and experienced in these popular affaires, and reaching himselfe at the same dignitie and promotion, wrought so with his adherents and friends, that before they went to the cittie, they should likewise elect the selfesame number with equall authoritie. Who entred the cittie with banners displaied, at the gate Collina, and marched through the mids thereofin warlicke order, up to the Aventine. And there joining and uniting themselves unto the other armie, they gave in charge to the twentie militarie Tribunes, to create out of their number twaine for soveraigne governours to rule all. So they elected Marcus Oppius, and Sextus Manilius.
The Senatours being in great care for the common-weale, fare in counsell every daie: where they spent time ofmer in wrangling and jarring, than in sage advise and politicke counsell. The murdring of Siccius,the wanton lust and loose life of Appius,the shamefull disgraces received in the warres, were laid in the Decemvirs dish. At length they concluded that Valerius and Horatius should go to the Aventine. But they refused and would not go, but upon condition that the Decemvirs would give up the ensignes and ornaments of that magistracie and government, which by right they should have for gone and departed fro, a full yeare before. The Decemvirs were grieved and complained, thus to beset downe and made no better than privatmen, and said flatly they would not be deposed from their place of rule, before those lawes were fully enacted and confirmed, for which at first time they were created. The Commons having intelligence  by M. Duillius,(who had been a Tribune of the Commons)that by reasons of continual debate and contention in the Senat house, there was nothing done and agreed upon, removed from the Aventine unto mount Sacer. For Duillius ceased not to suggest, and plainly affirme unto them, that the Senatours and Auncients of the cittie would never sadly thinke upon any care and provision to be made, untill they saw the cittie abandoned and desolate: moreover, That the mount Sacer would put them in mind of the constant resolution of the Commons; and that they should well knowe, that matters would never be setled and brought to concord, without they restored unto them their power and authoritie againe. So they take their waie by Nomentana Vis, which at that time was named Ficulensis, and encamped themselves in the mountaine Sacer;doing no harme to any creatures as they passed along: following therein the modestie  of their forefathers. The whole communaltie followed after the hoast: there was not one who for age was able to travaile on foote, that drew back and carried behind. Their children and wives be are them companie, in piteous wife moning themselves, and asking them: where to they would leave them behind in that cittie, where neither their honest chastitie might be guarded, not yet their libertie secured and kept safe. When as now, by reason of his uncoth and strange

 desolation, all seemed at Rome wast and void, and none to bee seene in the publicke place, besides a few of aged men: and when the Senatours were called into the Senathouse, the common place appeared emptie, naked, and forlone: then there were more besides Horatius and The remorstranres of Horatius and Vakerius, with other in the Senat, against the Decemvirs. Valerius that cried out and said.What looke yee for still my LL. of the counsell? What? and if the Decemvirs will make no end of their peevish frowardness, will yee let things run at sixe and seven, untill all come tumbling downe, or be of a light fire? And what goodly dominion is this, that you huggle so in your armes, that you clip and hold so fast? Will yee minister justice and give lawes to emptie housed and bare wals?
Are yee not abashed and ashamed, that there should be seen in the Place, a greater number welneere of your Lictors and officers, than of gowned citizens, and of all other men whatsoever? How and if the enemies should come against  the cittie, what would yee doe? Nay, what if shortly the Commons should march in armes, seeing we weigh their insurrection and departure so lightly? Will yee, together with the ruine and downefall of the cittie, end your rule, and not asore? Well, to be plaine, yee must either have no Commons at all, or els allow them to have their Tribunes againe: there is no mean, there is no other remedie.Sooner shall we went our Magistrates of the Nobilitie, than they will be without their Pattones and Officers of the Communaltie. They wrung and wested from our forefathers that power and authoritie firenew, and whereof they had as then, no proofe and experience: how thinke yee then, that having rasted now the sweetnesse of it, they will endure the want thereof? especially seeing, that we our own selves are not of so temperate carriage in our government and command over them, but that they have need of some succour and releese.And when these  and such like reasons were on all hands often alledged and laid abroad, the Decemvirs overweighed with the generall consent and unitie of the house, promised: That seeing it was so thought good, they would be wholly ordered and ruled by the Senatours. This onely they besought at their hands, and admonished them of, by way of a proviso, that they would take order for the safetie and securitie of their persons: and not by sheading their bloud, to flesh the Commons, and to nuzzle them up, and acquaint them with exercising crueltie upon the Nobles and Senatours. Then were Valerius and Horatius sent with commission to reclaime and cal home the Commons, upon such conditions and capitulations, as they should thinke convenient: yea, and to set all things in good order and make a finall composition, with a speciall charge to provide for the safegard of the Decemvirs, against the raging ire and violence of the multitude. These mediatours  tooke their journey, and were received into the campe with exceeding joy of the Commons, as being doubtlesse, their very saviors and redeemers, approved both in the beginning of their troubles, and now also at the very end and upshot of all. In regard whereof, they were welcomed with thanksgiving Icilius was the mouth of the multitude, and their proloquutor. Who when they came to debate and reason about the articles of covenants, and that these Delegates and Committees, required of the Commons, What the demands and points were that they stood upon?The demands of the Commons in mount Sacer. Being alreadie provided aforehand of purpose what to say, demaunded such conditions, as it was well seene, that they reposed more hope, and relied themselves rather in equitie, and indifferencie, than inforce of arms. For they require, Imprimis, to have the Tribunes power on foot againe; and the appealing unto the people revived: which before the creation of the Decemvirs  had been the onely helpes and succours of the Commons, Item, that no man should bee called in question, nor any way touched in life, lim, or goods, for gathering the souldiors or Commons together by way of commotion, for recovering againe their liberties and franchises. Only, their demand concerning the punishment to be inflicted upon the Decemvirs, savoured of crueltie. For they deemed it meet and reason, that they should bee yeelded into their hands, and then they threatened to burne them quicke with fire.The answer of Valetius and Horatius to the Commons. To these articles the Comittees spake in this wise.
As for those capitulations, which upon counsell and deliberate advise yee have articled, they are so reasonable and indifferent, that without your suit, they ought to have ben offered unto you franckely and freely: for yee request to enjoy such things as concerne the defense of your libertie and freedome, and maintaine not your licentiousnesse, to the offence and hurt of others. But as to your ire and wrath, it is to be pardoned, rather than to be followed and yeelded unto: as who, under colour of hatred and detestation of crueltie, run headlong into crueltie: and before, in a manner, that yee bee set free yourselves, yee will bee rulers and lords over your adversaries. Alas the while, and will our cittie never be at rest, and cease from punishing: but that either the Nobles will scourge the Commons of Rome, or the Commons whip the Nobles? As for you, ye had more need of a shieldywis, than a sword. Humbled hee is ynough, and too much humbled,

who liveth in a cittie on even hand, and equall with others, under the same lawes, neither doing  (...) taking wrong. And if ever at anytime you meane to shew yourselves dread and to be feared, when you have once recovered your Magistrates and ordinances againe, when ye have the law in your owne hands, to censure and judge according to your owne discretion, then may yee give your doome of our lives and goods, as each cause requireth. Now for this time it sufficeth, that yee claime and have your freedome againe. Hereupon they all submitted themselves to the deputed Delegates, permitting them to doe what they would. Who seeing they had brought all matters to so good a conclusion, promised to returne with al speed. So they took their leave. And when they had declared to the Senatours the demands of the Commons, all thereft of the Decemvirs, perceiving no mention at all made of their punishment (a thing more than they looked or hoped for) denied no one point thereof.
But Appius, man of a fell and cruell nature, and who above all the other was most odious, and lay open to the malice of the people, and measuring the hatred of others toward himselfe, by his owne ranckour that hee bare against other men: I wot well (quoth he) what ill fortune will betide me shortly: and I see plainly, that our adversaries hold off to bicker and buckle with us, no longer than untill they have weapons given them in their hands. To satisfie this their malice and hatred, we must part with our bloud: nothing else will content them. For mine owne part, to renounce my Decemvirship I weigh not: neither passe I how soone I doe it. Then was an Act made by the Senat, that the Decemvirs out of hand should surrender their place: and that Q. Furius the Archbishop or High priest, should create Tribunes of the Commons: provided alwaies expressely, that the mutinie of the souldiors, and insurrection of the Commons, should turne no man to displeasure  and harme.^spand^ government These Actes being passed, and the Counsell risen, the Decemvirs came abroad into the open place of assemblies, and there to the exceeding joy of all men, they resigned up all their power and authoritie. Tidings here of were carried to the Commons, by the mediatours aforesaid: and looke, what people soever remained behind in the citie, went now forth to accompanie them. As this multitude passed along forward, they were encountred upon the way, with another joyfull companie from out of the camp. Who rejoyced mutually one in the behalfe of the other, that both freedome and concord were restored to the cittie againe.
Then the mediators in the generall assembly of them all spake and said: To the great good, happinesse and selicitie of you and of the C.W. be it spoken, Returned in Gods name into your owne countrie, to your houses, wives and children: but see, that as ye have demeaned yourselves modestly in your  way hither, hurting and spoiling no mans lands and possessions, notwithstanding the neede ye were driven unto of so many things: so ye carry the same moderation and stay of yourselves homeward into the cittie. Go into the Aventine from whenceye came: and there for good lucke sake, where ye laid the first foundation and ground-worke of your libertie, create ye shall your Tribunes of the Commons. There, will the high priest be readie and give attendance, to call an assembly for the graund Election. Great was accord alacritie and cheerefulnesse, that they shewed in approving all that was propounded. So from thence they turne their standards and ensignes, and as they marched to Rome, they strove avie with all they met on the way, who could shew most joy and gladnesse: they passe on through the cittie armed as they were, yet peaceably and without noise, untill they came into the Aventine. Where the chiefe priest immediately  held the (...) the magistrates Comices,(...) of the Commons (...) in which they created for Tr. of the C. first and formost L. Virginius, next after him L. Icilius and P. Numitorius, Vackle by the mothers side of Virginia: all authours of their insurrection and departure: then, C. Sicinius, descended from him in right line who was the first Trib. of Comm. created in mount Sacer, (as we finde in records) and M. Duillius, who before the choosing of Decemvirs, had right worthely and notably borne the Tribuneship, and in all combats and bickerments with the Decemvirs, stuck close to the comminaltie and never failed them. After these, were elected, more for hope than any former defart, M. Tilinius, M. Pomponius, C. Apronius, Ap. Iulius, C. Oppius. Then C. Icilius immediately in the very entrance into the Tribuneship, preferred a bill unto the Commons, and the Commons enacted it, That the departure and insurrection of the common people against the Decemvirs, should  not be laied to any mans charge, nor bring him into trouble. Then without farther delay M. Duillius went through with an Act of his own, to wit, That there should be Consuls created, with reservation of libertie to appeale unto the people. All these things passed in the Comices of the Commons, assembled in the meddowes named Flaminia, which now they call Circus Flaminius.

 Then, by an Interregent were Consuls created, L. Valerius and M. Horatius, who presently began their government.Consuls elected again. Whose popular Consulship,Consuls elected again. as it was without wrong doing to the Senatours and Nobles, so it was not without some offence committed of their part: For whatsoever was provided for the liberties of the Commons, they supposed it abridged somewhat of their power and authoritie. And first and formost, whereas it was a question and cotroversie not well cleared in law, Whither the Nobles were bound to stand to the Acts of the Commons: they made a law now in a general Session, by the suffrages of the Centuries, That what ordinance soever the Commons (being parted by Tribes) had by their voices granted, it should comprise and bind the whole bodie of the people. By which law, the Tribunes actes were armed with a most sharpe and keene weapon to strike withall. Moreover, The other consular law concerning Appeale, the  onely fort and strength of libertie, which by the Decemvirs absolute power had been overthrowen, they not onely revive againe, but also fortifie the same for the time to come, by making a newlaw, forbidding expressely that no man should create any magistrate absolutely without the libertie of Appealing: and whosoever should create any such, he might rightfully and lawfully be killed, and that murder should not bee counted a capitall crime. And when they had sufficiently strengthened the Commons, on the one side with the benefit of appealing, and on the otherside with the Tribunes power: in favour of the Tribunes themselves, that they also might seem sacrosainct and inviolable (a thing now almost grown out of remembrance) they renewed that high priviledge, with certain solemne ceremonies, which having ben of long time sorlet and neglected, were now brought up againe and put in ure. And they ordained them to be inviolate, as well in a reverent regard of religion and scruple of conscience, as also by a speciall law in that behalfe provided: namely, that whosoever hurt either Tribunes of the Commons, Aediles, Judges, or Decemvirs, his head should bee accursed and devowed to Iupiter, and his familie sold in portsale sale at the church of Ceres, Liber and Pro^erpin^ secundum Arm^h. and (...). Libera. By vertue of this Act, the great Expositours of the law, denie that any man is sacrosainct or inviolable: but (say they) it is enacted only, That whosoever hurt any of them, shall be accursed. And therefore, an Aedile may be attached and led away to prison by superior Magistrates. Which although it be not warranted by law (for hee is hurt, who by this law ought not to bee hurt) yet it is a good argument to prove, that an Aedile is not inviolable. Marry, as for the Tribunes, they were indeed by vertue of an ancient oath of the Commons, at what time as they first created that power and authoritie, inviolable: as they would  seeme to expound and make construction of the law. Others have beene, that thus open and interprete the law, That in this selfesame Act of Horatius, the Consuls also, yea and Pretours too, (because they are created by the same auspicia or birdsignes that the Consuls be) were comprised, and had the benefite thereof. For a Consull is called by the name of a Iudge. But that exposition is confuted, for that in those daies it was not the manner to tearme the Consul a Iudge, but the Pretor onely. And thus much concerning the Consular lawes.
The same Consuls also brought up this order and custome, that all the Acts of the Senat should be brought into the church of Ceres, and presented unto the Aediles of the Commons: which aforetime were suppressed and smothered, yea and corrupted or perverted at the will and pleasure of the Consuls. After all this, M. Dullius a Tribune of the Commons, propounded  unto the Commons a law, and they let it passe and graunted it, That whosoever should leave the Communaltie destitute of their Tribunes, or create any Magistrate absolute without Appeale, should be scourged, and lose his head for it. All these Acts, as they passed against the wils and minds of the Nobles: so they went cleane without their contradiction: for that, all this while hitherto, there was no rigour and severitie that seemed to extend and reach to anyone particular person among them. But afterwards, when as both the Tribunes power, and also the Commons freedome, were once well and surely grounded: then the Tribunes, supposing now it was ful time, that they might safely and without perill give the onset upon them, severally one by one, made choice of Virginius to bee the first accuser or plaintiffe, and Appius Claudius the first defendant. And Virginius had not so soone arrested Appius to answere at a day, and Appius come downe into  the Common place, guarded with a companie of tall yong gentlemen of the Nobilitie: but presently upon the sight of him and his guard about him, the remembrance of that most cruell and detestable tyrannie was refreshed and renued.Virginius his accusation of Appius.
Then Virginius: Speeches (quoth hee) and Orations were devised for doubtfull causes: and therefore will I neither spend time in accusing him before you, from whose crueltie yee have by force of armes delivered yourselves: nor suffer this wretch, over and besides his other wicked prancks, to shew in the defence of himselfe his

audacious impudence. Therefore, as touching all other lewd parts of thine and wicked designements, O Appius, which thou hast for these two years ungratiously and impiously enterprised and practiced one in the neck of another. I will do thee some favor, and pardon thee: but for one crime only, unlesse thou canst acquire thy selfe the better, namely, that thou being the judge, against all order of law, didst not grant unto the party defendant, the benefit of liberty to go at large, during the time of the suit depending, untill she might bring proofes of her freedome; for this, I say, I command thee to prison. Now had Appius no hope at all, either in the Tribunes helping hand, or in the dome and judgement of the people. How be it he both called upon the Tribunes for succour: and also seeing himselfe tugged and haled away by the officer, and no man state his hand; I appeale (quoth he) unto the people. This one word in maintenance of freedome, being heard to come out of that mouth, that lately had given sentence on his side, that impeached the freedome  of one, and challenged the partie for bond, caused silence.
And when every man to himselfe secretly muttered in this wife: I see well (when all is done) there are Gods in heaven, and such gods as neglect not the affaires of mortall men. Pride and crueltie (although it bee long first) at length will surely have a fall, and throughly be punished. Lo, how he is now saine to appeale, who aforetime abolished and tooke away all appeale: he humbly craveth reliefe of the people, who heretofore trod underfoot all rights and franchises of the people: and see how he is carried to prison, destitute and deprived of the benefit of libertie, who awarded and adjudged a free bodie to bondage and servitude. Amidst these words I say, that might be overheard in that confused humming of the assembly; Appius also was perceived to call unto the people of Rome for  reliefe and mercie.(...)
He reckoned up withall, the deserts of his auncestours in the behalfe of the C.W. both at home in the cittie, and abroad in the wars: he alleadged his own unhappy affection (when time was) to the cominaltie of Rome, and partaking with them: and namely how with the exceeding displeasure of the Nobilitie, he resigned up his Consulship, and all for to bring in and establish, equall and indifferent laws to both parties. He rehearsed moreover his own laws, which not with standing they remained still in force and strength, he, the lawgiver himselfe, was going to prison. But concerning his owne proper parts and deserts good or bad, he would then make triall thereof, (he said) when he should be permitted judicially to make his defence: as for the present time, he pleaded the common benefit of the citie, to wit, that being a Citizen, he might at the appointed daie, speake for himselfe, and stand to the dome of the people: neither feared  he the hatred and malice of men so much, as to repose no hope at all in the equitie and mercie of his neighbours and fellow citizens. But and if he were cast into prison and not suffered to come unto his answere, then he would once againe call upon the Tribunes of the Commons for their help, and admonish them, not to follow and imitate them, whom they would seem to hate. And in case the Tribunes will be known and avow, that they are linked in the same bond and covenant, to abolish and take away the benefit of calling unto any one of them by way of mediation, (against which they have charged and blamed the Decemvirs for complotting and agreeing together) then he said, that he appealed unto the people, and had recourse for succour unto the lawes concerning appeale, made as well by Consuls as Tribunes, that present yeare and no longer ago. For who may ever hereafter (quoth he) have benefit of appeale, if it be not lawfull for me, who stand yet not condemned, nor attainted, and have not pleaded for my selfe? what commoner, what meane person may find reliefe by those lawes, if Appius Claudius may not? It will be seene in me, and mine example shall be a precedent and proofe to others, Whether by these new statutes, lordly rule, or equall libertie be established: whether the calling for helpe by way of mediation and intercession, or by plaine appealing against the wrongfull proceedings of magistrates, be granted in very deede, or but onely pretended in bareshew, under vaine colourable pretences and foolish letters patents.The reply (...) of Virginius upon Appius
Against all this, Virginius made his rejoinder and said, That Appius was the man alone exempt out of all benefit of lawes, and excluded from all civile and humane societie. Let men but looke backe toward the tribunal feare, the very well head as it were and receptacle, the fortresse and hold of all wickednesse: whereon that perpetuall Decemvir practising his crueltie upon the goods, the bodies and lives of free citizens, menacing  whipping cheere and hangmans worke unto all persons; a contemner both of God and man, garded with a crue of executioners and butcherly tormentours, rather than Serjeants, proceeding on from spoile and bloudshed to set his heart on lecherie and carnal lust, plucked a maiden by birth free, from out of the very armes of her father, as if she had ben taken captive in war; and that, in the fight of the people of Rome, and gave her away to one of his followers, even to

 a groome of his bedchamber. Where, by a cruell decree of his, and detestable sentence, adjudging her bond, he caused the father to lay violent hands upon his owne daughter: where he commanded, the espoused husband and Vnckle of the Virgin (that tooke up her bodie halfe dead) to be had away to the Gaol, as being more displeased with them, for disappointing and putting him beside his purpose of abusing and spoiling her, than for the murder upon her by them committed. Adding moreover and besides, That he had built a prison, which hee used to tearme The habitation and dwelling house of the Commons of Rome. And therefore, plead hee eftsoones, and as often as hee will, his appeale, I will not give over (quoth Virginius) but as often tender a judge betweene, and be able to prove, that he gave not sentence, and pronounced her free,Appius commited to prison but bond: but in case hee will not abide to bee consured by a competent judge, then I command  him to be carried to prison, as attaint and convicted. Thus was he committed toward: and as there was none misliked of this proceeding, so everieman was greatly troubled in spirit, to see so great a personage punished, and the very Commons themselves thought their liberty too large and excessive. The Tribune set him downe a day (before hand) to plead for himselfe and make his answere.
Amid these affaires, there came to Rome Embassadours from the Latines and Hernicks, to congratulate, and to shew their joy and great contentment, for the unitie and concord betweene the Nobles and the Commons: in token whereof, they brought as a present unto Iup.Opt.Max. a crowne of gould, not very massie in weight, but according to their abilitie, which was not much, yet aunswerable to their devotion: which men performed rather with religion and zeale  in those daies, than in portly shew and magnificence. By relation and intelligence from them they were certified also, that the Aequians and Volscians prepared warre with all the power they could make. Wherupon, the Consuls were commanded to part their provinces between them. To Horatius befell the Sabines, and to Valerius the Aequians and Volscians. And when they had proclaimed musters against these warres, such was the forward affection and favour of the Commons, that not onely the younger folke, but also a great sort of those that by law were dispensed with, and discharged from warfare, and lived of their pensions, offered their voluntarie service, and were readie to enter their names into the muster-masters booke: whereby the armie was not onely in number greater, but also for the goodnesse of men, more puissant, as having the old, beaten, and experienced souldiors among them. But before they went out  of the cittie, the Decemvirall lawes, (which now are knowne by the name of the twelve Tables,) they set up openly to beseene, engraven in brasse.The lawes called the twelve tables. Some writers have delivered, that the Aediles performed this office, as they had it in charge from the Tribunes. C. Claudius, who upon a detestation and deepe hatred of the Decemvirs leaud and wicked enormities, but especially above all others, of the insolent pride of his brothers sonne, which hee could no longer abide, had removed and departed to Regillus, his old native countrie.
Hee being now a very aged man, returned to sue and intreat for his deliverance out of danger, whose vices hee abhorred: and in sullied weed and poore array,C. Claudius his petition in the behalfe of App. Claudius. accompanied with those of his linage, and other his followers and vassals, went through the common place, and laboured everie man one by one, Beseeching them not to set that brand of ignominie, and bring such a staine upon the house and name of the Claudij, as that they should bee thought worthie of imprisonment and yrons: nor suffer a man of most honourable qualitie, a singular patterne of Nobilitie to his posteritie in time to come, the lawmaker and founder of the Romane lawes, to lie in chaines amongst fellons, night-theeves and robbers by the high way side: but to turne away their minds a while from anger and wrath, and encline to a due regard and consideration of matters: and rather at the suite and earnest petitions of so many of the Claudji, to forgive them one man, than for the hatred of one man, to reject the praiers of so many suppliants. As for himselfe, he protested that he did thus much for kinred and names sake. Neither was he reconciled unto him, and they made friends again: yet could he wish, that his adverse fortune and poore condition were relieved. Concluding with this in the end, That as their libertie was recovered againe by vertue and prowesse, so the concord of all degrees and  estates might be established sure by clemencie. Some there were whom he mooved, more in regard of his owne kindnesse and love, than in any respect of him for whom he spake. But Virginius praied them, To take pittie and compassion rather, of him and his daughter, and to give eare to the praiers and supplications, not of the Claudij, who have had the day, and tyrannised over the Commons, but to the neerest friends of Virginius, the three Tribunes, who being created for the aid and succour of the Commons, doe now themselves implore and beseech the helpe and assistance

of the Commons. And verily these tears were thought more reasonable, and like to speed  Thus when Appius law all meanes of hope cut off, before the foresaid day appointed was come,Appius killeth himselfe killed his owne selfe. Soone after this, Sp. Oppius, who of all the rest next unto Appius, was most hated: for that hee was in the cittie at the very time when this unjust doome and sentence of his colleague happened to be pronounced, was attached by P. Numitorius. But Oppius was the worse thought of and more prejudiced, by occasion of an injurie by himselfe done, than for not stopping the wrong intended by Appius to Virginia. For a witnesse was produced to depose against him, one, who having served in the warres seven and twentie yeares, had beene rewarded and honoured extraordinarily eight times. This valiant servicour, thus adorned with those gifts and markes of valour, in the view and sight of the people of Rome rent his garments, and shewed his backe and sides, and the skin all broken with scourging: beseeching no other favor, but if Oppius the partie  accused, could justly charge him with any trespasse and offence by him committed, he should not spare him, but now a private person as hee was, exercise and redouble his crueltie upon him once againe. Well, Oppius likewise was had to prison: and there before the law day, ended his life. Oppius dieth in prison The goods of Appius and Oppius both, the Tribunes did confiscate. Their compartners also and fellow Decemvirs fled their countrie and were banished, and all their goods also were forfeit and confiscate. And not so much as M. Claudius, the partie that laid claime unto Virginia escaped, but he was arrested to answere at a certaine day, and was condemned. Howbeit Virginius of himselfe released him his life, and would not take the extremitie, so he was sent away and confined to Tybur, as it were into banishment. Thus the poore spirit and ghost of Virginia, more happie after her death than fortunate during her life, having wandered abroad, and haunted so many  houses for due revenge of her adversaries: at last, when there was not one guiltie person of them left unpunished, gave over her walking, and rested quiet.
Now were the Nobles in exceeding feare, beholding the same countenance alreadie in the Tribunes, which they had observed in the Decemvirs.
But then M. Duillius, a Tribune of the Commons, wisely and politickely restraining and keeping within a meane this excessive power of others: We have ynough (quoth he) both of our owne libertie, and also of revenge of our ene^ue: and therefore I will not suffer for this yeare, any man more to be arrested or imprisoned. For I doe not like that old faults done and past, and now as it were cancelled and rased out, should be revived againe, and brought in question, since that by the punishment of the Decemvirs, satisfaction had been made for the new: and the continuall care and diligence of the Consuls both  ^waine, for the maintenance of your freedome assureth me, that nothing wil be committed hereafter, that may require and need the power of the Tribunes. This moderation at the first hand of the Tribune, put the Nobles out of their feare: but made the Consuls to bee thought the worse of, (for that they had been so addicted, wholly to the Communaltie) in that a Magistrate of the Commons had more regard of the safetie and libertie of the Nobles, than the proper Magistrate of the Nobilitie: and because the adverse part had their full of revenge and punishment of the Nobles, before it did appeare that the Consuls would once seem to stop the course and streame of their licentiousnesse. And many there were who gave it out, that the Consuls bare themselves too remisse and slacke in the matter, and little respected the good and credite of the Nobles, in that they had approoved and confirmed the Acts that were proposed by the Tribunes. And no  question, troubled as the state was then of the C.W. they were forced to give place, and doe according to the necessitie of the time.
When the Consuls had set all things in good order within the cittie, and surely grounded the state of the Communaltie, they went either of them into their owne province. Valerius against the armies of the Aequians and Volscians, which now had joined together in Algidum: where full pollitickely he held off, and stood upon his defence onely: for if out of hand he had put it to the hazard of a battell, I cannot tell, but I greatly doubt (considering how the hearts of Romans and enemies both, were affected, presently upon the unfortunate conduct of the Decemvirs) it would have turned to their great losse, and cost them an overthrow. Hee therefore having encamped a mile off from the enemies, kept his souldiors within the campe. The enemies raunged in battaile  array, tooke up the whole ground between both campes, and when they made bravadoes, and challenged them to come forth and fight, not one Romane would answere them again. At length the Volscians and Aequians, wearie with long standing still, and in vaine expecting battell, thinking verily, that the honour was in manner yeelded unto them, departed: some into the countrie of the Hernikes, other some to the territories of the Latines, for to raise booties and make spoile:

 leaving behind them rather a competent guard for defence of the campe, than a sufficient power to maintaine a field-fight. Which when the Consull perceived, he paid them againe with the like measure of feare, as they before had from them received; and with his armie readie embattled, biddeth them battaile: who being privie to themselves what forces were wanting, forbare to fight: whereupon the Romanes presently tooke a better heart unto them, and made account that their enemies were overcome, being in such a feare within their rampier. When they had stood thus a whole daie readie to fight, they retired backe in the evening and gave place to the night. And the Romanes full of good hope, refreshed their bodies and made much of themselves, but the enemies nothing so hartie and couragious, send out messengers every way in fearfull hast, to call againe the forraiers. Such as were neare at hand came running backe into the camp: those  that were father off, could not be found not met withall. Now when it was once day light, the Romanes issue forth of the camp, intending to give an assault upon the rampier, unlesse they would come forth and fight. But when it was farre forth daie, and the enemies stirred not all, the Consull commanded to advance with their ensignes. The Aequians and Volscians seeing their battaile comming forward, began to chase and take foule disdaine, for very shame that their rampier and trench should protect victorious armies within the campe, rather than their weapons and valour defend them in plaine and open field: and were earnest likewise themselves with their Generals for the signall of battaile, and at length after much importunitie obteined it. Now were some of them fallied out at the gates alreadie: and others followed hard after at their heeles, keeping their array, and every man comming orderly into his file and ranke. By which  time, the Romane Cos. before the battaile of the enemies stood surely furnished with their full strength, came on still and gave the onset: charged them before they were all come forth, yea and ere they were well marshalled that came abroad, being a multitude, waving (as it were) to and fro every way for feare, and looking about themselves, and to their fellowes: and to masker their troubled heads the more, hee assaileth them with a great shout and maine violence. At first the enemies gave back: but after they had gathered their spirits together, and were come again to themselves, and that their captaines on every side rated them, and asked them whether they would yeeld unto them, The Oration of Valerius the Consull, to his souldiors. whome before they had overcome, the fight began againe to bee renued.
The Consull on the other part, willed the Romanes to remember, that this was the first day, wherein they being newly set free, were to fight likewise for the freed cittie of Rome: and therefore they  were to win a victory for themselves, and not after victorie gotten, to be a prize for any more Decemvirs to prey upon. For they fought now under the conduct and standard of Appius, but of the Consull Valerius: who as he was descended from the deliverers of the people of Rome, so he was one of them himselfe: exhorting them to shew now, that in former battailes of late daies, it was long of the leaders and not of the souldiors, that they archeeved no victories: saying, it were a foule shame for them, to have had more stomacke against their owne neighbours and cittizens, than heart against their enemies; and to have stood more in feare of servitude at home, than of bondage abroad. As for Virginia, shee was but one, whose honestie and chastitie was in time of peace hazarded: and Appius it was onely, and none but hee, that in regard of his unbridled and dissolute lust, was the dangerous cittizen. But if the fortune of warre should faile on our  side, and goe against, us, then shall our children all bee in jeopardie, to bee abused and spoiled at the hands of many thousands of enemies. Vnwilling I am (quoth hee) to boden such miseries and to osse the cittie unto those calamities, which both Iup. and our stockfather Mars, forbid and forfend to light upon it, founded upon so lucky signes and happy foretokens, at the first beginning: I put you in mind rather of the Aventine hill, and mount Sacer: that where within these few moneths you recovered your freedome, thither ye may carry backe again your Empire, safe and sound, unsteined and unfoyled: that all the world may see that Romane souldiors are as forward and nobly minded after the banishing of the Decemvirs, as they were before their creation: and that by the bringing in of equall and indifferent lawes, the manhood and prowesse of the people of Rome, is no whit decaied nor diminished. Having uttered these words among  the ensignes of the footmen, he made speed to the corners of the horsemen. Go to, brave gallants (quoth he) excell the footmen in valour and chivalrie, like as ye exceede them in honor and degree. At the very first shocke and encounter, the footmen forced the enemie to recule: and being now reculed to your hand, setspurs to, gallop after them apace, and chase them out of the plaine field: they will never abide your violent charge: for even alreadie they are at a bay, and stand rather at a stay, than make any resistance. Hereupon they gird out lustily, and run their

horses among the enemies, disordered alreadie and in disarray by the service of the footmen. And  having broken through their rancks, and passed forth even to the rereward; certain of them cast about in the void and open ground, and when the enemies were about on all sides to flie, they turned most of them away from their campe, and overriding them, they got betweene them and home, and scared them wholly from thence. The footmen and the Consull himselfe, with the whole strength of the maine battaile, made forward to the campe, assailed the tents, won them, and besides a great slaughter, obtained a bootie farre greater.
When newes of this battaile was brought, not onely into the cittie, but also unto the other armie into the Sabines countrie, it was received in the cittie with joy onely and solemnitie: but in the campe it set the souldiors hearts on edge, and enkindled them to strive for the like honour and renowme. Now had Horatius alreadie, partly by sending his souldiors forth, to make reises  and outrodes: and partly by training and prooving them in light skirmishes, inured and acquainted them to trust unto themselves, and have confidence in their owne good service, rather than to remember the shamefull disgrace and foile, received under the leading of the Decemvirs. And even those small bickerings had done them much good already against they should venture upon a set field, and hartened them in assured hope to win the victorie. The Sabines againe for their part, still lustie upon their good succesie the yeare before, ceased not to provoke and urge their enemies: eftsoones asking them what they meant after the guise of robbers, to run in and out in small companies, so to trifle out the time, and thus by peece meale to make of one entire battaile many pettie and small skirmishes? Why rather fought they not one field for all, and without more adoe, hazard all upon a cast, and commit the whole to the triall of fortune, to see unto  what side she will encline. Then the Romanes, besides that of themselves they had gathered hart and courage ynough, were with the indignitie of this challenge also set on fire: considering, that when the other armie was at the point now, with victorie to returne into the cittie, their enemies began to insult and crowe over them with reprochfull tearmes: and if now they were not meet and even with them, when should they ever bee able to make their parts good?
So soone as the Consull perceived the souldiours thus to mutter and mumble within the campe, hee assembled them all together,(...) the (...) to his (...) and thus he spake: Sirs (quoth he) what successe hath beene, and how the service hath sped in Algidum, I suppose you have alreadie heard, namely, such as beseemed the armie of a free state and people. By the pollicie of my fellow Consull, and the manhood of his souldiors together, atchieved is the victorie. As for my selfe, that course will I take, and that resolute  mind will I carrie, which you my souldiours shall affoord unto me. The warre may be drawne out in length profitablie: it may be also-dispatched and ended speedily. If protracted it shall be, look how I have begun alreadie to traine you, with the same discipline still I will exercise you, and bring to passe, that your hope and prowesse may increase every day more than other. If your hearts now serve you well, and that you like to fight it out, Go on in the name of God, and in token of your willing hart and valerous prowesse, now set up such a crie and shout, as you will make when you first joine battaile, and give the charge. After that they had with exceeding cheerefulnesse shouted alowd: God blesse us all (quoth he) I will fulfill your desire, and bring you forth to morrow into the field for to fight. So the rest of that day was bestowed in making their harnish and weapons readie. When morrow was come, the Sabines so soone as they perceived the Romanes  raunged in battaile array, came forth also themselves, as readie and desirous of fight, as they. Here was a battaile strucke, such as might beseeme two armies, that trusted on both sides in their owne valour, and made full account of that daies honour. The one eager and greedie to recover their auncient glorie, wonted evermore to have the upper hand, the other prowdly bearing themselves, upon a new victorie lately atchieved. The Sabines besides, mended their strength well with a stratageme, for when they had equally devided their battaillons every way, they reserved two thousand drawne out of therest, extraordinarie without the ranckes apart. Who in the verie time of the conflict, should hotely charge the left point of the Romanes: they advauncing overthwart with their ensignes, and flanking them on the tone side, pressed shrewdly upon that one point, and overcharged it, well neare environned all  about. Then the horsemen of two legions, 600 almost in number, alight on foote from their horsebackes, and as their fellowes were even now readie to recule, rush forward with all speed to the forefront: and withall, made head against the enemie. And first, they put life unto them againe, for that they entred equally with the footmen into danger and bare even part thereof: afterwards, for very shame, they gave more boldnesse and animated them to fight. For abashed

 they were, that horsemen should be put to double service in both kinds of fight, on horse and on foote: and professed footemen not able to countervaile the horsemen, who had taken them to their feete. So they advance forward to the battaile, which on their part was abandoned, and make hast to recover the ground which they had lost. And with a trice at one instant, not onely the fight was renewed, but also a battailon of the Sabines began to shrinke. The horsemen closely among the rankes and files of the footmen, gat againe to their horses, and from thence rode speedily unto the other side, reporting to their fellowes the victorie: and withall, sharpely charged the enemies, who now were affrighted, because the stronger wing of their side was discomfited: neither were there any in this battaile also, that were seene to performe better service than they. The Consull, as an overseer, beheld all the maner of it, praising those that stood to it manfully  and rebuking where they fought but faintly. They were not so soone chastised and reproved, but presently they bare themselves like hardie men and did right good service: and looke how much that praise excited some, so much shame stirred up other. Then with a fresh shout and outcrie, they bent their whole force on all sides, and compelled the enemies to turne their backs: who were not able after this, to abide the violence of the Romanes. The Sabines, scattered here and there all over the fields, left their tents for a spoile to their enemies: where the Romanes recovered againe not the goods of their Allies, as before in Algidum, but their very own, which they had lost by the harrying and spoiling of their lands.
For this two-fold victorie atchieved in two sundrie battailes, the Senate right sparingly, (such was their miserie) decreed in the name and behalfe of the Consuls, one daies thanksgiving and  procession, and no more. But the people, the second day likewise, without order and warrant from authoritie, solemnised the same in great numbers. And this popular procession, disorderly as it was and without formalitie, was with more good will and better affection of men celebrated, than the other. The Consuls of set purpose (as it was agreed afore) came within the compasse of those two daies into the cittie: and summoned the Senat to assemble in Mars field: where, as they were about to make some speech of their exploits and worthie actes, the chiefe and principall lords of the Senat, complained and shewed themselves grieved, that the Senat was assembled for the nonce, among the soldiors, to strike a terror into them. Wherupon the Consuls, because they would give no occasion of quarrell and faultfinding, called away the Senat from thence into Prata Flaminia, where now the temple of Apollo standeth: a  place, which even then they called Circus Apollinaris: where they being denied triumph with one voice and generall consent of the Nobles: L. Icilius, a Tribune of the Commons, propounded unto the people, to know what they thought of the Consuls triumph. And among many that stepped forth to crosse and dissuade the bill,C. Claudius against the Triumph of the Consuls; C. Claudius above all others cried out aloud, that the Coss. intended to triumph over the Nobles and not over their enemies: and that they sought a thanke by way of recompence for a privat favour done to the Tribune, and not for an honourable reward, for any vertue and worthie act.
For never (quoth he) aforetime, was there held any treatie of triumph before the people: but evermore it was referred to the Senat, to consider and determine of that honour. Neither had the Kings at anytime, impaired the majestie of that highest court and degree: what should the Tribunes then meddle so much, and have their  hand in all matters by vertue of their authoritie, as to suffer no publike counsell at all to remaine in force? For a cittie can never be counted free, nor lawes equall and indifferent, but when each degree and estate reteineth still their own priviledge, and hold their proper preeminence. When the rest of the principall Senatours had spoken much to the same effect, all the Tribes notwithstanding in generall, allowed by their suffrages that which the Tribune had propounded. This was the first time that ever any triumph was granted by the voices of the people, without the authoritie and assent of the Senatours. But this victorie of the Tribunes and the cominaltie, had like to have turned to a dangerons surfeit of licentious libertie: by reason that the Tribunes conspired together and were fully agreed, to be chosen Tribunes againe: and to the end that their owne ambition should be lesfe seene above others, they alleadged to the Coss. for a sufficient reason (that they likewise should continue still in place of government) the agreement and consent of the Senatours: through whose holding togither and drawing in one line, the liberties of the Commons, to the great disgrace and reproch of the Consuls, were infringed and indammaged. For what would come of it, say they, if before the late lawes were fully established, the (new) Consuls with their factious banding, should set upon the new Tribunes: for we must not looke to have alwaies such as the Horaty and Valery, to be Consuls, men that would not regard their own weale

before the freedome of the comminalrie. As it happened very well for that time, it fell to M.Dutilius his lot especially, to be chiefe president of the Comices and Election: who like a prudent and wise man, foreseeing the hartburning and hatred, like presently to ensue, upon the continuance of the same magistrates still in place, said flatly, that of the old Tribunes he would not propound any one: and when his brethren in office labored earnestly with him, to permit the Tribes to go to a free scrutinie, or els yeeld up the charge to him alotted, of holding the assembly, unto his brethren, who would keepe the same and manage the matter, according to law rather than to the will and pleasure of the Nobles: Duillius then, seeing their earnest contention, caused the Consuls to be called into their owne pues and feares, and demaunded their mindes concerning the Election of the Consuls: and when they answered that they would create new, he having once gotten them to be the authors of a popular sentence, and not popular themselves, went forth togither  with them into the assembly of the people. Now when the Consuls were brought out into their presence, and were asked the question, what they would doe, in case the people of Rome should elect them Consuls the second time, and that, in remembrance of their libertie received and recovered by their meanes, and for their good service in warre, and worthie actes by them performed: he finding them constant in the same mind still, and nothing altered from their resolution: after hee had commended the Consuls, for their steedfast perseverance unto the last (as altogither unlike to the Decemvirs) went presently to the new Election. And when he had created five Tribunes onely, seeing there were not other competitours enough to reach unto sufficient voices of the Tribes, in comparison of the other nine Tribunes his colleagues who openly stood to be chosen againe: he brake up the assembly, and from that time  forward called no more about any Election. For he said, That he had fulfilled the law in that behalfe, which without setting downe any precise and definite number of Tribunes, so that there were some left behind and roomes void, gave authoritie to those that were created, to chuse and take unto them more colleagues, to make up the number. And therwith he recited the words of the law, which run in this forme. IF I SHALL PROPOUND TEN TRIBUNES OF THE COMMONS TO BE CREATED, AND THEY SHALL THAT PRESENT DAY MAKE FEVVER THAN TEN: THEY BY VERTUE OF THIS LAVV, SHALL BE ACCOUNTED TRIBUNES, VVHOM THOSE ELECTED SHALL CHUSE AND TAKE UNTO THEM FOR THEIR FELLOVVES, AND AS LAVV FULL SHALL THEY BE HELD, AS THOSE VVHOM THIS DAY YEE SHAL CREATE TRIBUNES OF THE COMMONS. Thus when Duillius persisted still resolute  unto the end, saying, That in any case the state might not beare xv. Tribunes; and having thus conquered the greedie ambition of his colleagues: with great favour and the good liking as well of the Nobilitie as the Cominaltie, he gave up his roome. The new Tribunes now in the electing and making choise of their companions, curried favour with the Senators, and framed themselves to their will and pleasure, in chusing to them two of the Nobilitie, and those that had been Consuls, to wit Sp.Tarpeius and A.Aeternius. And Consuls there were created Sp.Herminius and T.Virginius C^limontanus. Who bearing themselves in a meane betweene Commons and Nobles, and not greatly inclining to one side or other, had peace as well at home as abroad. L.Trebonius a Tribune of the Commons, being highly offended with the Senatours and spitefully bent against them, and saying withall, that in the cooptation of the rest of the Tribunes, he had been cunningly overraught by them, and betraied by his colleagues, proposed a law, That whosoever hereafter propounded unto the Commons any Tribunes to be elected, should not give over, but still propound, untill he made up the full number of ten. Thus continued he all his Tribuneship in persecuting and molesting the Nobles, never letting them to be quiet: whherupon he was surnamed^ough o^ ^igo^o^^. Alper.
After this, M. Geganius Macrinses, and C. Iulius being created Consuls, appeased the contentious orations of the Tribunes, which were begon and raised against the young Gentlemen of the Nobilitie, so as without any bitter invectives against that authoritie of the Tribunes, they preserved still the soveraigne majestie of the Nobles: and by meanes of decreeing musters against the warres of the Volscians and Aequians, staied the Commons, and kept the Cittie  from all sedition and discord: saying, That by civile u^itie, all would be at quiet abroad: whereas through discord of citizens, forreiners tooke heart. The care likewise of outward peace, was the cause of inward and intestine concord. But evermore the one state disquieted the moderation of the other: for whiles the Commons were still and in good temper, the punie Senatours began to offer them wrong and hard measure. And when the Tribunes would have assisted the weaker

 side, at first it booted little, and small good they did: but afterwards they themselves escaped not without abuse and hurt: and especially in their latter monthes, when as they received injuries, both by reason of the meetings and packing together of the mightier sort, and also for that toward the end of the yeare, the edge and vigor commonly of all authoritie waxeth dull and groweth feeble and weake. So that now the Commons had little or no confidence at all in the Tribuneship, unlesse they might have such as Icilius to be Tribunes: and as for these two yeares last past, they had them but in bare name, and not to any effect and purpose. The elders and ancient fathers of the Senat on the other side, as they beleeved verily that their youth were too cocked and lustie: so they were of this mind, That if there needes must be trespasse and excesse, they had leiffer those of their owne degree and cote should exceede measure, and have greater stomake, than their adversaries. So ticklish and dangerous a thing it is to keepe a meane in maintenance of libertie: whiles under a colour of wishing and desiring equalitie, every man advanceth and lifteth up himselfe so, as that he thrusteth and beareth downe another: and in pretending a care and regard that men should not stand in awe and feare of them, they make themselves dread and fearefull to others, and so the wrong that we put off and shove from our selves, we impose upon others. As if there were no remedy, but that we must either doe, or suffer injurie.
Then were made Consuls, T. Quintius Capitolinus the fourth time, and Agrippa Furias: who found neither sedition within, nor warre without. But yet both the one and the other was neare at hand. For now could no longer the dissention of the cittizens be held in, but needes it must  breake out. And both Tribunes and Commons rose against the Nobles. For in all the folkmotes and meetings of the people, one or other alwaies of the Nobles and Senatours were served with processe: wherupon grew fresh troubles and new contentions. At the first noise wherof, as if the signall of battaile had been given, and the al'arme striken up, the Aequians and Volscians tooke armes: and withall, their leaders and captaines(such as gaped greedely after spoile and pillage) had borne them in hand and persuaded them to beleeve, That for these two yeares past, they could not go through with their musters proclaimed: for that the Commons refused to obey, and brake their alleageance: which was the onely cause, that there were no forces sent out against them. Besides, say they, The use and manner of their warfare, is now with their licentious loosenesse, discontinued and cleane decaied: Rome was now no more a common-wealth  and countrie to her citizens: For, all their anger, quarrels and malice, that they bare aforetime against forreine nations, was now turned upon their owne selves: so that at this time they had fit occasion and good opportunitie to surprise them, blinded as wolves with mutuall rage and woodnes one against another. Hereupon they joyned their whole power, and first wasted the countrie of Latium: and afterwards seeing none to encounter them and make defence (to the exceeding joie of those that were the authors of this warre) they came harrying and spoiling al the way to the very wals of Rome, even before the gate Esquilina, there braving and vaunting in reproachfull and scomfull termes before the whole cittie, telling them how they had laid their fields and territories wast. From whence they retired themselves without revenge and losse, driving their booties afore them,The Oration of Quintius the Consull, to the people of Romes and marched along to Corbio. Quintius the Consull seeing this, assembled  the people, and there (as I have heard) he made to them a speech in this wise.
Albeit I am not privie to my selfe, and my conscience accuseth me not of any fault, O Quirites, yet am I exceedingly abashed and ashamed to come forth into this assembly of yours: that ever you should know, or the posteritie hereafter understand, how the Aequians and Volscians (who of late daies were hardly comparable to the Hernicks) came when T. Quintius was the fourth time Cos. in warlike manner with banner displaied to the wals of the cittie of Rome, and went their waies againe cleare and without any hurt by them received. This shamefull dishonour, if I had known it would have light so just in this yeare (and yet for this good while the world hath so gone, and such hath been the course of our life and conversation, that my mind ever gave me there was no goodnesse toward) I would have avoided this place of dignitie, either by banishment or death, if  there had been no other way to escape it. And might indeed have Rome been taken in the time of my Consulship, if those weapons which were under our gates had been in the hands of valorous men? Then had I indeed enjoied sufficient honour alreadie, then had I lived long ynough, and a little too long, and might have died well when I was but the third time Consull. But who were they, I pray you, whom these most base and cowardly enemies of our, despised and set so light by? Were we they that are your Cousuls, or you (Quirites)the people of Rome? If we were

in the fault, take from us as unsufficient and unworthy persons, our rule and government: and if that  be not ynough, let us over and besides be well punished, and abide the smart. But if the blame be in you Quirites, let neither God nor man chastise your trespasse and offence, only do you repent your selves, and be sorie therefore. It was not your cowardise that they scorned and despised, neither was it their owne valour wherein they trusted. For why?they having ben so often defeired and driven out of the campe and the field, fined with forfeiture of lands, forced to go under the gallowes, and brought into servitude, knew very well both themselves and you also. No no, the variance and discord betweene our owne states and degrees, is the onely bane, and nothing els, of this cittie; the jarres and debates, I say, betweene the Nobles and the Commons. Whiles neither we have any gage or stay of rule and commaund, nor you know meane of freedome and libertie: while you are wearie of Noblemen rulers, and we likewise of the Commoners Magistrates, they  have gotten heart, and waxe bold. Now, (Gods will) what meane you to doe, and what would you have? Tribunes of the Commons yee longed and hunkered after: for quietnesse and concord sake, we let you have your longing. Decemvirs you had a great misse of, and them you desired: we graunted and permitted them to be created. Wearie you were anone, and all too wearie of Decemvirs: we forced them to forgo their office. And when your anger continued stil against them, being become private persons againe, we suffred to be put to death, and to be exiled, most noble and right honorable men. When you would needs elect a new your Tribunes of the Commons, you chose them at your pleasure. To create Consuls from out of your owne faction, although we knew it hurtfull and prejudiciall to the Nobles, yet have we seene that dignitie proper to Nobilitie, given away as it were, and made common with the Communaltie. The assistance of Tribunes, the appealing to the people, the lawes and Acts devised by the Commons, to bee rendered and imposed upon the Nobles, to bind them thereto: and that, under the pretence and colour of (...), or equall and indifferent lawes, our owne rights and priviledges should be overthrowne, we have abidden, and doe still endure. When will there be an end once of discord and dissention? Shall we never have one citie of it? Shall wee never have this to bee the common countrie of us all? We can be content much better to be at quiet, when we are vanquished, than whiles we are victors. And is it not ynough for you, that you are dread and feared of us? but still you seeke for more? Against us it was, that you tooke the mount Aventine, against us it was that you held and kept the mountaine Sacer. For when the gate Esquilina, was wel-neer surprised by the enemie, and when the Volscians our enemies were readie to climbe our trench and banckes, and to scale our  wals, none of you there was to be seene, for to remove and set them farther off. Against us ye play the men, against us ye can be armed. Wel then, go to: When ye have here beset the Senathouse, taken up the market place and common hall with souldiors, filled the gaole with Noblemen, and those of the cheefelt and best qualitie, then with like courage and stoutnesse of heart, sallie forth of the gate Esquilina. Or if you dare not venture so much, behold and view all afore you from the wals, discover your lands and territories with fire and sword wasted and consumed, your goods and cattell had and driven away as booties and prises, your fermes and horses burning and smoking in every quarter. But all this time the Commonweale onely (you thinke) by this meanes is in worse plight and poorer case, the villages fired, the cittie besieged, and the enemie goeth his way with the honour of the warre. And in what taking, I pray you, is your own privat estate the while? Tidings will come anon to every man particularly, from out of his owne livings and possessions, of his proper losses: and what have you at home (if a man may aske) to make supplie again? Will the Tribunes make you restitution, and amends for all your damages? You shall have words of them your fill. They will not sticke to speake, to raile, and let flie slanders freely before you against the heads of the cittie. Lawes upon lawes you shall have hudled thicke and threefold. Assemblies, convocations, and seditious invectives good store. But from these their folkemotes, never came there any of you home to his house, richer of one gray groat or single denier, nor in better state to live than before. Was there ever any one carried ought from thence to his wife and children, but hatred and mallice, displeasure and rancour, grudges and hartburnings, both publicke and privat? From which at all times ye have been shielded and defended, if not with your own vertue and  innocencie, yet by the helpe and aid of others. But certes, when ye served in wars under the conduct of us your Consuls, and followed not the leading of your Tribunes: when you served I say in campe, and not in the hall and common place: when in battaile your enemies quaked to heare you shout, and not in your folkemotes, the Romanes were in dread of you utas and outcries: then you wan prises, and conquered lands from your enemies, then you returned home with triumph

 to your houses, full of riches and wealth, full of honour and renowne, as well publicke as private. Where as now, you suffer your enemies to depart, fraught and loaden with your goods. Sticke to your Warde-Leetes, as if you were nailed and fast pinned to them: dwell still in your hall, and lead your lives continually there: yet must you needs war when all is done, flie from it as fast as you can. Greeved it you indeed, and thought you it a trouble and a painful thing, to take an expedition so farre as into the Volscians and Aequians countrie? Lo, the warre is come even unto your gates: if it be not put from thence, it will anon be within the wals, it will scale the castle and Capitoll, it will follow you, even into your houses. Two yeares ago, the Senat gave order and commanded, that there should be souldiors mustered, and an armie conducted into Algidum. But we sit still at home and doe nothing, but chide and scold (as it were) one at another, like curst  and shrewd women, contenting our selves, and joying in a present peace: and little seeing, that of that rest, there will come sundrie warres againe, and that right shortly. I know full well, there are speeches more pleasing and plausible than these. But to speake the plain truth for your good, rathan to flatter and sooth for your pleasure, if mine own nature and disposition did not teach and admonish me, even very necessitie doth force and constraine me. Willing would I be, and most willing, O Quirites, to please you: but much more would I have you to be in safetie, think whatsoeverye will of me. It falleth out commonly, as a thing that commeth by kind, that who so speaketh to a multitude in his owne cause, and for himselfe, is better liked, and heard with more applause, than hee whose mind aimeth at nothing els but a publicke weale. Vnlesse peradventure you thinke these common flatterers, these clawbackes, and men-pleasers, which give you no rest, neither in warre nor peace, does tirre you up and provoke you for your good. But will you have the truth? yee being once sollicited and pricked on by them, serve their tumes in good stead, either for their honor or gaine. And because they see themselves to bee of no worth and regard, while the states doe agree, they desire to play small game, rather than to sit out: to be captaines of misrule and leaudnesse, rather than of nothing: and in one word, to be the heads, the ringleaders and guides of troubles and dissentions. Whereof, if you be so blest and happie, as to be wearie now at length, and will betake your selves to the auncient manners and fashions, both of your owne, and of your auncestors, in lieu of these new fangles, I will refuse no punishment: nay, let me be put to the most shamefull death that is, if I do not before many daies passe over my head, defeat, discomfit and put to flight these robbers and harriers of our fields, and send them packing  out of their owne campe, and finally translate and remove this terror of warre, wherewith ye now are so affrighted and astonied, from our gates and wals, even unto their owne townes and citties. Sildome at any time els, had there been a speech delivered by a popular Tribune, more acceptable unto the Commons, than was the sharpe Oration at this present of a most severe Consull. Yea and the very youth, which amid such terrors of warre, had ben wont to refuse souldiery, the onely keene and sharpe weapon they had to fight withall against the Nobles, now desired warre and to be in armes. Over and besides, the countrie kernes that fled (to Rome,) such also as were spoiled and wounded in the villages about, reported more foule and cruell outrages in their eares, than were presented unto their cies, and set all the cittie in an hoat and angrie broile. Now when the Senatours were assembled together in the Counsell house, then verely they all cast their eies  upon Quintius, beholding and regarding him well, as the onely patrone and maintainer of the majestie of Rome: but the chiefe peeres and Lordes of the Senate spake out and said: That hee had made an oration, beseeming the soveraigne government of a Consull, beseeming so many Consulships by him alreadie borne, beseeming the whole course of his life, that had passed off through many honourable dignities, and yet alwaies deserved more. As for other Consuls, they either in flattering and soothing up the Commons, had betraied the dignitie of the Nobles: or els in seking by hard courses to maintaine the rights, preheminencies and roialties of their state, and to tame the multitude, have thereby made them more fell and untractable. But T. Quintius, he hath made a speech, respective and tending, as well to the royall dignitie of the Nobles, as to the concord and unitie of the States, and principally regarding the condition of the times. They would request him therfore, together with his brother Consull, to take in hand the care of the common-weale. They would request the Tribunes likewise, to joine in one accord with the Consuls, and shew themselves willing and forward, to have the warre kept off and put back from their cittie wals: and in so fearefull and dangerous a case, to reclaime their Commons to their due obedience to their Nobles: saying moreover, That the native countrie, the common mother of them all, calleth unto the Tribunes and craveth their aid, now that the territories are wasted,

and the cittie at hand to be assaulted. Whereupon, they all agreed generally o decree a  muster, and presently to make a levie of souldiors. And when the Consuls, had pronounced before the whole people then and there assembled, that it was no time as then to heare excuses, but that all the younger sort, should betimes the next morning by day light, be readie to attend in Mars field: and that after the warre was ended, they would find out and appoint a time, to enquire into their allegations and reasons, that entred not their names: and that he should be taken for a traitour and rebell, whose excuse they allowed not: the whole manhood and youth of the cittie shewed themselves the morrow after in readinesse. Each cohort or regiment chose their centineres or captaines, and every Regiment had two Senatours for their provost marshals. All this was performed (by report) with such speed and expedition, that on the very same daie, the standerds and ensignes were by the Questors had forth of the Armorie and chamber of the cittie  and brought into Mars field: and by the fourth houre (or ten a clocke) the same day, set forward and advaunced out of the field. And this new armie, with a few bands of old souldiors, who willingly of their owne accord followed them, marched on and rested, at ten miles end. The day following they discovered their enemies, and at Corbio encamped close unto them. And by the third day, there was no stay on both hands, but they must needes encounter and fight. For why? The Romanes for anger were sharpe set: the enemies againe, upon a guiltie conscience that they had so often rebelled, were grown desperate. Now, whereas in the Romane armie the two Consuls were in egall commission, yet gave Agrippa place unto his brother Quintius, and yeelded unto him the entire and absolute command. A course most profitable in the managing and execution of great affaires. And being thus preferred, he againe in curtesie answered and requited  the others gentlenesse and inclination to submission, in this wise, by imparting unto him all his counsels: by parting with him all his honour and praise, and by making him his equall, who was indeede his interiour and underling. In the battaile, Quintius commanded the right point, Agrippa led the left: Sp. Poslbumius Albus, the Lieutenant generall, had the conduct of the maine battaile. And P. Sulpitius the other Lieutenant, they set over the horsmen. The footmen of the right point fought most valiantly, and the Volscians received them with equall valour. Sp. Sulpitius with his men of armes, brake through the maine battaile of the enemies: and albeit he might have retired himselfe the same way againe unto his companie, before that the enemies could bring their rankes againe into order, that were disaraied: yet he thought it better to charge them upon their backs.
And in one moment he had discomfited and quite defeated  his enemies, by assailing them behind, and thus affrighting them on both sides, but that the Volscian and Aequian horsmen recharged him, held him plaie in his owne fight, and so kept him occupied a good while. Thereat, Sulpitius said, it was no time now to linger and to drive off, but to beltirre themselves, crying out aloud, that they were environed round, enclosed within their enemies, and excluded from their owne fellowes, unlesse they set to, and bent their whole force, quickly to dispatch the horse-fight: and that it would not serve, to put the horsemen to flight and save their lives: but kill both horse and man, that none might ride backe againe from thence into the battaile to renew the fight. And to make head and resistance against him and his horsemen, they were never able, since that the maine thicke battaile of footmen had given him ground alreadie. Good care they gave to his words, and soone harkned to his direction: and with one entire assault  they gave a fierce charge, and defeated the whole power of the Cavallerie, unhorsed and dismounted a number of them, and with their javelins goared both them and their horses. And theres an ende of the horse-service. Then they set upon the battaile of the footmen, and dispatched messengers unto the Consuls with newes, what they had done: where also by that time, the battaile of the enemies began to shrinke. And when tidings came unto the Romanes that were alreadie upon the point of victorie, they verely were more encouraged: but the Aequians that were about to recuile, were strucken with greater feare. In the maine battaile first began the overthrow, namely, whereas the men of armes before had broken the array. After them, the left point also began to be distressed and driven backe, by Quintius the Consull. But in the right there was hardest hold, and most a doe. Where, Agrippa being a tall man of his handes and  young withall, seeing in every part of the battaile things go better than where he was: caught the ensignes from the ensigne-bearers, advanced them forward his owne selfe, yea and fell to flinging some of them against the thickest of his enemies. For feare therefore of so shamefull a disgrace, the souldiorsbeltirre themselves, and freshly assailed the enemie. And so on all hands alike, they atchieved the victorie and won the field. Then came a messenger from Quintius, and brought

 word, that he had the better hand, and was now readie to give an assault upon the campe, but would not breake in, and enter thereinto before he knew for certaine, that they in the left point, also had gotten the upper hand, and made an end of the battell. In case therfore he had discomfired the enemie, he should joine his forces to him, that the whole armie altogether might gaine the spoile and pillage of the tents. So Agrippa, who also for his part was victor, came to his brother Consull and the campe of the enemies, and met with mutuall congratulation one to the other. There, finding but a few to defend, whom they discomfited in the turning of an hand, they brake into the rampier and munitions, without conflict or skirmish: and so besides the recovery of their owne goods againe, which they had lost by the overrunning of the country, they gained also a rich bootie, and retired back with their whole armie. I cannot learn, that either they themselves  required triumph, or the Senat offered them any: and no cause appeareth upon record, why they should either refuse, or not hope for that honor. For mine own part, so far as I can guesse in so long distance of times, seeing that Valerius and Horatius, who over and besides the conquest of the Volscians and the Aequians, had the honour also of dispatching and finishing the Sabines warre, were denied triumph at the Senates hand; these Consuls might not with modestie, sue for the same; having performed but halfe the good service of the others: least if they had gotten it graunted, there might have seemed more regard had of the persons, than of the deserts.
But this noble and honourable victorie over the enemies abroad, thus atchieved, was obscured and foulie distained with a shamefull dome of the people, in a controversie of their allies, about the bounds and meeres of certaine lands.A controversie betweene the Atdeares and Aricines, decided by the people of Rome. The inhabitants of Aricia and Ardea, having  warred oftentimes one with the other, about some lands in question betweene them, and by giving and taking sundrie foiles and overthrows outwearied, chose the people of Rome their Vinpire, to decide and determine this quarell. And when they were come with their counsell to plead the case, the Magistrates graunted a court of Assises of the people. Where was much arguing and dispute on both sides before them: and after the witnesses were deposed, and that at length the Tribes should be called to the scrutinie, and the people give their voices: there steps forth an old father, one P. Scaptius, a Commoner.
And I (quoth he) for my part, O Consuls, if it be lawfull to speake for the good of the State, wil not suffer the people to erre, and be deceived in this question. When as the Consuls denied him audience, as being an old foole, and of no credite: and commanded bim (as he cried still that the publicke cause of the cittie was betraied) to behad  away, he calleth for the assistance of the Tribunes. The Tribunes then, who lightly are ever overruled by the multitude, rather than able to rule them, yeelded unto the Commons: That for as much as they were desirous to heare what the old man could say, Scaptius should speak his mind at large.The evidence given by old Scaptius^
Then setteth he the tale on end, and beginneth thus: I am (quoth he) fourescore winters old, and three on the head of it: and even upon that very ground, for which all this strife and variance is, I served as a souldior, when I was no young man neither, but one that had been prest to warres, and received pay twentie yeares afore. And it was, I remember well, during the siege before Corioli. Hither am I now come, to give evidence of a thing by long continuance of time, worne out cleane and forgotten of other men, but fresh in my knowledge and remembrance: to wit, that the lands thus litigious, and in controversie, had been sometime within the confines of  the Coriolanes: and after the winning of Corioli, were seised by right of conquest, to the Commons of the people of Rome. I marvell much therefore, by what custome and prescription, the Ardeates and Aricines, who never had right and interest, and were not postlesled of the land, (so long as Corioli stood in prosperitie) should hope to defeat the people of Rome thereof, whom being the LL. in fee of the ground, they had chosen for their Arbitrator. As for mee, I have but a small while to live, and one foot alreadie is in grave: and yet I cannot find in my heart, but (to that land, which whilome, I being a young and lustie souldior, did my best to fight for, and conquered with sword in hand) make claime now that I am aged, by word of mouth, the onelie meanes left mee to recover it. I advise the people therefore in good sadnesse, that in a vaine respect of bootlesse modestie, they condemne not their owne cause, nor give away their  right.
The Consuls marking well what audience was given to Scaptius, and that he was heard not onely with silence, but also with good liking and contentment, cried out upon this abominable practise: calling both heaven and earth to witnesse, and therwith sent for the Lordes of the counsell: and joyning with them, went to the Tribunes, fell in hand with them, and instantly besought them not to go forward with this most leud action for the present, and a more shameful precedent for the time to come: namely, that Vmpiers and daies-men, should convert the thing in

suit unto their own and proper vantage: especially considering, that, Admit it were a lawful thing  for a judge himselfe to have an eie and regard to his own commoditie: yet would there not be so much gained and gotten by comming thus betweene, and interverting the land, as there would be dammage and hinderance another way, in alienating by those hard courses, the hearts of their good friends and Allies. For the losses (verely) and cracks of name and credit, are such as may not be valued at any price. And should the embassadours indeed, say they, go their waies home with this goodly catch? and make report abroad how they have sped? should our confederats heare this? should our enemies come by the knowledge thereof? with what griefe the one? with what joy the other? Thinke ye that our neighbour nations will impute, attribute, and ascribe this, unto the speech made by Scaptius, a prating old busie body and one that loveth to heare himselfe speake in assemblies? Nay this is certaine: well may Scaptius be famous and much talked of, in the  playing of this pageant: but the people of Rome shall incurre the obloquie, to have acted the part under the visour of Scaptius, of a cunning promoter, and a false interceptour to himselfe, of other mens right in suite. For, what judge at any time in a private matter, hath done the like, as to award the thing in question, unto himselfe? Why, even Scaptius, past all shame and grace as he is, would never have done it. These and such like words, spake both Consuls and Senatours alowd in all their hearing. But the covetousnesse of men, and Scaptius that first set them a longing and their teeth a watering, prevailed more than they all. The Tribes were called to the Scrutinie of their voices, and gave judgment, That the lands pertained to the common Territorie of the people of Rome. Neither can it be denied, but it would have so appeared indeed, in case it had been tried before other judges. But now, for all the goodnesse of the cause, is not the ignominie of the arbitrement one jote the lesse: Nay, the Aricines and Ardeates themselves, thought not more shamefully and hardly of it, than the very Senatours and Peeres of Rome. The rest of the yeare continued quiet, from all troubles as well domesticall as forraine.




THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the fourth Booke.
THe law concerning marriage betweene the Nobles and the Commons, was proposed, and with much ado enacted by the Tribunss of the Communaltie: not withstanding, the Nobles withstood it. Tribunes militarie with full authoritie of Cousuls, were created. Vnder this kind of Magistracie was the State ruled for certaine yeares, both in cittie and in warre. The lands of the Ardeates, which had been awarded from them by an arbitvement of the people of Rome, were restored againe unto them, and Coloners sent to inhabite the same. In the time of a great dearth and famine at Rome, one Sp. Melius, a Romane knight, dealt corne amongst the people  freely, at his owne proper charges: by which deed he won the favor of the Commons: and thereby aspiring to be king, was at the commandement of Quintius Cincinnatus, the Dictator, slaine, by the hands of C. Servilius Hala, Generall of the Horsemen. L. Minutius, who disclosed the treason, had a bullocke with guilt hornes given him for a reward. The Embassadours of the Romanes, which were murdered by the Fidenates, had their Statues or Images erected at the Rostra, or the common Crosse of the cittie, because they died in the service of the Commonwealth. Cornelius Cossus a Colonell, having slaine with his owne hand Tolumnius, the king of the Veientians, wan and bare away the second royall spoiles. Mamercus Aemylius the Dictator, limited the government of the Censureship, within the compasse of one year and sixe months, which before that time continued five yeares: and for that act, was shamefully disgraced by the Censors. Fidene was conquered and subdued, and thither were Coloners sent to dwell. Whom the men of Fidene slew, and revolted from the people of Rome: and by Mamercus Aemylius the Dictator were subdued, and the cittie forced. The conspiracie of the bondslaves was suppressed. Posthumius a Tribune militarie, was for his crueltie slaine by his owne souldiors. The souldiors  then first, and never before, had their pay out of the common treasurie. Moreover, this booke containeth the warres against the Volscians and Veientians, the Fidenates and Falisci.

THERE succeeded Consuls after these, M. Genutius and P. Curiatius. A yeare full of broiles, both at home and abroad. For in the beginning of the yeare, both Canuleius, a Tribune of the Commons, proposed a law, concerning alliance of the Patritians with Commons, by way of mariage. Wherby the Nobles supposed their bloud to be desteined, and the rightes and priviledges  of families and houses confounded. Also, wheras at first the Tribunes by little and little had moved, That one of the Consuls might bee created out of the Commons: now the matter proceeded so far, that of ten Tribunes that then were, the other nine propounded this in plaine termes for a law, That it might be in the peoples power to chuse both the Coss. (if they would) either out of Commons or Nobilitie. Mary, if that should come to passe, the Nobles thought indeed that the soveraigne rule and authoritie, was not only made common with the basest sort, but also translated altogether from the great men andbest of the cittie, to the comminaltie. Glad were the Senatours therfore to heare say, that the people  of Ardea, for the wrongfull awarding away of their lands from them, were revolted: and that the Veientians had wasted the frontiers of the Romanes: and that the Volscians and Aequians grudged and muttered for the fortifying of Verrugo. So much preferred they any warre, miserable though it were and dangerous, before a shamefull and dishonourable peace. Having heard therefore these newes, and taken them in the worst manner: to the end that amidst the rumour

and bruite of so many warres, the Tribunitian troublesome suites might staie and bee  dead for the time: they command musters to be taken, souldiors to be levied, all furniture of war, and all manner of force to be prepared, and (if it might be) with more indevor, than it had been when T. Quintius was Consull. Then C. Canuleius, after some hoat words which he spake alowd in the Senate, namely that the Consuls by frighting the Commons, went about but in vaine, to avert them from the regard of their new lawes: and that so long as he had any breath in his bodie, they should never go through with muster, unlesse the Commons had first ratified those things, which by him and his brethren had been propounded: forthwith assembled the people together.(...) Thus at one instant the Consuls animated the Senate against the Tribune, and the Tribune incited the people against the Consuls. The Consuls gave it out plainly and said, that no longer now might these furious courses of the Tribunes be endured. Now were they come  to the very height and extremitie, and raised more war in effect, at home, than the enemies abroad. Which thing (no doubt) happened not so much through the fault of the Commons, as of the Nobles, nor of the Tribunes more, than of the Consuls. For looke what thing was best rewarded in a cittie, the same alwaies most increased: thus men in peace (we see) prove excellent, thus in warre they come to bee singular. In Rome (say they) seditions sped ever best, and have been reputed both to each one in particular, and to all in general most honourable. But let the Senat call to mind the dignitie which they themselves had received from their fathers, and compare it with that which they were like to leave to their children and see, whether they may boast as the cominaltie doth, how that their condition is much bettered and more glorious than before. Well, neither is there any end now, nor ever will be, so long as the authours of seditions  be as highly advanced, asthe seditions themselves are prosperous and fortunate. See what matters and how great hath Canuletus attempted! He would bring in a minglemangle and conconfusion of kindreds and houles, a perturbation in the managing both of publike and private affaires: that nothing might be sincere and intire, nothing pure and undefiled: that all difference and distinction being taken away, no man might know either himselfe or his. For what thing (...) doe these mixtures of states and degrees by marriages draw after them, without all order and discretion; but that like bruit beasts in a manner, Commons and Nobles may go and couple together? so that the children betweene them borne, shall not be able to tell of what bloud he is descended, and to what religion he doth belong, being a mungrell, as it were, the one halfe a Noble, the other a Commoner; and not well suiting and according with himselfe? They thought it  not enough (belike) that all divine and humane lawes, were confused and shuffled together: for now these mutinous persons, these busie heads and troublers of the common people, addresse themselves to shoot at the Consulship. At first, they sounded in privat speeches and secret (...), only, how to compasse, That one of the Consuls might be created out of the bodie of the Commons: but now they go roundly to worke, and carrie it before them: they are so bold to prefer laws (forsooth) that the people might make them both, either Nobles or Commons, at their good pleasure. Wherby (no doubt) they would make choise from out of the Commons, of the most seditious persons of all other. We shall have then the Canuleians and Icilians to bee our Coss. But Iupiter (that great good god)forbid, that ever the royal and imperial majestie, should come to that loweb or desperat passe: die they would a thousand deaths rather, than suffer so great  a shame and indignitie: knowing this assuredly, that their ancitours also, if they had once suspected or foreseene, that by granting the cominaltie every thing as they desired, they would not have proved more bonair and buxome towards them, but rather more churlish and untractable: and when they had obtained their first suites, to proceed still to demaund worse and worse, one thing after another: they would sooner have indured at the first, any contesting and debate whatsoever, than suffered those hard conditions to be imposed and put upon them: and because they had once relented, that Tribunes should be created, therefore to grant them againe the second time. So that as now, there is no ho with them, nor end of quarrels will be none, so long as in one and the selfsame cittie, Tribunes and Senatours remaine togither. Nay verely, either this state must be put downe, or that office utterly adolished. And better late than never, to withstand  and meet with their rash and desperat boldnesse. What? shall they without controlment, first sowe discord at home, and then stir up sorreine wars abroad? and afterwards, against those wars which themselves have raised, debar and hinder the cittie, for to take armes and defend it selfe? and when as they, have as good as sent for the enemies to come to their dores, then, not suffer an

 armie to be levied against them. But let Canuleius(if he dare) speake these wordes out in the Senat, That unlesse the Nobles suffer his laws, as if he were a Conquerer, to be admitted and received, he will stay the mustering? For what els is that, but to threaten that he will fell and betray his countrie, and suffer it to be assailed and lost? What encouragement will such a word give as that, I say not, to the comminaltie of Rome, but to the Volscians, Aequians and Veientians? Will not they hope, under the conduct of Canuleius, to be able to scale the Capitoll and the castle, if so be the Tribunes shall take from the Nobilitie their courageous hearts, as they have bereaved them alreadie of their right, their honour and dignitie? Let him know therefore, that the Consuls are readie, first to shew themselves to be captaines and leaders, against the mischievous practises of their own citizens, before they wil make head against the armed forces of their enemies?  Whils these matters were debated of with great contention and heat in the Senat house, Canuleius for the maintenance of his laws, and to crosse the Consuls, made this Oration unto the people. How greatly the Nobles have despised you,The Oration of Canuleius to the Commons, against the NoLilitie. ^O Quirites, how unworthie they have ever thought you, to live among them within the wals of one cittie, me thinkes I have, as often heretofore, so now especially and most of all perceived: in that they have risen up altogether so fiercely to check and withstand our proposed lawes.
Wherein, what pretend we else, but to tell them and put them in mind, That we are, as well as they, cittizens: and although we are not of the same wealth, yet we inhabite the same countrie with them? In the one, we request mariage; a thing to borderers, yea and to forraine nations usually graunted: and to speake of our selves, we also have afforded even to our conquered enemies, the benefit of our citie, which is far more than marriage. In the other,  we move no new matter, but onely claime againe and challenge that, which is the peoples right, to wit, that the people of Rome may bestow their offices and dignities, upon whom they please. What reason have they then, I pray you, to set all on an uprore, as if heaven and earth should go together? and what is the cause, that erewhile I had like to have had violence offered unto me in the Senate? What moved them to breake out and say, they could not forbeate nor keepe their hands from me, and threaten to abuse and violate the sacred authorities of the Tribunes? Set case that the people of Rome may have their free voices and suffrages, to elect the Consuls whom they will, and that no Commoner be denied, so he be worthie of the highest place, for to obtaine the soveraigne dignitie. How then? cannot this cittie possiblie stand any longer? and is our Empire come to an end for ever? And all one it is (belike) and importeth as much, to disable a  Commoner, for being made Consull, as if a man inferred, that a bondman or a freed libertine should become Consull. Perceive you not yet (my Maisters)in what contempt you live? They would, if they might, bereave you in some measure of this day light: that yee breath and speake, that yee have the shapes of men, they thinke much, they repine, and it goes to their heart. And what els? They give it out flatly and say (if God will) it is unlawfull, that a Commoner should be a Consull. I beleech you heare me a little. If we may not be allowed to read the Chronicles, nor to peruse the Highpriests records and registers, know wee not those things then, that even all strangers know? namely, That Consuls entred in place of kings, and succeeded them, and have no other right, preheminence or dignitie at all, than kings had before? Thinke yee' that men have never heard, that Numa Pompilius, a man not so much as a citizen of Rome, much lesse then, a  Patritian and noblie descended among them, was sent for out of the Sabines countrey, and by the peoples voices, and the assent of the Nobles, created king of Rome? Also, afterwards, how L. Tarquinius, who was no Romane borne, no nor yet so much as an Italian, but the sonne of Demaraius the Corinthian, a stranger inhabitant at Tarquines, and from thence removing, albeit king Ancus his sonnes were living, attained likewise to the crowne? Moreover, how Servius Tullius after him, the sonne of a captive woman of Corniculum, whose father was unknowne, whose mother abondwoman, through wit and vertue, obtained and held the kingdome? For what should I speake of T. Tatius the Sabine, whom Romulus himselfe, the father and founder of this cittie, admitted to raigne together with him? Well, so long as no stocke was disdained, no race rejected, wherein appeared sparkes of vertue, the Romane Empire became mightie, and flourished.  Scorne yee then at this day, a Consull out of the Communaltie, when our forefathers despised not kings that were aliens and strangers? No, nor when the kings were expelled, was this cittie denied and shut against forreiners, that were valorous, and men of action. The kinred and whole name (I am sure) of the Claudij, after the kings were exiled, we not onely admitted into our cittie, from out of the Sabines, but also received into the number of the Patritians and Noblemen.

And may a meere forrainer indeed become a Nobleman, and so a Consull? And shall a citizen  of Rome, if he be of the Communaltie, be wholly disabled and out of all hope for ever being Consull? Tell me I pray you, Thinke ye it not possible, that a valiant and hardie man, approved both in warre and peace, being one of the Commons, may prove like to Numa, L.Tarquinius, or Servius Tallius? and if he doe, whether shall we suffer him to governe the Commonweale or no? And whether will ye have our Consuls, such rather as the Decemvirs (the most wretched and wicked persons under the sunne, who, by your leave, were at that time of the Nobilitie) than strangers and new commers, which of all the Kings were simply the very best? But forsooth, presently after the KK, were deposed and expulsed, there was not one of them Com. a Consull. What of that? ought no new thing to be ordained, and which hath not been already taken up asore? For many things have not yet been practised, (as in a state newly incorporat) ought not such then  to be put in use, if they be thought expedient? While Romulus reigned, there were no Bishops nor Augurs : by Nyma Pompilius they were created. There was no Sessing of the people at all in the cittie, no description of Hundreds and Classes. By S.Tullius they were instituted. Coss. were never heard of before: when the KK.were driven out, they were elected. The time was, when neither the absolute rule nor yet the name of a Dictator was knowne. In our fathers daies it first began. Tribunes, Aediles, Questors there have been none: it was ordeined they should be made. Within this ten yeares, we have both created and also abolished our of the common-weale, Decemvirs for the making and penning of our lawes. And who doubteth, but in a cittie founded for ever to endure, and increasing still infinity, there will be brought in new governments, new priesthoods and sacerdotall dignities, new priviledges both of kindreds and privat persons? And even this  one thing in question, to wit, that the Com. and Nobles might not joine in marriage, were not the Decemvirs they that first within these few years made that Edict? A most shamefull ensample and precedent in a free state, and tending to the manifest wrong of the Commons. Can there be any greater or more notorious injurie, than that there should be in a cittie one part and member, as defiled and polluted, thought unworthie of the bond of marriage? What els is this, but to suffer exile and confining within the samewals, when they debarre us that we should not be either allied in affinitie or knit in kindred? They provide (forsooth) and take order that bloud should not be mixed, nor families confused. How then? If this doe pollute this great gentrie of yours, which most of you descended from the Sabines and Albanes, have not by right line from the Patritians, but by cooptation and election into the number of the Nobles, as being  chosen either by the favour and graceof the Kings, or els by the peoples voices after the KK. were expelled: could not your wisedomes have kept your bloud uncorrupt by some private meanes and provision: namely by taking heed neither to espouse wives from among the Commons, nor to suffer your daughters and sisters to be married to any other than Nobles? No commoner (ye might be sure)would have forced a daughter of any noble house: no, these insolencies of lascivious lust are appropriat to gentlemen onely of the Nobilitie : none of us would have compelled any of you against his will, to make covenant and contract of matrimonie. But y vis, that by an expresse law it should be forbidden, and that marriage betweene Nobles and Commons should be condemned, that is it, which to the cominaltie is a plaine contumely and open injurie. And why conferre ye not and lay your heads together, that the rich may not mary  with poore? That, which at all times and in all places, hath been a matter left unto particular pollicie and consideration, namely, That into what house soever a woman cast a liking and fancie, there she might be married: and into what familie a man obliged himselfe by word, promise and covenant, from thence he might take a wise: even that, restraine ye within the bonds of a most proud and tyrannicall law: whereby ye might breake in sunder all civile societie, and of one cittie make twaine. Why forbid ye not by a positive law, that a commoner should not dwell by a Nobleman, or go the same way that he doth, or frequent the same feast, or converse in the same market or common place of assembly? For in effect what difference is there, if a gentleman mary a commoners daughter, or a commoner espouse a gentlewoman?What right I pray you or condition of state is thereby changed? surely the children still take after the father. Neither seeke we  for any thing els by matching with you, but only this, that we may be reckoned in the number of men and of cittizens. Neither is there any cause, why you should so contend and stand upon it (unlesse it doe you good to crosse and take a pleasure to exercise your selves in working us disgrace and shame.) Finally I would gladly know whether the soveraigne government of the state

 resteth in you or in the people of Rome? When the Kings were driven out, got you thereby to your selves lordly soveraigntie, or purchased all men equall liberrie? It must needs be granted, that the people of Rome may at their pleasure publish and ordaine a law. And will ye then as soone as any law whatsoever, is by them proposed, appoint a muster presently for their punishment? and as soone as I that am Tribune, shall begin to call the wards to give their voices, shall you that are Consuls, by and by sweare all the younger sort, presse them to warfare, lead them forth unto the field, and menace the Commons, menace I say, the Tribune also? What? If ye had not twise alreadie good experience, howe little these goodly threats of yours prevailed against the Com. when they agreed and stucke together, it were somewhat. Will ye say, that ye forbare to strive, ye tendered our good, and for pittie spared us?Nay rather, to say a truth, was not  this the cause that no sray was made, For that thestrongerside was also the more coole and modester of the twaine? Neither (O Quirites) will there now, I warrant you, bee any combat, nor blowes dealt: they will alwaies assay and found, what stomackes and hearts ye have, but never will they seele your fists, and trie how keene your swords be. Therfore to these wars (be they falsely pretended, or truly indeede or reported) O ye Consuls, the Commons are readie prest to follow you: provided alwaies, that by granting them libertie of mutuall marriage, ye will make at length this cittie one: that they may be linked, joyned and united unto you, by privat alliance and affinitie: that hardie and valiant men may have hope and possibilitie, to honours and dignities: that they may be allowed fellowship and societie in the Commonweale: Finally, that (which is due unto equall libertie) they may one with another in alternative course, obey annuall  magistrates, and be obeied againe in their turnes. If any of you shall gainsay and withstand these conditions, prate still and talke at your pleasure of wars: multiply and make them as many and as great as ye will. There is not one shall give his name, not one shall take armes, not one shall fight for those proud Lords, with whome they can have neither fellowship of dignitie in the common-weale, nor alliance of marriage in privat estate. Now when as the Consuls also were come forth into the open assembly of the people, and that they fell on all hands from continued and long orations, to short dispute and altercation: the Tribune demaunded why a commoner might not attaine to a Consulship? Vnto whom the Consull returned an answere, as to the substance perhaps truly, so for the present contention not very wisely and to the purpose: Namely, because that no commoner had the Auspices :which was the cause why the Decemvirs  ordained distinct marriages, least upon a doubtfull and mingled issue, there should follow a troubled confusion of the Auspices. But hereat, the Commons stonned and stamped most of all: that as odious men unto the immortall gods, they were flatly denied and deemed unworthie to observe the flight and singing of birds. And never gave they over their heates of clamourous debate (whiles the Commons had gotten unto them a most sharpe Tribune to set them a worke, and were themselves in obstinacie no whit behind him) untill at length the Nobles were overcome and driven to graunt, that the law as touching marriage should passe: supposing by that meanes especially, that the other Tribunes would either cleane give over their suite for making commoners Consuls, or at least wise put it off, untill the warre were ended: and that the Commons in the meane while being well pleased and contented with marriage among the Nobles,  would be willing and readie to levie a muster. Canuleius for this his victorie over the Nobles, and for the favors he gat among the Commons, became a great and mighty man. Wherupon, the other Tribunes were kindled to the like combate: and for the proceeding of their law also, indevoured with all their might and maine. And albeit the rumor of the warre encreased daily more and more, yet they hinder the levie of souldiors. The Consuls seeing now that no decree and order could passe the Senat house, by reason that the Tribunes interposed their negative voice: tooke counsaile together with the chiefe of the Nobilitie at home in their privat houses. And wel they saw that they must yeeld either the victorie to their enemies, or the buckler to their own citizens. Of all the Senators that had ben Coss. only Valerius and Horatius were not present at these counsailes. C.Claudius his opinion was, That the Consuls should put themselves in arms against  the Tribunes: But the two Quintij, Cincinnatus and Capitolinus, abhorred all bloudshed and violent proceedings against those, whom by a solemne covenant made with the Commons, they had received and accepted for to be as sacrosainct and unviolable. But in these counsels they grew to this point in the end, that they suffered militarie Tribunes of equall power with the Consuls, to be created indifferently from out of the Commons and Nobles: provided alwaies, that

as touching creation of the Consuls, there should be no alteration from the old manner asoretime. And wherewith were both Tribunes and Commons well satisfied and contented. A generall assembly therfore was proclaimed for the chusing of three Tribunes in Consuls authoritie, which being once published: ford with as many as had spoken or done ought tending to sedition, and above all others those that had been Tribunes of the people, began in their whited robes to take hold of men and run too and fro about the common place labouring for this dignitie. At the first, the Nobles partly in dispaire of obtaining the place (seeing the Commons to set a slote) partly for disdaine and indignation to beare any honourable office jointly with them of so base condition, were scared and affrighted from standing therfore: at the last (but they were forced thereto first by the heads and the chiefe Lords of the Senate) they were content to be competitours and suiters for the dignitie: least they might seeme to be fully excluded forth of  the possession of the Common-weale, and leave it entirely for the Commons. The event and effect of this Court, shewed plainely, that mens minds are otherwise affected in contending about libertie and dignitie, than presently after such contentions laid away, they are in weighing and judging aright without passion and affection. For the people satisfied herewith, that there was some account made of the Commoners, and that they were not shut out, elected militarie Tribunes all of the Nobles. This modestie, this equitie, this noble mind, where shall a man now adaies find in one person, which then was to be seene in the whole people? In the three hundreth and tenth yeare after the cittie of Rome was founded,Militarie Tribunes first created, with Consuls, (...) were the first militarie Tribunes created, that bare office in the roome of the Consuls, to wit, A. Simpronius Aratinus, L. Attilius, and C. Cecilius: in whose government, concord at home caused also peace abroad. There bee writers, who affirme, That upon occasion of the Veientian warre, and the rebellion of the Ardeates, because two Consuls were not able to manage so many warres at once, therefore were three militarie Tribunes chosen: without making any mention of the law published, concerning election of Consuls of the Commons: and that they were invested both in the jurisdiction, and also in the ornaments of the Consuls. Howbeit, the exercise of that governement, stood not fast and sure, nor continued long. For within three moneths after that they entred, they forewent their office, by a decree of the Augurs, as if there had been some error in their creation. It was alledged that C. Curiatius, who was President of that court of Election, had taken his quarters amisle for the observation of the luckie signes by flight of birds, and not according to the Augurs skill.
There came from the Ardeates to Rome, Embassadours, complaining of wrong received, in  these tearmes: That if it might be redressed, and amends made, and their grounds restored, they seemed willing to abide still in league and amitie. Answere was made them by the Senat, that the judgement of the people, alreadie passed, could not bee reversed by the Senate, if it were for nothing els but for concord sake and agreement of the States: besides, they had neither any precedent to lead them thereto, nor law and authoritie to warrant them. Marrie, if the Ardeates would wait their times, and put to the Senates arbitrement and discretion, the redresse and casement of their injurie pretended, it would come to passe, that in processe of time they should not repent of governing their passions, and brideling their choler: and should well know, that the Nobles had a good regard, that there should no wrong bee offered unto their friends, as they were carefull, that if any were offered, it should not long continue. Thus the Embassadors, promising, to make  a true report, unto their citizens of the matter, wholly as it was: were friendly dismissed, and had their discharge.
The Senatours seeing now the Commonweale, without any soveraign magistrat of the chaire and of State, went together, and made an Interregent: and whiles they strove whether Consuls or Tribunes should be created, the Interregent continued many daies. The Interregent and the Senate laboured, that there should be an Election of Consuls: the Tribunes on the other side, and their Communaltie, were for the Tribunes Consular. But the Senatours prevailed, because both the people seeing they were to conferre the one office or the other, upon the Nobles, surceased to strive any more: and also the cheese of the Commons, chose rather to have that Election, wherein they should not be once propounded, than wherein they were sure to take the repulse, as unworthie. The Tribunes also gave over to contend any longer to no purpose, and without effect, seeming thereby somewhat to gratifie and pleasure the LL. of the Senate.Consuls chosen againe. So T. Quintius Barbatus the Interregent, chose for Consuls L. Papyrius Mugilanus, and L. Sempronius Atratius. Whiles these were Consuls, the league with the Ardeates was renued. And this is the onely evidence

 and proose, that they were Consuls that yeare, for that neither in the auncient yearely records, nor in the kalenders of the magistrates, they are found at all. I take it, because the militarie Tribunes were created in the beginning of that yeare: and therefore, although these Consuls were in their stead chosen, yet their names were left out, as if the other had remained in office the whole yeare.
Licinius Macer affirmeth, that they are mentioned both in the composition with the Ardeates, and also in the linnen bookes or registers in the church of Iuno Moneta. Albeit there had ben so many terrors and bravadoes, threatened from the borderers, yet both abroad and at home, all was quiet. And whether Tribunes onely, or Consuls also chosen in the roome of Tribunes governed in this yeare; certaine it is, that the next following, had Consuls M. Geganius Macerinus  the second time, and T. Quintius Capitolinus the fift time. This was the very yeare when the Censors office came up first. A thing that rose of a small beginning: which notwithstanding afterwards, increased to that height, that it had governement of the manners and discipline of the Romanes: and under the jurisdiction thereof, the Senate and Centuries of the order of knights, the distinction of worship and shamefull disgrace, were reduced. Likewise, the survey of publicke and private Aedifices, yea, and the tributes, revenues and subsidies of the people of Rome were at the disposition, ordering, and discretion of that office. The beginning of which thing arose upon this occasion: For that the people in many years space had not ben assessed and numbred, and seeing the Cense could be deferred no longer, nor the Consuls (by reason of warres, from so many nations imminent) had leisure to goe about and accomplish that busines: the Senat therefore  made a motion, that the charge being painefull, and not for the majestie of Consuls to busie themselves in, required a special Magistrate, and a peculiar officer by itselfe. Vnder whome should attend the Secretaries and Clearkes: who likewise should the keeping and charge of the rolles and publick records: and at whose discretion should passe the schedules and instruments of all Assesments. The Senatours therefore accepted gladly of this ouverture, although it were but a trifling matter: yet because there should be the more Magistrates of the Nobilitie. Supposing (I wene) it would come to passe, as (it prooved indeed) that shortly the power and wealth of those, who bare the office, should win more authoritie and credite unto the thing. Yea, and the Tribunes also made no great adoe, but suffered it to passe, being an office (as it was in truth, no other at that time) rather of necessitie and attendance, than of shew, port, or honour: because  they would not seeme to be crosse and peevish in every small matter. When as therfore this dignitie was of the principall of the cittie refused, the people by their voices chose to that Office, Papyrius and Sempronius, of whose Consulship there was some doubt: to the end, that by that office they might supplie and make up the defect and misse of a Consulship.Censor a first created. And of the exercise and function it selfe, Censors were they called.
Whiles these things were a doing at Rome, there came Embassadours from Ardea, craving as well in regard of their most auncient amitie, as also of the late league renued, their helping hand for their cittie, welnigh undone and overthrown. For, peace (which wisely and by right good advise they had kept and maintained with the people of Rome) they might not enjoy at home, by reason of inward debate and domesticall quarrels. The cause and beginning whereof, as it is  reported, arose from siding and factions, which have been and will be to most States more pernicious, than forraine warres, than famine or plague, or other adversities, which men at attribute to the anger and wrath of God, as the extremitie of all publicke calamities whatsoever. There was a maiden, a Commoners daughter and no better, by birth, but for her rare beautie of singular note and passing renowne: whom two young men were suiters unto. The one of the same condition or estate that the maiden was of, and who relied upon her guardians and tutors, who also were of that degree and calling: the other a gentleman, enamoured on her, onely for her beautie. As for him, he had the good wils of the best in the cittie, by whose meanes the strife of partaking, entred even into the house of the damosell. For the Gentleman in the mothers judgment, was the more welcome and better liked of, whose desire was, that the maiden should be preferred by mariage,  and be most worshipfully bestowed. The Guardians also banded themselves, and laboured for their partie. But when as the matter might not be ended within dores, it came touit in law. And when the reasons and allegations were heard, both ofth mother, and also of the Guardians, the Iudges pro

having amongst those of their bend and faction, complained of that injurious award, with a  troup of men by force, set the maiden out of the mothers house. Against whom arose a stronger power of the gentrie, and followed the young Gentleman, who was incensed and set on fire upon this injurie offered. Whereupon insued a cruell fray. The Commons being defeated, went forth (there unlike to the Commons of Rome) armed as they were out of the cittie, and tooke for their hold a hil, and invaded the lands of the Nobles with fire and sword: and having gathered to them a multitude of Artisanes and handicrafts men, whom in hope of spoile they had called forth, they purpose and prepare to besiege the cittie also, which asoretime had been altogether unacquainted with the like sturres. In such sort, as no kind of calamitie that followeth warre, was wanting: as if the poore cittie had been tainted, infected, and poisoned with the furious madnesse of two brainesicke young men, seeking a wofull and deadly marriage, with the utter ruin and destruction  of their native countrie. And neither part thought it ynough to warre and fight at home among themselves. For the Nobles sollicited the Romanes for to rescue their besieged citie: the Commons stirred up the Volscians, to helpe to force and sacke the cittie. The Volscians under the conduct of Aequus Cluilius came first to Ardea, and against the wals of their enemies, raised a countermure, and cast a trench, and blocked the towne round about. Which ridings being brought to Rome, forthwith M. Geganius Consul, went forth with an armie, and incamped himselfe three miles from the enemies: and the day being now farre spent and drawing toward night, he commandeth his souldiours to refresh and make much of themselves, and take their rest: and afterwards at the release of the fourth watch, he brought forth his ensignes, set his men to worke, and sped his businesse once begun, so that by the sun rising, the Volsciansmight see themselves  invested more streightly by the Romans, then the citie beleagured by them. And on another side the Consull had joined a sconce to the wall of Ardea, by which way his souldiors might go and come in safetie. The captaine of the Volscians, who had to that day prepared no victuals, but sustained his armie onely with the corne which he had for the present from day to day robbed by ^orraying the countrie, seeing himselfe intrenched, and of a suddain to be destitute of all things, called the Consull forth to emparle, saying. That if the Romanes comming was to raise the siege he would remove and dislodge from thence. To which againe the Consull made this replie, That vanquished men were to take, and not to make articles of conditions: neither should they, as they were come at their pleasure to assault the allies of the Romanes, so depart againe when they l^t to Volsci. He commandeth therfore to yeeld their Generall, to lay down their weapons, confessing themselves overcome, and to be at his devotion. Otherwise he would bee a bitter and mortall enemie unto them, whether they departed or tarried still, and carrie home to Rome the Victorie of the Volscians, rather than their faithlesse peace. The Volscians, when they had assaied that small hope they had in their weapons (for all hope else was cut off) besides all other things that were crosse unto them, encountered in a place of great disadvantage for fight, but worse for flight: and seeing themselves on every side beaten downe and slaine, turned from fighting to intreating, delivered up their captaine, yeelded their weapons, were driven under the gallowes, and in their single doublet and hose with great shame and calamitie, were let go and sent away. And sitting them downe to rest themselves, not farre from the towne Tusculum, the Tusculanes upon an old grudge and hatred against them, set upon them thus disarmed and naked as they were at  unawares, and were so meet with them, that scarcely there remained any one to carrie newes of their ill day and unfortunate overthrow. Then the Romane Cos. appeased the troubles at Ardea: beheaded the cheefe captaines of that commotion, and confiscated their goods to the common chist and chamber of the Ardeates. And so by this great favour and benefite of the people of Rome, they supposed the injurie of the former arbitrement was done away and recompensed. But yet the Senate of Rome, thought somewhat behind still for the cancelling of the memoriall of a publicke avarice.See the end of the former book. The Consull returned, triumphing into the cittie, leading Cluilius the captaine of the Volscians before his chariot, with the spoile borne asore him of the enemies, whom he had disarmed, and brought under the yoke. Quintius the Consull againe for his part, in his long robe and gowne of peace, countervailed (a thing not usually seene) the glorie of his  Colleague in his bright armout: who had so great regard at home to intertaine concord and peace among the cittizens, by ministring justice indifferently, as wel to the highest as the lowest, that the Senatours reputed him a severe Consull, and the Commons accounted him as meeke and gentle a person. And more he woon at the Tribunes hands by countenance and reputation,

 than by contention and debate. His five Consulships wherein he carried himselfe after one and the selfesame manner and order: the course of his whole life, ever Consull-like, caused his person to be in a manner more reverenced than his honourable place. By this meanes, whiles these were Consuls, no words were made of militarie Tribunes. Then created they for Consuls M. Fabius Vibulanus, and Posthumius Ebutius Cornicen. These Consuls, by how much greater and more glorious the acts both at home and abroad, were atchieved by those, whom they saw they were to succeed (and surely that yeare was right memorable among the borderers, as well allies as enemies, and namely, because the Ardeates in so hard distresse, were by them succoured) so much the more earnestly endevoured for their part, to rase out of mens minds the infamie of that judgement aforesaid, and made an Act and decree of the Senate in this forme, THAT FOR AS MUCH  AS THE CITIE OF THE ARDEATES, BY REASON OF CIVILETROUBLES, VVAS DISPEOPLED AND BROUGHT TO A SMALL NUMBER OF CITTIZENS, THERE SHOULD BE ENROLLED CERTAINE INHABITANTS TO BE SENT THITHER FOR A GARISON, AND DEFENCE AGAINST THE VOLSCIANS. This was openly ingrossed in publicke Tables, and Instruments, for a policie, that their secret intent and purpose of reversing and disanulling the arbitrement, might not be perceived by the Tribunes and the Commons. But they closely complotted, that when they had enrolled a farre greater number of Rutilians than of Romanes, for to inhabite Ardea, neither, should any other lands be devided, but those which by that infamous and unhonest award were intercepted: nor that one foot or clot of ground should be assigned to any other Romane, before the whole lands were parted among all the Rutilians. Thus the domain  that had been in question, returned againe to the Ardeates. The Triumvirs for the conveying of a Colonie to Ardea, were created these, Agrippa Menenius, T. Claelius Sicul
us, and M. Ebuties Helua. Who, besides that, they offended the Commons by their readie service, and nothing popular, in regard, that they assigned and set out to their allies, that land which the people of Rome judged their owne, were not well thought of neither, by the cheefe of the Nobilitie: because in the execution of their charge, they did nothing of affection, and for favour. Howbeit they avoided all troubles and dangers that were toward them (albeit they were accused by the Tribunes before the people.) For when they had registered and placed the Coloners, they remained still themselves in the same Colonie, which they had as witnesse of their innocencie, and just dealing.
 In this yeare and the yeare following, when Caius Farius Pacilius and Marcus Papyrius Crasius were Consuls, there was peace at home and abroad. The plaies which had been vowed by the Decemvirs, according to the Senats decree, during the time of the Commons insurrection and departure from the Nobles, were this yeare set forth. Petilius sought for some occasion of sedition, but in vaine. Who being made Tribune the second time, albeit he harped still upon one string, and threatened the selfe same things that he had before, yet he could not bring about, that the Consuls should propose unto the Senat, concerning the division of lands among the Commons: and when as with great ado he had obtained thus much, that the Senatours should be moved and their opinions asked, whether they would have an election of Consuls or Tribunes (consular:) determined it was at length, that Consuls should be chosen. So, that the menaces of  the Tribune, that he would hinder the muster, was a ridiculous matter of game: seeing that when the borders were at quiet, there was no need either of warre or preparation for warre. After this great quietnesse of the state, followeth a yeare (wherein Proculus Geganius Macerinus, and L. Menenius Lanatus were Consuls) for sundrie calamities and perils memorable: namely Seditions, Famine, and hazard of receiving upon their necks the yoke of Kings rule againe, and that, by the sweetnes of a Largesse. There wanted onely forreine warre: wherewith if the common-weale had been afflicted too, hardly could the helpe of all the gods above, have recovered the State. These calamities began with hunger. But whether it were, for that the yere was unreasonable for corne, or that they were so droned of the plausible and seditious orations, and of the cittie itselfe, that they sorelet and neglected the Tillage of their ground, it is uncertaine. For both the one  and the other is reported. The Lords of the Senat blamed the idlenesse of the Commons: and the Tribunes of the Commons laid the weight, one while upon the fraud and naughtinesse, another while upon the negligence and remissenes of the Consuls. At the last, the commoners enforced and drave the people (but not against the will of the Senate) to chuse L. Minutius Master of the provision or principall purveiour of come and victuals: a man who in that office prooved

more luckie to preserve the libertie of the cittie, than happy in the exercise or ministerie of his  charge: albeit at the latter end, hee deserved and had, both praise and thanke, for bringing downe the price of come. Who, notwithstanding many embassages sent both by sea and land to the neighbor nations round about, and all to litle purpose (but that out of Hetruria ther was brought some little sprinkling of corne) nothing eased and mended the Market: and therefore he turned againe to the dispensing or dealing the present dearth indifferently among all, by forcing every man to confesse what corne he had, to open his garners, to bring it forth, to vent and fell that, which he had more than would serve a month. But when by this practise, and by defrauding servants a portion of their daily foode, and by accusing the come-mungers and exposing them to the furious yre of the people, he had with all his hard courses and sharpe inquisitions rather laid open than eased the present neede and necessitie: many of the common people dispairing  of all hope, rather than they would live thus miserably tormented, pining and wearing away in hunger, covered their heads, and threw themselves headlong into Tyber. Then Sp. Melius, by calling a knight or gentleman of Rome, a man (as in those daies) exceeding rich, enterprised a thing, commodious I must needs say, but a dishonest precedent of dangerous consequence, and proceeding of a worse mind and intent of his. For having with his own mony bought up the come out of Hetruria by the meanes of his friends and vassals, whose ministerie he used: which thing (I beleeve verely) was an hinderance that all the publike care and providence, tooke small effect, and nothing helped the generall want and scarcitie, he devised to bring up a free dole and distribution of come: and to the end that when he had once by this benefit and liberalitie woon the hearts of the Commons, then he might, what way soever he went carrying a port  and majestie with him above the degree of a privat person, draw after him a traine of the people, promising him by their favour of support, undoubted and assured hope of a Consulship. But himselfe (as mans nature is unsatiable) not content herewith, aspired to higher matters than fortune promised him, and those unlawfull, and beyond his reach. And for as much as even the very Consulship was to be wrested from the Nobles against their wils, he plotted to make himselfe a King, and thought that, the only guerdon due for so deepe reaches and dessignes, and worthie that great contention and bickerment which lie was to abide with much toile and swet of browes. Now drew the Election on a pace for Consuls, which thing prevented him afore he had brought his devises to full ripenes and perfection. Consull was created L. Quintius Capitolinus the sixt time, a man most unfit for his turne, that should go about innovations and to change  the state: and with him was joined Agrippa Menenius, surnamed Lanatus. And L. Minutius was either made again the master victualer, or els created he was at first without limitation of time, to continue so long as the case should require. For there is no certaintie thereof, but only the name of Corne-master, recorded both years in the linnen Bookes or Registers among other magistrats. This Minutius was vigilant, and as carefull for the common-weale, as Melius for his privat wealth: and upon occasion that men of the same qualitie, to wit, the Commons, were conversant in both houses, namely in his owne and in the house of Melius, he came to the knowledge by their meanes, of Melius his treason: and declared unto the Senat the whole complot. Namely, That there was armour and weapons good store, carried into the house of Melius: that he kept conventicles there, and made seditious Orations, and that it was past all peradventure that he practised  to be King. As for the time of working the feat and to put it into action, as yet it was not determined and certainly known: all other things were alreadie agreed upon. Item that the Tribunes were bribed and hired to sell and betraie the libertie of the citie: That to certaine chiefetaines of the multitude divers charges were appointed. And herewithall, he excused himselfe (and said) That because he would not be reputed the authour of any uncertaine or vaine intelligence, he uttered these matters somewhat with the latest, and later well nere, than might stand with the common safetie of the Weale publike. Which newes after they were heard, and that on every side the chiefe Senatours had given both the Coss. of the former yeare a check, for that they had suffered those Largesses of corne, and tollerated meetings of the Commons in a privat house: and rebuked the new Consuls also, for that they had staied so long and waited till a matter of so great importance  was by the corne-master detected and declared unto the Senate, which required a Cos. to be not onely the enformer, but also the reformer: Then T. Quintius answered, That the Consuls were blamed without just cause, who being bridled with the lawes of appealing, tending to the great prejudice and disanulling of their soveraigne government, had not commission sufficient

 by vertue of their place, to punish the thing according to the hainousnesse and qualitie thereof, as they had courage and heart thereto: and that there was need now, not onely of a valiant and stout man, but also of one that was freed from all bonds of lawes and tied to none. And therefore he would name L. Quintius for Dictator: in whom there was courage answereable to to that absolute authoritie. When all men liked well thereof: Quintius himselfe at the first refused: demanding what they ment, to object and expose him, an unweldie man and so far stept in years, to so great a trouble, and manifest danger. Afterwards, when as they replied on all hands, and alledged how in that heart of his for all his age there was more valor, and in his head more pollicie than in all men besides; heaping on him right due and deserved praises, and commendations; and whilst the Consull also importuned him still and gave not over: then Cincinatus,  after he had praied to the Gods immortall, that his decrepit old age in so fearefull a case, might not turne either to the losse or dishonour of the common-wealth, was by the Consull pronounced Dictator. And he forthwith nominated C. Servilius Hala Generall of the horsemen. The morrow after, when he had set and disposed certaine guards, in divers places of the cittie, and was come down into the Common place: the common people wondring at the strangenesse of the matter, had their eies upon him: and the adherents and complices of Melius, and he himselfe their captaine, saw well that the force and power of this so great a magistrate was bent against them. But they that were not acquainted with those plots and dessignes that tended to the setting up of a king, asked one another, what tumult or sodaine war, should require either a Dictatours majestie, or that Quintius after sourscore yeares of age, should be the onely Ruler of the citie.  With that, Servilius the Generall of the horsemen was by the Dictator sent to Melius: Who said unto him, The Dictator calleth thee. Wherat he being affraid, asked again, What he would? and Servilius said, That he was to make his answere and purgation, of a crime that Minutius had enformed against him, before the Senate. Then Melius began to retire himselfe backe into the rout of his followers, and looking about at the first, shrunke onely away from him, and refused to obey. At the last, the Apparitor at the Generall of the horsemens commandement, began to force him to go with him: but he being rescued by the standers by, found his feet and began to flie, and be sought the aid of the comminaltie of Rome: saying, That the faction of the Nobles conspired his overthrow, and persecuted him for the good he had done unto the Commons, and for his liberalitie bestowed upon them: beseeching them to help him in that extremitie, and  not to suffer him to be murdered asore their face and in their very fight. As he spake these words, Hala Servilius overtooke him, and killed him outright: and being spreint with his bloud thus staine, and guarded with a crew of tall gentlemen of the Nobilitie, he bringeth word to the Dictator, how Melius being cited to come unto him, put backe the Apparitor, and raised the multitude: and now had suffered due punishments for his deserts. Then (quoth the Dictator) On forth in this valour and vertue of thine, o C. Servilius, thou deservest great praise, and hast delivered the common-wealth this daie from Tyrannie. Then as the multitude murmured and made a sturre upon some doubt, what they should thinke of the fact, and what might bee the occasion therof; he commanded them to assemble together, and openly avowed the deed, and pronounced that Melius was justly slaine:The Oration of Quintius the Dictators, to the people of Rome. yea, albeit he had been cleere from seeking to be king: for that,  being summoned and convented before the Dictator, and that by the Generall of the horsemen, he refused and came not: for my selfe (quoth he) was set judicially to examine and inquire of the cause: and upon the triall therof, Melius should have sped no worse than his cause deserved: but because he went about by violence to withdraw himself from judgement, by violence therfore was he restrained. Neither was he to be proceeded against as a citizen, who being borne in a free state, where justice and law were in force: and in that citie, wherout he was not ignorant that the K.K. were sometimes expelled: and where in one and the same year, Collatinus sisters sons, and the sons of that Cos. that was deliverer of his countrie, detected of a complot and conspiracie of receiving again into the citie the KK. bloud, were by their own father beheaded: out of which citie, Tarquinius Collatinus Cos. for the detestation only of the name being commanded to give up his office,  suffered exile: in which cittie, many yeares after Sp. Cassius for practising and plotting only to be King, suffered condigne punishment: wherein also of late time, the Decemvirs, for a tyrannicall pride, were deprived of their goods, banished their countrie, and berest of their lives. That in the same cittie (I say) Sp. Melius should conceive any hope of reaching to a kingdome? And a man (I pray you) of what qualitie and condition? And yet, no gentilitie of birth, no dignities nor deserts

serts were sufficient to make way to any for lordly rule and tyrannie.
(...) Howbeit, the Claudij and  Cassis, by reason of the Consulships and Decemvirships of their own, by reason of the honourable estate and reputation of their auncestors, and the worship and glory of their linage, tooke upon them, became hautie and proud, and aspired to that, wherunto Sp. Melius had no such meanes to induce him : who might have sit him downe, well enough, and rather wished and praied to God, than hoped once for so much, as a Tribuneship of the Commons. And supposed he, being but a rich corne-mudgin, that with a quart (or measure of come of two pounds) hee had bought the freedome of his fellow cittizens? or thought he by casting morsels of bread and victuals asore the common sort, that the victorious people, conquerours of all nations about them, might be allured into thraldome? and whom the cittie could hardly brook to be a Senator, him they should indure their King, to have the regall ensignes and the
government of Romulus, the first founder of the cittie, descended first from the gods, and to them ascended up againe; why, it was a thing not so wicked as monstrous. Neither was this act sufficiently satisfied for, with the sheading of his bloud, unles the house and wals, within which so horrible madnes was conceived and forged, were cast down and rased: and unles these goods, which were tainted and infected with the prices and hire that should have purchased the kingdome, were forfait and confiscate. He commanded therefore the Questors, to sell those goods, and to bring the mony into the common Treasurie. And then he caused forthwith his dwelling house to be overthrowne and made even with the ground, that the plot or floure thereof, might be a monument of a wicked attempt, smothered and stifled in the very hope and hatching therof. This is the place which was called afterwards Aequimelium. As for L. Minutius he had an oxe with guilded hornes given him for an  honour and reward, without the gate Trigemina. The Commons therewith were not miscontented, for that to them he devided Melius his corn, at the price of one (...) Asse a (...) Modius. Among some authors I find, that this Minutius forsooke the Nobles and went to the Commons, and was taken in to be the eleventh Tribune of the Commons, and appeased the mutinie that arose upon Melius his death. But it was not like that the Senatours suffered the number of the Tribunes to be increased : and especially, that such an example should be given and taken up by a man of their coat : or that the comminaltie would not keepe it still, if it had ben once allowed, or at least wise attempt it againe. But above al, this confuteth and reproveth the false title of Tribune set upon his image, for that a few years before, it was by a statute expresly provided, That Tribunes might not chuse and take untothem a colleague in office. Q. Cecilius, and Q.Iunius, and Sextus Titinius were the only men of all the colledge of Tribunes, that propounded not the law for the honor of Minutius : but rather accused unto the Commons, both Minutius and Servilius, and ceased not to make complaint of the cruell and unworthie death of Melius : and in fine prevailed so much, that there should be an Election for Militarie Tribunes rather than for Consuls : nothing doubting, but it six were chosen (for so many at that time might be created) some of the Commons also, by promising to revenge the death of Melius, might step in and be elected. The Commons for all they were tossed that yeare with many and sundrie troubles, chose no more than three Tribunes with Consuls authoritie; and among them, L. Quintius the sonne of Cincinnatus: Vpon the hard conceit and hatred of whose Dictatorship past, they thought to picke some occasion ofquarrell and tumult: and Mamercus Aemylius, a man of great credit and reputation, was by voices  preferred afore Quintius, and obteined the first place. And L. Iulius they created for the third.
Whiles these bare soveraigne rule, Fidene the Colonie of the Romanes, revolted to Lars Tolumnius, the king of the Veientians, and to the State of the Veientians. And besides their revolting, a more horrible fact they committed.(...) For at the commandement of Tolumnius, they slew C. Falcinius, and C. Iulius, Sp. Nautius, and L. Roscius the Roman Embassadors, who came to demand the cause of this their change and suddaine alteration. Some here doe excuse and elevate the act of the king, saying, that upon a luckie cast of dice he uttered a doubtfull speech, which was by the Fidenatians so taken, as though he seemed to bid the Embassadours to bee killed, and that (sorsooth) was the occasion of murdering the Embassadours (a thing incredible, that at the comming  in of the Fidenatians, his new allies, who were to consult with him and ask his advise, about a murder that should breake the law of Nations, his mind should not be turned away from earnest studying about his game) and so this hainous fact proveth to be but an error. More credible it is, that he had a further meaning and deeper reach: namely, that the people of the Fidenatians

 A should be bound unto him, and onely relie upon him, being attaint with the guiltinesse of so soule a murder, and not to looke and hope for any mercie or meed at the Romanes hands. The Statues of these Embassadours which were at Fidene murdered, were set up openly at the charges of the citie in the Rostra. [A publick crosse (as it were) or pulpit in Rome, out of which the Magistrats made Orations to the people, beautified with the beakheads-of ships and their brasen pikes, called Rostra.] Thus was there like to be a cruel conflict with the Veientians, and Fidenates. Who besides that they were people confining on their frontiers, had also in the beginning of their war given so wicked and horrible a cause of quarell. Therfore when as the common people and their Tribunes, in regard of the care for the publicke State, were at quiet; there was no question, but that M. Geganius Macerinus the third time, and L. Sergius Fidenas (named (I suppose) so, upon the war which  afterwards under his conduct was fought) should be created Consuls. For this man first encountred with the king of the Veientians on this side A river now called Teveron. Anio, and gat the victory: but not without much bloudshead of the Romanes. So that the greefe was greater for the losse of his owne souldiors, than the joy for the discomfiture of his enemies. And the Senate, as in all fearfull times and dangerous occurrents, ordained Mamercus Aemylius to bee created Dictator. Who, out of the brotherhood of Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie, the yeare before, named for the Generall of his horsemen, L. Quintius Cincinnatus, who had beene a Tribune with him, a toward young Gentleman, and a worthie sonne of so worthie a father. To those souldiors that were by the Consull mustered and levied, were the old Centurions, experienced and skilfull warriors, adjoined: and the number of those, which in that last battaile were slaine, was supplied. The Dictator commanded  to follow him as Lieutenants, Quintius Capitolinus, and M. Fabius Vibulanus. This greater power and authoritie, and the man likewise nothing thereto inferiour, drave the enemies out of the Romane ground, and set them farther off, even beyond Anio. Who removing their campe still backward, seized upon the hils betweene Fidene and Anio: neither durst they come downe from thence into the open plaines, before that the Legions of the Falisci came to succour. Then at length, the Tuscanes encamped themselves under the wals of Fidene. And the Roman Dictator likewise rested and abode upon the banckes of the Confluent (where both rivers runne into one) and flanked himselfe there by. And when he had cast up a trench and rampier afront, reaching acrosse from the one river to the other, the morrow after he brought his power forth, and set them in order of battaile. The enemies were of sundrie minds. The Faliscians, who hardly could away  long souldierie
farre from home, and trusting withall in their owne selves, that they were good ynough, required battaile. The Veientians and Fidenates had more hope in drawing out the war on length. Tolumnius, albeit the advise of his owne men liked him better, yet because the Faliscians should not indure lingering warfare, sendeth a trumpet, and proclaimeth battaile against the morrow. The Dictator and the Romanes, for that the enemies for the present, shifted off fight, tooke more heart unto them: and on the next morning, when as now the souldiours gave out brave words, and menaced, That unlesse they might have battaile, they would assault both the campe and the towne: the armies of both parts came forth into the middest of the plaine, betweene the two campes. The Veientians, as being more in number and having to spare, sent couvertly out certaine companies to fetch a compasse behind the hils, who in the time of the conflict  should set upon the Romane campe. And in this order stood the maine armie of three nations together embattelled. The Veientians kept the right point, the Faliscians the left, and the Fidenates the middle of the battell. The Dictator in the right point advanced his standard against the Faliscians, and on the left Capitolinus Quintius charged the Veientians: and against the maine battell betweene both, marched the Coronell of the Cavallerie, with his cornets of horse. Thus as they stood araunged in battaile array, for a prettie while was there silence on either side, and all quiet. For neither would the Tuscanes begin first, unlesse they were urged: and the Dictator looked eftsoones backeward toward the Capitoll of Rome, that the Augurs should set up a signall aloft (as it was agreed betweene them) so soone as the flight of fowles gave approbation accordingly: which he no sooner espied, but he put out presently the men of armes, with a great shout  against the enemies. The armie of the footmen followed hard after in the taile, and seconded them with a lustie charge. But on no hand were the Tuscane legions able to abide the force of the Romanes. The Cavallerie stood hardest to it, and made head still. For the king himselfe, the best horseman and most valiant of them all, when as on every side his enemies charged and preased sore upon him, rode afront them, held out and maintained fight. There chanced then to be

among the Romane horsemen, a Tribune or Marshall, one A. Cornelius Cossus, a goodly tall  man of bodie, and as valiant and strong withall. Who set before his eies the noble house from whence he was descended, and carried this mind, as it was right honorable alreadie by his auncestors, left him so to recommend the same to his posteritie more glorious and renowned.
This man seeing the troups of Romans, waving to and fro, for fear of the violence of Tolumnius, which way soever he bent and turned; and knowing him by his rich and roiall furniture, wherein hee bare himselfe like a brave knight, riding all over the battaile. Is this (quoth hee) the forswome breaker of humane league, is this hee that hath violated the lawes of armes, and of Nations. Now will I presently, if it be Gods will that anything in the world shall remaine wholly and inviolate, be his priest, I will sacrifice and betake him to the ghosts of our Embassadors deceased. Herewith, setting spurs to his horse, with bent speare in rest, he rode full against that one enemie, singled from the  rest; smote him, and dismounted him from his horse. Then bearing upon his staffe, alight presently on foot, and as the king was getting up again, he overthrew him backward with the bosse of his target, and laid him streaking along, and after many wounds given him, at length fastened him with his speare to the very ground. And when as he was once dead, he disarmed and despoiled him, and strake off his head: and carrying it aloft on his launce, presented a fearefull spectacle to the enemies of their king slain, and so discomfited them. Thus was the strength of the horsemen defeated also, which onely had made the battaile doubtfull. The Dictator having put likewise the legions of footmen to flight, pursued them still, and drave them to their fort, killing them all the way in the chase. Many of the Fidenates which knew the coasts of the countrie, fled into the mountaines, and escaped. Cossus with his horsemen passed over Tyber, and brought home into the cittie a great bootie out of the countrie of the Veientians. As this battaile was in fighting, there was a skirmish also in the Romane campe, with that part of the forces, which (as it is aforesaid) was sent by Tolumnius to surprise it. Fabius Vibulanus first defended the rampier, ordering his men all withinforth, in compasse like a garland: and while the enemies were wholly bent about the assault, he with the Triarij or souldiours of the rereward, suddainely issued forth at the gate, called Principalis, on the right hand, and gave an hot charge upon them. Vpon which they were affrighted, but there ensued the lesse slaughter, because the number was smaller. Howbeit, they fled no lesse in disarray, than those in the very battaile. Thus the Dictator having prosperous successe every where, returned with triumph into the cittie, by the decree of the Senate, and graunt of the people. In which triumph the greatest shew and goodliest sight of all, was Cossus, bearing the rich  and roiall spoiles of the king, slaine by his owne hand. For of him the souldiours chanted diverse rude ballades without rime and metre, comparing him in their songs with Romulus. Which spoiles, with a solemne manner of dedication, he bestowed and hung up in the temple of Iupiter Feretrius, neare unto those of Romulus, which were the first and only spoiles, untill that time, called Opima Spolia. And as he went, he withdrew from the Dictators chariot, the eies of all the people unto himselfe, and he in manner alone, carried away the magnificence and glorie of that feastivall day. The Dictator by order from the people, presented in the Capitoll for the honour of Iupiter, a golden crowne, weighing one 16 lib. sterl in angell gold. pound weight, raised out of the common mony of the cittie.
Thus have I set downe (as following all other writers before me) that Aulus Cornelius Cossus, a Colonell or Marshall, brought into the temple of Iupiter Feretrius, the second roiall spoiles. Howbeit, over and besides, that those spoiles onely are by right accounted Opima, or roiall, which a Generall hath taken from a Generall, and we acknowledge none for Generall, but him under whose conduct and high Commission a warre is managed, the very title also written upon the spoiles, doth check and reprove both them and me. The words wherof are these, THAT COSSVS BEING CONSVL, VVAN THOSE SPOILES. When I once heard say, that Augustus Casar himselfe, the founder or repairer of all temples, entred into the house of Iupiter Feretrius, which hee reedified, being by injurie of long time fallen to decay, and read it so written in a linnen jacke or curaze: I thought it little better than sacriledge, to discredite and cancell the testimonie of Cossus himselfe concerning his own spoiles, and of Augustus Casar, the benefactor of that very temple. Which error, if it grow hereon, That so ancient records and Chronicles, and that the books of the Magistrates, which being of linnen, and laid up in the temple of Moneta, Macer Licinius doth estsoones quote and cite as his authors, do represent unto us A. Cornelius Cossus, the seventh yeare after Consull, with Titus Quintius Pennus: let every man abound in his owne sence, and

 have his opinion by himselfe freely. For more than all this may be alledged to prove, that so famous battaile could not bee transferred to that yeare: because that for three yeares space about the Consulship of Cossus, there was no warre at all, in a maner, by reason of pestilence, and dearth of corne: so as some records, as it were, mourning, and bewraying the calamitie of the time, deliver unto us nothing but the bare names of the Consuls. In the third yeare, after that Cossus was Consull, hee was Militarie Tribune in Consuls authoritie, and in the same yeare Generall of the horsemen also: in which governement hee fought another notable battaile with horsemen. But hereof a man may conjecture and guesse what he will. But (as I thinke) wee may tosse these things of small importance, to and fro, according to every mans opinion: and when all is done, the author of this battaile his owne selfe, having set up these fresh and new spoiles in a holy place, in the  sight of Iupiter himselfe standing thereby, to whom they were vowed, and Romulus also, two witnesses, not to bee despised nor abused with a false title, hath written himselfe, A. CORNELIVS COSSVS CONSVIL.
When Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis and Papyrius Crassus were Consuls, the armies were led foorth; the one into the Veientians countrie, and the other into the Faliscians, and booties both of people and cattaile were from thence driven and caried away. As for the enemies themselves, no where in the countrie were they to be seene, nor any battaile was fought: and yet for all that, the townes were not assaulted, because the people at home died of the pestilence. And within the cittie, Sp. Melius Tribune of the Commons sought occasions and pretences to move seditions, but without effect. Who supposing by the popular favor of his name to prevaile  and raise some mutinie, both arrested Minutius to make his answere, and also put up a bill for the confiscation of the goods of Servilius Hala: laying hard to Minutius his charge, that Melius was falsely accused and circumvented by him: and burdening Servilius with the murdering of a cittizen uncondemned. All these surmises were with the people of lesse credit and importance, than the author himselfe. But the violence of the sicknesse still increasing more and more, troubled them: besides the fearfull and strange prodigious tokens: but especially, the fresh newes that divers houses in the countrie were by many earth-quakes cast downe. Whereupon the people went in solemne procession and made their supplications, whiles the Duumvir going afore pronounced the praiers, and the people said after him word for word. But the yeare following, when C. Iulius the second time, and L. Virginus were Consuls, was more contagious by reason  of the plague, and caused both in towne and countrie, so great a feare of utter desolation, that not onely there were none set forth in any rodes without the territorie of Rome to raise booties, whiles the Nobilitie and Commons had no mind of making warre: but the Fidenates also of their owne accord, who before time had kept themselves either within their ownes, or mountaines, or fortresses, entered now into the lands about Rome, and forraied all the countrie. After this, having gotten also unto them a power of the Veientians (for the Faliscians could not be induced either by the calamitie of the Romaines, or praiers of their confederats, to take arms againe) these two nations passed over Anio, and not farre from the gate Collina displayed their ensignes. So the feare was no lesse within the cittie than in the countrie. Then Iulius the Consull bringeth the forces abroad, and placeth them upon the rampier and the wals: whiles Virginius  assembled the Senate in the temple of Quirinus, for to aske their opinion. Where agreed it was, to create for Dictator, A. Servilius, surnamed (as some say) Priscus, or as other, Structus. Virginius making no longer staie than untill he had consulted with his colleague, by his permission declared the Dictator in the night season. And he nominated for his Generall of the Cavallerie, Posthumius Ebutius Helua. The Dictator commaunded every man to be readie without the gate Collina, by the breake of day: and so many as were able to beare armes were in a readinesse. The standerds and ensignes were taken forth of the treasurie or chamber of the cittie and brought to the Dictator. Whiles these things were in doing, the enemies were retired and with drawne to the higher grounds and places of advantage: and thither marched the Dictator, with his armie in order of battell. And encountring with them not farre from Nomentum, he discomfited  the legions of the Tuscanes, and drave them into the towne of Fidenae, and cast a trench about it. But neither could the towne be scaled for the high site thereof and the strong wals about it; and to laie seege unto it might not availe: for that they had come not only to suffice the ordinarie need of men besieged, but also plentie to spare, of their old store and provision gathered aforehand. Thus the Dictatour being without all hope both of winning it by assault, and also of forcing

them to yeeld by composition, purposed in certaine places for the neerenesse to him well  knowen, at the backside of the cittie which was slenderly guarded, most neglected, and for the naturall situation the surest, to undermine unto the castle. And he himselfe in places farthest off from thence, approched close under the wals,(...) with his armie devided into foure parts, to succeed one another by turnes in order: and so, by continuall skirmishing day and night, he kept the enemies at a bay and withdrew them from all perceiving and intelligence of the worke under ground: untill such time as by digging through the hill from the campe, there was a way and passage made straight up into the castle. And when as the Tuscanes were wholly amused upon the vaine threatnings, and bravadoes of their enemies before them, nothing minding the present danger wherein they stood: behold, the al'arme of their enemies even over their heads, made an ascrie, that the towne was taken. In this yeare Cn. Furius Pacilius and M. Geganius Macerinus, Censors, appointed and dedicated the Large Hall,Villa Publica. named Villa Publica in Mars field: and there first by them was held the Sessing and numbering of the people. I find in Macer Licinius, that in the yeare following, the same Consuls were made againe, namely Iulius the third time, and Virginius the second time. But Valerius Antias and Q. Tubero, do name M. Manlius and Q. Sulpitius for the Consuls that yeare. Howbeit in so different a report, both Tubero and Macer professe that they followed the linnen Records: and neither of them both conceale, that which the auncient writers have set downe, namely, That the same yeare were Tribunes militarie, in Consuls authoritie. Licinius without doubt is addicted to those linnen Registers, and Tubero is uncertaine of the truth. But among other antiquities, not knowne by reason of long time, this also is left in doubt and not cleared.
After the winning of Fidene, great was the feare in Hetruria: whilst not only the Veientians  were scared, fearing the like destruction: but the Falisci also, remembring the warre begon first with them,A Generall Diet (...) albeit they were not assistant in their rebellion. When as therefore these two States had sent their embassadours abroad to the twelve Citties about them, and obtained a Diet or generall parliament of all Hetruria should be assembled at the temple of ^spand^ Votumna: the Senat, as if some great troubles were like thereof presently to ensue, thought good that Mamercus Atmilius, should be created Dictatour ^he second time. By whom, A. Posthumius Tubero was named Generall of the horsemen. And with so much greater endevour made they preparation of armes than in the last warre afore, by how much more danger there was from all Hetruria banded together, than had been from two nations combined and no more. But this busines was much  more quieter than all men looked for. When as therfore news came by merchants, that the Veientians were flatly denied helpe, and bidden to end that warre by their own meanes and forces, which they had begon on their owne heads: nor seeke to imbarke them in the association of their miserie and adversitie, unto whom they had not imparted their mind and hope in their upright state, and when they were in their ruffe: then the Dictatour, to the end he should not seeme to be created in vaine, seeing all matter of acquiring renowne by warre was cut off, desirous yet in time of peace, to doe some notable piece of worke for a monument, setteth in hand to abate and diminish the Censorship: either supposing it to be too high an office, or else offended not so much with the greatnesse of the honour, as with the continuance and length thereof.
Having therfore assembled all the people together:The Oration of (...), to the people. For as much as the immortall Gods (quoth he) have  undertaken to governe the common-weale abroad, and performed all safe and sure: I for my part concerning that which is to be done at home within the wals, will take order and provide for the freedome of the people of Rome. The greatest preservation and defence whereof, resteth in this, when offices of great command are not long enduring: but when they be limited by terme of time which may not be restrained or gaged in jurisdiction. As for other magistracies they are from yeare to yeare: but this of the Censors continuing five yeares, is very heavy and grievous. And hard it is for men to live so many years, even a great part of their life, in danger of the same rules still. Minded therefore I am, to propose a law, That the Censorship continue no longer than one yeare and six moneths.The office of (...) reduced from the terme of five yeares, ^ one and an halfe. with great applause and consent of the people, the next day after, he both published the law and enacted it. And now that ye may (qd. he) o Quirites, know  in very deed, how I mislike of these long lasting offices, here presently I render up my Dictatorship. Thus having given over his owne place, set a limitation to the rule of others, and absolutly ended one, with exceeding congratulation and favour of the people he was brought home to his house. The Censors taking it grievously that Mamercus had abridged an office of the people

 of Rome, displaced him from his own tribe, laying on him an eightfold taxe in the subsidie booke, disfranchised and disabled him from giving his voice, and made him no better than a Tributarie. Which disgrace (they say) he tooke with a noble stomack,Mamercus Armilius distr. (...) and made (...) looking rather to the cause of this shamefull note, than to the ignominie it selfe. Moreover the Lords of the Senat, albeit they were willing enough that the Censorship nailes should be pared and their power taken downe, were offended yet, with this example of the rigour and severitie of those in place: for as much as they all saw plainly, that they should be both longer time and oftner under Censors; than Censors themselves. But so great an indignation of the people (by report) grew hereof, that by the authoritie of no man but of Mamercus himselfe, could they be restrained from offering violence to the very persons of the Censors. And the Tribunes of the Commons, with  their continuall orations and remonstrances, prohibited the Election of Consuls. When as the matter was well neare brought to the point of an interreigne, they obtained at length with much heave and shove,Tribunes Militatie in Consuls roome, chosen againe. that there should be militarie Tribunes chosen, with Consular authoritie. But reward of this their victorie whereat they shot, could they get none: namely, that a commoner might be chosen for one. They were all of the Nobilitie that were created, to wit, M. Fabius Vibulanus, M. Folius, and L. Sergius Fidenas.
The plague that yeare was the occasion of quietnesse from all other troubles. A temple then was vowed to Apollo for the health of the people. Howbeit, great losse was there both in towne and countrie, by the mortalitie of men and moraine of cattaile, one with another indifferently. And fearing least the husbandmen of the countrie should bee famished, they sent for corne into Hetruria  and the countrie of Pomptinum, to Cumes, and at last even into Sicilie. And not a word all this while about the election of Consuls. So there were militarie Tribunes elected, with Consuls authoritie, all againe of the Patritij, namely, L. Pinarius Mamercus, L. Furius Medullinus, and Sp. Posthumius Albus. That yeare the violence of the sicknesse abated: neither was there any danger or feare of scarsitie of corne, because they had made provision aforehand. Great sitting and consultation there was in the generall Diets of the Volicians and Aequians, and in Hetruria at the foresaid Temple of Volumna about making war. There, the matter was put off for one whole yeare: and by an act or decree it was provided, that no assembly or parliament during that time should be held: notwithstanding the people of the Ve^entians complained, but all in vaine, that the same fortune was like to happen unto Veij, which had fallen alreadie upon Fidene, even  the utter subversion of the state. In this meane season, at Rome the chiefe heads of the Commons having aspired and gaped now a long time, but still in vaine, after higher place of dignitie and honor, tooke their vantage whiles all was quiet abroad, and began to have their conventicles and meetings in the houses of the Tribunes, and there entertained secret counsels. Some complained that they were much despised of the common people: for wheras in so many yeares, there were Tribunes militarie created with Consuls authoritie, yet never was there' any one of the comminaltie advanced to that dignitie. Our forefathers (say they) in great wisedome and deep forecast, have done well to take order, that none of the Nobilitie at any time should have accesse to any office of the cominaltie: for if that were not, the Commons should have had ere this, some of the Patritij for their Tribunes: so odious are we become to those of our owne cote, and are as  little set by of the Commons as of the Nobles. Others excused the people, and laied the fault upon the Senatours: by whose ambition, by whose craftie fetches and subtill pollicies it came to passe, that the Commons were stopped from the high way to advancement and promotion. But if the Commons might have any respite or breathing time, and not be sollicited and tempted by their praiers interlaced with threats: they would remember themselves and those of their owne calling, in giving of their voices: and having once gotten assistance unto them, would also winne the highest pitch and soveraigne type of authoritie. For the abolishing therefore of this ambitious seeking and standing for offices, they agree and resolve, that the Tribunes should preferre and publish a lawe, that no man might weare white more than ordinarie, or refresh the bright hew of his upper garment, while he sued for any dignitie. A small matter now a daies  and may seeme scarcely worth the debating in serious counsell, which notwithstanding at that time, set both Nobles and Commons in a great heate of contention. Yet obtained the Tribunes so much, that this law passed: and it appeared, that the Commons when their bloud was once up, would affect their owne, and wholly incline to them in their suffrages. But to the end that they might not have their full scope and put it in practise, an Act of the Senat was, that

there should be held an Election of Consuls. The occasion thereof, was a tumult or commotion: which, as the Latines and Hernicks advertised them, arose from the Aequians and Volscians. T. Quintius Cincinnatus, the sonne of Lucius (surnamed also Pennus) and C. Iulius Mento were elected Consuls. Neither was this fearefull newes of warre entertained any longer. For the enemies having by a sacred law (which amongst them was of greatest force to levie an armie) mustered their power, set foorth two mightie armies from both parts, into Algidum, and there met. Where the Aequians and Volscians, severally by themselves encamped strongly, and more earnestly studied the captaines to fortifie their campes, and to traine and exercise their souldiours, that at any time afore. Whereupon, the newes was more fearefull that the messengers brought to Rome. So the Senat agreed to create a Dictatour. For, although those nations oftenuines had been vanquished by them, yet now they rebelled in more forcible maner, and with preparation, than at any time before. Also, by reason of the late sicknesse, the youth and flower of the Romans was sore diminished. But above all, the private discord of the Consuls one with another, and the debate and difference in all their counsels, terrified them most. There bee that write, how these Consuls had but unluckie fortune, and lost a field in Algidum: and that it should be the cause of making a Dictatour.
But this one thing is certaine, that howsoever els the Consuls disagreed, yet they jumped in one to crosse the wils of the Senatours, in that they would not nominate a Dictatour, untill such time as, after newes brought, still worse and worse, and yet the Consuls would not bee ruled by the Senatours: one Quintus Servilius Priscuss, a man, who right worthily and honourable had borne the highest offices,The speech of Q. Servilius Priscus. made this speech: My Maisters, yee that are Tribunes of the Commons (quoth hee) in this exigent and desperate case, the Senate  calleth for your assistance, that in so great hazard of the Commonweale, yee by vertue of your authoritie, would force the Consuls peremptorily to make a Dictator. Which speech being once heard, the Tribunes supposing now they had good occasion offered, to stretch and extend their power to the full, departed aside: and in the name of their Colledge or societie, pronounced, That it was their pleasure and will, that the Consuls should be obedient unto the Senat: and in case they proceeded to doe farther, than the consent of that most honourable house would beare them out, they would command them to ward. The Consuls chose rather to bee overruled of them than of the Senat: saying yet withall, that the prerogative of the highest governement was by the Senatours betraied, and the Consulship made thrall and subject to the Tribunes power, if so be the Consuls might be compelled to doe ought by vigour of the Tribunes authoritie, and (than which, a private person could feare no more) bee sent also toward, or committed to prison. The lot fell to T. Quintius (for in this also they could not agree betweene themselves) to nominate the Dictator: who named A. Posthumius Tubertus, his wives father, a grim sir, and a man of most severe and sterne government. By whom was L. Iulius nominated for Generall of the Cavallerie. Herewithall was proclaimed a vacation or lawsteed, and that throughout the whole citie they should goe in hand with nothing but warre. The taking knowledge of such, as pretended to bee freed and exempt from souldierie, was put off untill the war was ended. So that they that were before doubtfull, suffered themselves to be enrolled: and souldiors were levied out from the Hernikes and Latines, who from both places obeied the Dictator to their uttermost. All these things were dispatched with exceeding expedition. Then the Dictator having left C. Iulius the Consull, for the defence of the citie, and L. Iulius the Generall of the horsemen for all suddaine occasions incident unto warres, that they might not be to seek for any thing, whereof they had need in the campe, tooke with him Aulus Cornelius the High priest, and saying after him certaine praiers, word or word, he vowed great and stately plaies, in regard of this tumultuous and troublesome warre: and thus departing from the cittie, and deviding his wholearmie between himselfe and Quintius the Cos. at length he approched the enemies. And like as they had discovered the two campes of their enemies, a little space distant one from another, so they also, about a mile from the enemie, intrenched themselves: the Dictator neere to Tusculum, and the Consull to Lanuvium. So these foure armies, and as many fortified campes, had a spacious and large plaine in the middle, sufficient not onely for small excursions to skirmish in, but also to display  their armies of both sides. And all the time that they lay encamped one against another, they ceased not to make light skirmishes: for the Dictator was well content, that his men by making proofe, and comparing their strength and puissance with their enemies, and assaying by little and little to trie the event of these bickerments, should conceive aforehand some hope of

 the entire and generall victorie.
The enemies therefore having no hope left, to speed well in a set field and pight battell, assailed by night the Consuls campe, and put all to the hazard of a doubtfull issue. The suddaine crie and al'arme, awakened not only the Consuls Sentinels, his corps de gard, and so his whole armie, but the Dictator also, out of their sleepe. And where need was of present helpe, there failed not the Consull, either in courage or counsell. Some souldiors ward and defend the gates, others compasse the trench, ranged in a round array. In the other campe of the Dictator, looke how much lesse stirre there was, so much more leasure had they, and studied what was most needfull to bee done. Forthwith aid was sent unto the Consull his campe, under the leading of Sp. Posthumius Albus, a lieutenant. The Dictator himselfe in person, with part of his power, fetching a small  compasse about, gained a place most apart from all noise and tumult, and from whence at unawares he might charge upon the backe of the enemies. And leaveth as Vicegerent in the leaguer Q. Sulpitius: and to M. Fabius a Lieutenant, he committeth the conduct of the horsemen, commanding him not before day to stirre with his horse, as being unrulie and hard to bee managed in tumults and troubles of the night. And all things els, that a provident and industrious captain in such a case might command and doe, that commanded hee, and did orderly. But for one thing above the rest, he shewed singular proofe of policie and courage, and worthie no meane praise: in that hee sent out first M. Geganius with certain chosen squadrons to assaile that campe of the enemies, from whence hee knew by his espials there was departed a greater part of the forces. Who after that hee surprised the enemies there, amused wholly upon the event of other  mens danger, carelesse and secure for their own selves, and therefore neglecting their skouts and guards, wan their hold, in manner before the enemies knew well it was assailed. From whence the Dictator having descried a smoke (which was the signall agreed between them) crieth alowd, that the enemies campe was woon, and commaundeth newes thereof to be carried everie way. Now it waxed broad day light, and all was clearely to bee seene: by which time both Fabius with the horsemen, had given the charge, and the Consull also had made a sallie out of the campe, upon the enemies that now alreadie were feared. But the Dictator on the other side, charging upon the rereward and the middle battaile, came on everie side with his footmen, and horsemen in traine of victorie against the enemies: who were forced to turne round and fight everie way, according to the dissonant outcries, and suddaine alarmes. Thus being environned round about,  they had in the middest died for it everie one, and suffered punishment due for their rebellion, had not Vectius Messius,The speech of Vectius Messius to his fellow foldiours. one of the Volscians, a man more renowmed for his valiant acts, than noble by his parentage, rebuked with a lowd voice his fellowes, being readie now to cast themselves into rings, and said: What? will ye here without making your defence, without revenge, offer yourselves to be devoured of the enemies sword?
What do you with our armor and weapons? Why began yee warre first? Are you troublesome and unrulie in peace, and cowards in war? What hope have yee in standing still? Doe you looke for some god from heaven to protect and deliver you? You must make way by dint of sword. Go to then, and sticke to it like men, and that way whereas yee shall seeme goe afore, follow yee after, as many of you as mind to see againe your home, your parents, your wives and children. It is neither wall, nor rampier and trench, but armed  men that must withstand armed men. In valour yee are their matches, but in respect of necessitie, (which is the last and strongest engine of all other) ye are the better. When he had these words spoken, and done accordingly, with a fresh shout they followed after, and made head to that quarter whereas Posthumius Albius had placed against them his cohorts: and compelled the victors to lose ground,The valour of Vectius Methes, a Volscian. untill such time as the Dictator came to succour his men, thus distressed and now readie to recule: and so hee bent thither all the force of the whole battaile. In one only man, Messius, rested all the hope and fortune of the enemies. Many a man was there hurt on both parts, and many a one slain outright, and left dead in the place. So as now the verie Roman Commaunders, fought not without bloudshead. Onely Posthumius being smitten with a stone, which had broken and brused his head, went out of the medley: for neither the Dictator, woun ded as he was in the shoulder, nor yet Fabius, albeit his thigh was almost nailed to his horse, nor the Consull, for all his arme was quite cut off, once retired or departed out of that daungerous combat. But Messius amids the enemies that there lay dead on the earth, with a guard about him of most hardie and tall men, passed through in forcible maner, and escaped clear to the Volscians leaguer, which as yet was not lost: and so the whole battaile enclined thither. The Consull, after

he had chased them, scattered in plumpes here and there, even as farre as to the trench, assaileth  the very campe and the rampier. Thither also bringeth the Dictatour his power on another side. Neither was the assault lesse hote there, than the fight was sharpe afore. It is said moreover, that the Consull threw an ensign within the rampier, to animate the souldiors, that they might more eagerly get up after it: and so by recovering the banner againe, was the first breach and entrance made. Thus the Dictator having broken through the mure, came to close fight and handstrokes even within the campe. Then began the enemies every where to fling from them their weapons, and to yeeld themselves prisoners. So being themselves and their pavillions taken, they were all sold, but those of Senators calling. Part of the pillage was restored to the Latines and Herniks, namely, to as many as knew their own goods: part therof the Dictator sold in portsale. And leaving to the Consull the charge of the campe, rode himselfe triumphing into the cittie, and gave  over his office. Of which his noble and famous Dictatorship, they blemish the memoriall, who write, that A. Posthumius (the Dictator his sonne, for that upon advantage offered of a fortunate service, he departed without leave from his quarter and guard) was after his victorie archieved, by his fathers commaundement beheaded. But I list not to beleeve it. And lawfull it is for me so to doe, among so diverse opinions: and a good proofe it is on my side, that such imperious and rigorous proceedings were called Imperia Manliana,(...) and not Posthumiana. For like it is, that he who had given the first example of such crueltie, should have gotten afore all others, that noted title of crueltie. Besides, Manlius it was, that was surnamed Imperious. But Posthumius is not marked with any odious note at all.
C. Iulius Consull, in the absence of his Colleague, without any casting of lots, dedicated the  temple of Apollo Quintius having discharged his armie, when hee was returned into the cittie, tooke not that well. But it was no boot to complaine in the Senate house. Moreover in this notable yeare, so full of brave and worthie acts, there is recorded one thing, that was thought in those daies nothing pertinent to the state of Rome, namely, that the Carthaginians (so great and mortall enemies in time to come) passed the seas then first: and (upon the occasion of civile diffention and discord among the Sicilians) with a power landed in Sicilie, for to take part with a side and faction. In the cittie of Rome the Tribunes of the Commons laboured, that Militarie Tribunes might be with Consuls authoritie chosen: but it could not be obtained. Consuls were made, Lu. Papyrius Crassus, and L. Iulius. The Aequians Embassadours suing to the Senate for a league, and for that league, pretending estsoones to yeeld themselves, and bee in subjection; obtained a truce  onely for eight yeares. The Volscians after their overthrow in Algidum, fell to continuall debate and contention, whiles some persuaded peace, and others war: so long, untill at length they grew to brawles and mutinies. So on everie side the Romanes were at rest. The Consuls understanding that the Tribunes of the Commons were complotted (for one false brother among them bewraied and detected all) to put up a bill,(...) and make a law, concerning the estimation of fines and penalties (a thing right pleasing and acceptable to the people) they themselves prevented them, and preferred it. Then were Consuls, L. Sergius Fidenas, the second time, and Iostius Lucretius Tricipitinus. In whose yeare nothing was there done worthie of rehearsall. After them succeded Consuls, A. Cornelius Cossus, and Titus Quintius Pennus the second time. The Veientians made rodes into the lands of the Romanes. And a rumour went, that some of the Fidenatian  youths were accessarie unto them, and had their hands therein. For which were appointed as Commissioners to make inquisition, L. Sergius, Quintus Servilius, and Mamercus Aemylius. Some of them were confined to Hostia, for that they could make no sound excuse, and justifie their absence for certaine daies out of Fidene. So the number of the inhabitants there, was encreased; and their lands, who were slaine in the warres, assigned unto them.
In that yeare hapned an exceeding great drouth. For not onely there wanted raine water from above,A great drought about Rome, and much mortalius (...). but also the very earth lacking her naturall moisture, scarcely sufficed to maintaine the running streame in maine rivers. The scarcitie of water besides about springs that were dried up, and the small rils and brookes caused a great death and mortalitie of cattaile for default of drinke: whereof some died of the scab: by contagion where of the people also were diseased generally. The maladie first began among the rusticall sort, the bond-slaves and hines: and afterwards spred into every corner of the cittie. Neither were men onely tract and diseased with this infection:Rome (...) but their mindes also were troubled and possessed with sundrie sorts of superstitious religions, and those for the most part strange and forraine: whiles upon vaine and foolish prophesies,

 they brought new rites and ceremonies of sacrificing into mens houses; and made good gaine of such as were given to superstitious devotion, and made conscience of every little thing: untill such time as now it grew to a publike offence, and the chiefe of the cittie were ashamed to see in every streete and chappell, strange and unaccustomed purgatorie sacrifices and expiations, for to procure the favour and mercie of the Gods. Wherupon the Aediles had in charge and commission, to looke streightly to this disorder: and that no other gods were worshipped, than those of the Romanes: nor after any other manner than had been usuall in their native countrie. So their anger against the Veientians and desire of revenge, was put off unto the next yeare following, when C. Servilius Hala, and L. Papyrius Mugilanus were Consuls. And even then, they made some scruple to proclaime warre immediatly, or to make out any power against them: but  they thought good to send their Heraulds afore, to make claime for their owne and challenge restitution. For whereas of late yeares there had beene a field fought with the Veientians before Nomentum and Fidene: wherupon there followed no peace but onely a truce concluded: both the time was now expired, and also before the daie they had rebelled. Yet were there Heraulds sent unto them. And when they had demaunded a mends by a solemne oath and other ceremonies according to the auncient manner, they might have no audience, neither were their words regarded. After this, there arose some question, whether the warre should be proclaimed with the peoples allowance and suffrages, or the Senates decree were alone sufficient. The Tribunes by giving out and threatning that they would stop the musters, obtained in the end, that Quintius the Consull should propound this matter concerning the warre unto the people. And  it passed cleare through all the Centuries. Herein also had the comminaltie the better of it, for that they prevailed that there should be no Consuls chosen the yeare following.Foure militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie. So there were foure Tribunes militarie created with Consuls authoritie, T. Quintius Pennus immediatly from his Consulship. C. Furius, M. Posthumius, and Cornelius Cossus: of which Cossus had the charge and government of the cittie. The other three after they had mustered, tooke a journy to Veij; and made good proofe how hurtfull in warre is the rule of many Commanders. For whiles every man was inclined to his owne counsaile and advice, and tooke divers courses one from another, they made way for the enemies and gave them advantage. For the Veientians taking their opportunitie and time, entred upon the armie thus distracted, whiles some commaunded to found the retrait, others the al'arme and to strike up the battaile. Whereupon they were disordered  and put to flight. But for as much as the campe was neare at hand, thither they retired themselves in safetie: so, as the shame they gat was more than the harme in this diffeature. The cittie was pensive and hereupon sorrowed, as not used to take foiles and overthrowes. The Tribunes they hated, and required a Dictatour: in whom rested ever the whole hope and stay of the cittie. And when as even in that behalfe, they made a matter of conscience, because there might not be any Dictatour nominated, but by a Consull, the Augurs were consulted withall: who resolved them of that doubt and rid them of their scruple. So A. Cornelius (a consular Tribune) nominated Mamercus Aemilius Dictatour: by whom he was himselfe also pronounced Graund Master of the horsemen. At such default was the cittie then, of right valour and true vertue, that notwithstanding the prejudice by the Censors, yet there was no remedie, but the whole government  of the state should rest upon that family, which had been wrongfully disgraced and unworthely noted by the Censors.
The Veientians proud of their late good successe, albeit they sent their Embassadours about all the nations of Hetruria, boasting and vaunting that in one battaile they had discomfited three Romane Generals: yet could not they with all their solliciting, persuade any to be seene to take part with them in publike action: but they procured divers from all parts for hope of spolle, voluntarily to aid and assist them. The people of Fidene onely agreed to rebell. And as though it had been in no wise lawfull, to begin any warre but with some wicked, heinous and execrable fact: like as asore they had embrude their hands, and bathed their swords in the bloud of Embassadors, so then, they began with murdering their new received Coloners: and so banded themselves  with the Veientians. Then consulted the Princes and States of those two nations, whether they should make Veij or Fidene the seat towne of the warre. Fidene was supposed the fitter and more commodious. So the Veientians passed overthe Tyber, and translated the warre to Fidene. Great feare was there at Rome, to see the armie of their enemies removed from Veij, and emplanted at Fidene. And being shrewdly danted by their late overthrow besides, encamped even before

the gate Collina. On the wals were armed souldiors placed, vacation in all courts of lawe  was ordeined, shop windowes, thutte up; and all more like a leager than a cittie. Then sent the Dictatour the criers about into all streets and carrifours, to summon the cittizens thus terrified, to a generall assemb'y.(...)
Where he rebuked them for carrying such wavering and doubtfull hearts upon so small accidents and events of fortune, having received but a flight losse and finall foile: and that, not through the manhood of the enemie, or cowardise of the Romane armie; but onely through the disagreement and difference of the leaders. Also for that they were affraid of the Veientian enemie, whom five or sixe times afore they had put to the worst and vanquished: and especially of Fidene, which had been oftner in a manner won; than asiaulted: As for the Romanes and their enemies (faith he) they are even the same still that alwaies for so many hundred years; they had been: bearing the same minds, the same bodily strength, and the same  armour: and even my selfe am the same Mamercus Aemilius, and no other, who heretofore discomfited at Nomentum, the Veientians and Fidenatians, with the Faliscians power also adjoined unto them. And as for A. Cornelius, he will no doubt be the same Generall of horsemen in this battaile, as in the former warre he was: at what time he being a Knight Marshall, flew Lars Tolumnius the King of the Veientians, in the fight of two armies: and brought into the Temple of Iupiter Feretrius, the rich armour of him despoiled. Wherfore ye ought to remember this, that we have on our side triumphs, spoiles and victorie: whereas with the enemies remaineth the wicked and detestable fact of killing the Embassadours, against the law of all nations: also the massaker of the Fidenatian inhabitants, in time of peace: the breaking of truce, and their revolting now seaven times, to their ruine and overthrow. Take weapon therfore in hand like men: for  I trust assuredly, that so soone as we shall joine our campes together, and encounter these most wicked enemies, they shall have no long joie of the late shamefull discomfiture of the Romane armie. And the people of Rome shall understand, how much better they have deserved of the Common-weale, who made me Dictatour now the third time, than those, who for clipping the Censors wings and abridging them of their kingly rule, had disteined and disgraced my second Dictatourship with the shamefull blot of ignominie and reproch. After this speech, when he had made his vowes accordingly: he encamped a mile and an halfe on this side Fidene, flanked on the right hand with the hils, and on the left with the river Tyber. And commanded T. Quintius Pennus his lieutenant, to gaine the hils afore, and be possessed secretly of that cape or hill, which was on the backe part of the enemies.
Himselfe the next morrow, when as the Tuscanes, (full of pride and stomack for the prosperous successe of former daies, which was much better than their service in fight) came forth into the field: after he had staied a while, untill the scoutes and espials brought word, that Quintius was gotten safely unto the hil top neare adjoyning to the castle or sort of the Fidenatians, he advanceth forth his standerds: and with his footmen ranged in battaile array, marched against his enemies with full pace: commaunding his Generall of the horsemen not to charge without his warrant: for that he himselfe as need should; equite, would give the signall for the aide of his cavallerie to come in, willing him then, to quit himselfe like a brave Knight in remembrance of his glorious combat with a King: of his rich present and oblation: and of Romulus and Iupiter Feretrius. Thus the legions assaile one another and encounter right hardily. The Romanes kindled and enflamed with rancour and malice, termed the Fidenatians, wicked and godlesse wretches: the Veientians, robbers and theeves; trucebreakers both, polluted with the abominable murder of Embassadours: steined with the execrable massaker of their cohabitants: faithlesse and treacherous allies, cowardly and dastardly enemies: thus both in word and deed they satisfied their hatred to the full. And at the very first shock forced their enemies to shrinke. At which instant all at once, there issued out of the open gates of Fidene a strange armie, not heard of nor usuall, before that day. A mightie number armed with fireworks, and shining all over with burning lights, after a fanaticall and mad manner, ran as if they were carried with spirits, upon their enemies: and with the uncouth fight of this kind of fight, amased the Romans a pretie while. Then the Dictator busie in fight, having sent both for the Generall of the cavallerie with his troupes of horsmen, and also for Quintius from the mountaines, hastened himselfe to the left point: which being terrified with a scarefire more like than a battail, had given place unto the flame, and stepped backe. Where with a loud voice he thus spake: What? wil ye be overcome with smoak like a swarm of bees,(...) and leese your ground, and recule from your naked and unarmed enemies? wil ye not put out this fire with redoubled stroke of brandishing swords?
 And will yee not every man for his part, if we must needs fight with fire, and not with weapons, pull from them their torches and firebrands, and fling them againe at their owne heads? Go to, I say, like hardie men, mindfull of the renowne of Romanes, remembring the prowesse of your fathers, and your owneselves. Turne this fire upon your enemies cittie, and consume Fidene into ashes with her own flames: this disloiall Fidene, which by no favors and good turns of yours, yee were ever able to win and pacifie. The bloud of your Embassadors, the bloud of your Coloners thither sent to people their cittie, your frontiers and borders by them wasted, put you in mind of no meaner revenge. At the Dictatours commaundement, the whole battaillon was moved and encouraged. Some latch the firebrands as they flew, others by force snatch them from them, so that now both battailes were armed with fire. The Generall of horsemen for his part, renueth  the horse-service: commaunding them to plucke the bitts out of their horses mouths, and was the first himselfe, that setting spurres to, rode with bridle in horsenecke, into the middest of the fire: and the other horses also being pricked forward, and eased of their bridles, caried the riders with full cariere against the enemie. The dust rising together with the smoke, took the light from mens eies, and horses both. And that fight which had terrified the souldiours; nothing at all affrighted the horses. Wheresoever therfore the men of armes rode, they bare down all afore them as if some houses had come tumbling upon their heads. Herewith happened a new al'arme to be heard, which having caused both armies to wonder and listen thereunto, the Dictator crieth out aloud, That Quintius the Lieutenant and his regiment, came upon the back of the enemies: and himselfe reenforcing the shout, advanceth his ensignes forward more freshly. When as now  two armies, and two divers battailes, preased sore upon the Tuscanes, and environned them both before and behind: and that the enemies could neither flie backe to their campe, nor yet retire or withdraw themselves unto the mountaines, from whence a fresh supplie of enemies, made head, and affronted them: and that the horses being unbrideled, carried the riders every way, hither and thither: the most part of the Veientians ran scattering in disorder, and highing them apace, toward the Tyber: and the Fidenatians that remained, to the citie Fidene. But in that tearfull flight they ran upon their owne death. Some were killed on the banckes of the river, others were driven into the water, and the stream and whirlepits carried them away. And even they that were cunning swimmers, what with wearinesse, and what with faintnesse of their wounds and with fright, suncke and were drowned: so that few of many swam over in safetie. The other armie fled through  their campe into the cittie. The same way also the Romanes followed forciblie after: and Quintius especially, together with them who crewhile came downe from the mountaines, and were the freshest souldiors for fight (as who came last into the battell) and so afterwards entred pell mell among their enemies into the gate, climed upon the wals, and from the wals set up a banner to their fellowes, in token that they had woon the towne. Which as soone as the Dictatour espied, (for now by this time had hee made an entrance into the forlorne, and abandoned campe of his enemies) he brought the souldiours, upon desire to run to a spoile, and hoping of a greater saccage in the citie, streight unto the gate. And being gotten within the wals, marcheth directly forward to the castle, whereinto he beheld the multitude to flie for refuge and safetie. The execution in the cittie was no lesse than in the field: which continued untill they threw away their weapons,  and craving nothing but life, yeelded themselves to the Dictator. So both citie and campe was spoiled and sacked. The morrow after, the Dictator disposed of his prisoners thus, He drew them by lot, and gave to every horseman and Centurion one, and to as many as had done more valiantly than other, two apeece: the rest he sold in portsale. And so with triumph brought home to Rome his victorious armie, enriched with a great bootie: and having commaunded the Generall of the horsemen to resigne up his office, himselfe also surrendreth his owne, upon the sixteenth day after his creation, yeelding up his government in peace, which in time of war, and in a fearefull state he had received.
There be some that have recorded in their Chronicles, that there was a battaile fought with the Veientians at Fidene by ships upon the water. A thing verily, no lesse impossible than incredible.  Considering that even at this day, the river is not broad ynough for such a purpose: and at that time, (as by auncient men we have learned) it was farre narrower than now it is. Vnlesse haply in crossing over the river some vessels or bottomes, that were put out to meet and to receive them, were staied. And so, men making the matter greater (as usually it commeth to passe) have desired a vaine title of a navall victorie at sea. The yeare following, there were militarie Tribunes,

with Consuls authoritie, A. Sempronius Atratinus, L. Quintius Cincinnatus, L. Furius Medullinus, and L. Horatius Barbatus. Then was there a truce graunted unto the Veientians for twentie yeares, and to the Aequians for three yeares, whereas they had made suit for more. Rest there was also from all feditions and broiles in the cittie. The yeare following, having neither warre abroad, nor yet fedition at home, was famous yet for the plaies which in time of warre had been vowed: both in regard of the great preparations that the Militarie. Tribunes made, as also for the frequent resort and concourse of the Nations adjoining. The Tribunes with Consuls authoritie, were Cl. Crassus, Sp. Nautius Rutilius, T. Sergius Fidenas, and Sextus Iulius Tullus. The fight of these games and pastimes, whereunto those strangers were come by publick consent of their States, was unto them more acceptable, in regard of the courtesie of those friends that gave them intertainement.The Tribunes Orations to the Commons.
After these plaies, there ensued seditious  Orations of the Tribunes of the Commons, who rebuked the common multitude, for that they being besotted with admiration of those whom they had so hated, kept themselves in perpetuall thraldome. And not onely durst not attempt to put forth themselves for to bring in againe the possibilitie to have Consuls of their part, as in times past: no nor so much as in the creation of Militarie Tribunes (the Election of whom was indifferent as well for Commons as Nobles) were mindfull or thought either upon themselves or their friends, and those of their owne bodie. And therfore they should surcease to marveile, why no man pleaded for the benefit of the comminaltie. For, travaile is well bestowed, and danger well adventured, where profit and honor might be hoped and looked for. And nothing is so difficult but men would employ themselves to enterprise the same, if for the adventuring of great exploits, there might be proposed as great  rewards. But, that any Tribune of the Commons should run desperatly and blindly into a world of brangles and troubles, with great hazard of his person, and no hope at all of fruit and profit in the ende: for which contention, he might be sure that the Nobles against whom he strived, would persecute him with deadly and irreconcilable malice: and at the Commons hands, for whom he thus contended, he should be honored and advaunced never the more, it was a thing neither to be expected, nor required. The onely meanes to get courage and magnanimitie, is advancement to high place of honor and dignitie. And as for them, they would not disdaine the meanest commoner that was, if they themselves might be no more despised. To conclude, the matter were worth the triall in one or two, whither any commoner were sufficient to beare a great office of state; or whether it were a wondrous thing and strange miracle, that a valiant and  hardie man should arise out of the comminaltie. With much a doe (say they) we got and obtained, that Tribunes militarie with Consuls authoritie might likewise be chosen out of the comminaltie: and men approved both in warre abroad and in affaires of State at home, had sued therefore. In the first yeares they being nipped by you, and so having the repulse, were had in derision of the Nobilitie: so that at length they forbare to give themselves thus contumeliously to be misused and made fooles. Wee see no cause therefore, why that law also should not bee repealed, wherein a dignitie was graunted, and never like to bee obtained. For lesse shame would there arise, if the law were not indifferent nor respective unto them, than as unmeet persons and unworthie, thus shamefully to be passed by and take the repulse. These and such like speeches were heard with so good an eare and generall applause, that some of them were incited forward  to sue for the Militarie Tribuneship: whiles every one promised in the time of his office to doe great matters and to propose, some one thing some another, for and concerning the benefit of the Commons. Pretending great hopes of deviding the common lands, and planting of colonies abroad, and laying tributes and impositions upon landed persons, for to paie souldiors wages. But the Tribunes militarie then in place, devised to spie out a time, when upon some occasion of the absence of much people departed out of the cittie, the Senators by a privie and secret warning, should at a certaine day be called home: and then, whiles the Tribunes of the Commons were away, an Act of Senate should passe in this forme: That for as much as it was noised that the Volscians were entred into the lands of the Hernicks to forray and rob, the militarie Tribunes should go to see whether it were so or no, and that in the mean while there should  be held a generall assembly for the Election of Consuls. The Tribunes militarie tooke their journey accordingly, and left Appius Claudius the Decemvirs sonne, governour of the cittie, a stour young gentleman and a forward, who from his very cradle bare an inward grudge and hatred against the Tribunes and the Commons. And bootlesse it was either for the Tribunes of

 the Commons to find themselves grieved with those, who made the decree, now that they were absent, nor yet had they cause to quarrell with Appius Claudius, because the thing had been contrived and past afore his time. So, Consuls were created, C. Sempronius Atratinus, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus.
A forreine matter, but yet worthie to be remembred and here inserted, is reported to have happened that yeare: to wit, that Vulturnum a cittie of the Tuscanes, which now is Capua, was by the Samnites taken: and that it came to bee named Capua of one Capis their captaine, or (which soundeth more like a truth) of the champian field. But they wan it by this meanes. For upon occasion that the Tuscanes were wearied with former warres, they were admitted into the societie of their cittie and territorie. And on a solemne feastivall day, when as the cittizens had  filled their bellies, and were sound asleep, these new Coloners the Samnits, set upon the old inhabitants, and in the night season slew them all.
But now to returne. Things passing thus (as I said before) the Consuls abovenamed upon the 13 of DecemberIdes of December, entred their government. By which time not only they which were of purpose sent to learne the newes of the Volscians, brought word that warre was at hand, but Embassadours also from the Latines and Hernickes, gave intelligence of the same. And namely, that never at any time afore, the Volscians were more busie and occupied, either in chusing of good captaines, or in levying an armie, giving out these speeches abroad and in every place, That the time was now come, either to forget warfare, and lay away souldierie, and for ever make account to beare the yoke of thraldome; or els not to give one foot, nor come behind those with whom  they strove for soveraigntie, either in manhood or in painefull travell, or in discipline of warfare. And surely they were no vaine tidings that those messengers reported. But the Senatours would take no such knowledge, nor be greatly moved at the matter. And withall, C. Sempronius, unto whom the charge of that war was allotted, presuming upon fortune, as if she were alwaies right constant and at commaund, and leading an armie of a people used to victorie, against those that were wont to be overcome, did all things rashly and negligently. So as to speake a truth, there was more Romane discipline in the Volscian host, than in the Romane. And so, fortune (as oftentimes els) went with vertue. At the first encounter, which by Sempronius was unheedfully and unadvisedly begun, before that either the battaillons were reinforced and strengthened with fresh supplies of succour, or the horsemen raunged in convenient place, they ran together, and came to  handstrokes. And the first token which way the victorie would encline, was the manner of shout at the first charge; which by the enemie was more lowd, more shrill and continuall: but by the Romanes dissonant, unequall, dead and cold, often begun, and
 often renued: and by their uncertaine and variable noise, they bewraied the inward feare of their hearts. Whereupon the enemies so much the more eagerly charged them, pressing upon them with their shields, and laying at them thicke with their bright swords: on the other side, the Romanes helmets wag, and their crests nod everie way as they looke about them: and as they were to seeke what to doe, so they tremble and run together on heapes: one while the ensignes stand still, and were abandoned of the formost fighting in the vaward, another while they retired in againe amongst their own squadrons. Yet was not the flight certaine, nor yet the victorie. The Romanes sought more to cover  and shrowd themselves than to fight: to ward blowes rather than to strike. The Volscians set forward their ensignes, preased upon the maine battail, and saw more enemies under foot slaine than running away. And now in all places the Romanes reculed, notwithstanding Sempronius the Consull both rebuked and al
so exhorted them to sticke to it: for neither his commandement nor the authoritie and majestie of his countenance availed ought. And immediately had they all turned their backes on their enemies,The valo^ of Sex Tampani^. if Sex. Tempanius, a Decurion of horsemen, had not in this desperat case, with a resolute courage and readie advise, helped at a pinch. Who cried with a loud voice, that those horsemen which would the safetie of the common-wealth; should dismount off their horses.
And when the Cornets of horsemen bestirred themselves at his words, no lesse than if the Consull had given commaundement, Vnlesse (faith hee) this  troupe of men of armes, staie the violence of the enemies, wee see the last of the Romane Empire. Follow therefore in stead of banner displaied, the point of my launce: let both Romanes and Volscians see, that no nation is comparable to you, either for foote or horse. Whose encouragement being approoved and received with a shout, hee advaunceth forward, bearing his staffe aloft: and what way soever they goe, they enter and make roome with forcible

sway: and where they see their fellowes in greatest distresse, thither they make speed, opposing  their targuets afore them. And thus in every place whereas they thrust themselves forcibly, was the fight renued: and doubtlesse the enemies had turned their backs, if possible it had been, for so few to have performed everything at once. Now when as the Generall of the Volscians, saw his men not able to withstand them, he gave a signall and charge to give way to this new band of enemies, to wit, these Targattiers: untill such time as they had put themselves so forward, that they might be excluded from their fellows. Which being done, these horsemen were enclosed on every side: neither could they break through that way which they went, because the enemies were there thickest, where they had made their lane before. The Cos. then, with the legions of the Romans, having lost the fight of those that had ben a shield of defence and bulwarke erewhile to the whole armie, least that so many hardie men thus invironed, should be overpressed  by the enemies; resolved to adventure any perill or hazard whatsoever. The Volscians were likewise divertly occupied and troubled. For on the one side they bare off the Cos. and legions: on the other side they affronted Tempanius sore, and the horsemen: who seeing that after many assaies and offers they could not breake forth to their fellows, gat up unto a certaine little hill, and cast themselves into a ring and stood to their defence, not without doing some mischiefe to their enemies: neither gave they over fighting untill night. The Consull also maintained the battell so long as he could see, and kept the enemie play. So the night parted them a sunder, and uncertaine it was who had the upper hand. And for that the event was unknown, who sped the better, so great a terrour came upon both parts in their campes, that leaving the wounded and a great part of their cariages behinde, both armies as taking themselves loosers, recovered the mountaines  that were next unto them. How beit the hill or banke aforesaid, continued still beset round about, untill midnight. But when word was brought thither to the Assailants, how that their campe was abandoned: they thinking their fellowes vanquished, were also for their part affrighted, and made shift and fled in the darke as well as they could. Tempanius, fearing an ambushment, kept his men there together untill day light. Then went he downe with a few to discover the coasts: and finding by enquirie made of the wounded enemies, that the tents of the Volscians were left and forsaken: he was full glad thereat, and called downe his souldiors from the mount, and entreth into the Romane campe. Where seeing all void and forlorne, and finding the same desolation which was amongst the enemies: before that the Volscians upon knowledge of their errour should returne again, he tooke with him those hurt souldiors that he could: and not knowing to  what quarters the Consull was gone, marcheth forward the next way to the cittie of Rome. And thither alreadie the bruit of this unluckie fight, and of abandoning the tents, was arrived. But above all the rest, those horsmen were bewailed, and great mone and lamentation was made for them as well in privat as in publike. The Cos. Fabius, seeing the citie also terrified with this news, kept ward before the gates: by which time, they might discover the horsemen aforesaid a far off: but not without some feare of their parts, doubting who they were. But being soone knowne, they caused so great contentment after former fear, that in most joyful maner, the noise went through the cittie, how the horsemen were returned safe with victorie. And out of those mourning and sorrowfull houses, which a while afore had bid adieu to their friends and kinsfolke, and bewailed their death, they ran into the streetes and high waies by heapes. The fearefull dames also and wives, forgetting, for joie, all decent and womanly modestie, went out to meete the armie, fell every one with open armes upon their owne husbands and sonnes, tooke them about the necke, clipped and kissed them, and with all their hand and heart received them, yea and for exceeding joy were almost past themselves.
The Tribunes of the Commons, who had challenged and accused M. Posthumius and T. Quintius, for that by their default, there was an unluckie fight before Veij: seemed to have good occasion and opportunitie offered now, by bringing the Consull Sempronius into fresh and new hatred and disgrace, for to renue the conceived displeasure and malice of the people against them. Having assembled therefore the people together, with open mouth they declared, that the Common-wealth was betraied first, at Veij by the leaders, and afterwards, because  they went cleare away withall, and unpunished, therefore the armie in Volsci was likewise lost by the Consull:(...) and that a troupe of most valiant knights were thus cast away and given to be murdered, and the campe shamefully left and forsaken.
Then C. Iulius, one of the Tribunes, commanded Tempanius the horseman to be called, and before them all said, I would know of thee

o Sixtus Tempanius, whether thou thinke that C. Sempronius the Consull, either began battaile in good time, or strengthned his battaillons with good succours and supplies? or whether thou thy selfe, when as the Romane legions and footmen were discomfired, of thine owne head and pollicie, causedst the horsemen to alight on foote, and therby reenforced the fight? Afterwards, when thou and thy men of armes were shut out from our battaile, whether either the Consull himselfe came to rescue, or sent any succour unto thee? Last of all, whether the morrowe after, thoir haddest any aid or rescue at all? Whether thou and thy troupe of horsemen brake through into the campe by your own hardinesse and valor? And whether ye found in the campe any Consull or armie, or rather the pavilions abandoned, and the souldiours left behind, hurt and wounded? To these premisses and pointes, hast thou to speake this day upon thy vertue,  and the faith of a souldior: by which onely, in this warre-service the Commonweale hath stood preserved. Finally, where C. Sempronius, and where our legions be? Whither thou were forsaken thy selfe, or whether thou forsookest the Consull and the armie? And to conclude, whether we have lost or woon the field? To these demands, Tempanius made (as they say) no fine Oration, but a grave pithie speech like a souldiour: not full of selfe-praises; nor shewing any gladnesse for the fault of another,The modest answere of Tempanius, to the former Interrogatories. and answered in this wife: How great skill (quoth he) of martiall feats, and what sufficiencie is in C. Sempronius, it is not for me a souldiour to judge, nor yet to make any estimate of my Generall: but it was for the people of Rome to determine thereof, at what time as by their suffrages and voices, in a solemne Election, they chose him Consull. And therefore yee are not to enquire of me, and to be informed, either of the polliciesof a General captain, or vertues  and duties of a Consull: deepe points to be examined, weighed, and discoursed by great wits, reaching heads, and high mindes. But for that which I with mine cie sawe, I am able to make report and testifie: namely, That before himselfe was excluded out of the battaile, I beheld the Consull fighting manfully in the vaward, encouraging his men earnestly, and even amongst the Romane standards, and pikes of the enemies, busily emploied. After which I was carried from the fight of my fellowes: how beit by the stirre, noise and shouting, I well perceived, that the conflict continued until night. Neither was it possible (as I thought) for them to breake through unto the hill which I kept, by reason of the multitude of enemies betweene. As for the armie, what is become of it, I know not: But I suppose, that as I my selfe in an extremitie and fearefull case, defended my selfe and my men, by advantage of the ground: so the Consull for to save the armie,  tooke some more safer place to encampe in. Neither thinke I verely, that the Volscians stood in better termes than the Romanes fortune was. And the darknes of the night (no doubt) caused errour and confusion on every side, and in all places. After which speech when as he besought them, not to hold him any longer, wearied with travaile, and faint of his woundes: he was with exceeding praise both of his valiant service and also of his modest speech, licenced to depart.
Whiles these thinges thus passed, the Consull by that time, had marched by the way of Lavicum as farre as to the Temple of The goddesse of rest and Repose. Quies: thither were waines, draught-beasts and sumpter horses sent from the cittie, to receive and ease the armie, toiled out with fight, and tired by journying all night. Within a while after, the Cos. entred into the cittie: who endevoured not more,  to put the fault from himselfe, than to extoll Tempanius, and give him his due deserved praises. Now whiles the cittie was sad and heavie for this hard hap, and angrie also with the captaines: behold, M. Posthumius, who before had been accused, was now presented unto the people, for to wreke their choler and malice upon. He had been a Tribune Militarie in place of a Cos. at Veij, and now was condemned,^^ lib. 5 sn. sterl. and a fine set on his head of ten thousand Asses of brasse. But as for Titus Quintius, his fellow in government, because that among the Volscians he had served fortunatly as Consull, under the conduct of Postbumius Tibertus the Dictator: and likewise at Fidene, as Lieutenant of the other Dictator Mamercus Aemylius, and laid the whole fault of that other time from himselfe, upon his colleague before condemned: he was found unguiltie and acquit by all the Tribes. It is said that the fresh remembrance of his father Cincinnatus, late a right  worshipfull citizen, helped him much: Yea and Capitolinus Quintius a very aged man, did him no hurt, who humbly besought them that they would not suffer him, having but a while in this world to live, for to be the carrier of so heavie newes unto Cincinnatus. The Commons made Tribunes of the comminaltie, Sex. Tempanius, A. Sellius, Sex. Antiflius, and Sex. Pompilius in their absence: whom also the horsemen had chosen for their captains or Centurians, in the former exploit,

by the advise and counsell of Tempanius. But the Senatours, because now for hatred of  Sempronius, the name of Consuls misliked and offended them, determined that militarie Tribunes with Consuls authoritie, should be created. So there were chosen L. Manlius Capitolinus, Q. Antonius Merenda, L. Papyrius Mugilanus.
In the very beginning of the yeare L. Hortenfius the fift Tribune of the comminaltie, accused C. Sempronius the Consull of the former yeare. And when as his other foure fellows in office, in the sight of the people of Rome besought him, not to trouble their guiltles captaine, in whom nothing could be blamed or found fault withall, but adverse fortune: Hortensius could hardly abide, but thought it was but to prove and trie his resolute constancie: and that the partie accused, trusted not upon the praier and intercession of the Tribunes, which only for a shew was pretended, but upon their support and assistance. And therfore turning one while to Sempr. himselfe, demanded what was become of that hautie courage and stomack, so ordinarie in those of Senatours calling? and where was that magnanimitie which rested and relied upon innocencie? since that he having been a Consull, was faine to shelter and shrowd himselfe under the shadow and protection of the Tribunes? Another while directing his speech to his fellow Tribunes: but you my Masters (qd. he) what will ye do? if I prosecute mine action against him still, and convict him in the end; Will ye take from the people their right, and overthrow the authoritie of the Tribunes among the Commons? When they again said and inferred, that the people of Rome had absolute power to doe what they would, both with Sempronius, and all others: and that they neither would nor could abridge the people of their judgment. But if (say they) our praiers in the behalfe of our Generall, who was to us in steed of a father, may not availe, then will we together  with him change our weede for companie. Nay God forbid (quoth Hortenfius) The Commons of Rome shall never see their Tribunes arraied in soiled and mournfull apparell. And as for C. Sempronius, I have now no more to say to him, since that he hath carried himselfe so, whiles he was generall, as that he hath gained thus much, as to be so dearly beloved of his souldiors. Neither was the kindnesse of those foure Tribunes more acceptable to the Commons and Nobles, than the good nature of Hortensius, who at their reasonable request, was so easie to be pacified and intreated.
It was no long time that fortune fawned upon the Aequians: who embraced the doubtfull victorie of the Volscians, and tooke it as their owne. The next yeare after, when Cn. Fabius Vibulanus, and T. Quintius Capitolinus, the sonne of Capitolinus, were Consuls: by the leading of Fabius, unto whom was allotted that province, nothing was done there worthie of remembrance. For when as the Aequians had made semblance of a battell, and brought their armie only in fight, they were in fearfull wise soon discomfited, and shamefully fled, ministring no matter of great honor to the Cos. And therfore was he denied triumph. But yet because the ignominie of the losse which happened by Sempronius, was partly allaied, it was granted that he might enter Ovant into the cittie.(...). [A Generall was said to enter Ovant into the citie, when ordinarily without his armie following him, he went on foot, or rode on horsebacke only, and the people in their Acclamations for joy, redoubled Ohe, or Oho. So that Ovatio is as much as Ohatio: Howsoever, some thinke that Ovatio took the name of sacrificing a sheepe. But he rode in triumph, when his souldiors attended him in his chariot, crying to Triumphe. In this he caried a branch, or ware a garland of lawrell, in the other of Myrtle. So that the Ovation was a lesse honour than the Triumph. And it was granted to inferior persons, and for meaner desert. Whereas, none usually might triumph, unlesse he were Dictator, Cos. or Pretor, and had slain in field 5000 enemies at the least, won much spoile and pillage, and augmented the State of the Roman Empire.] Like as the war was dispatched with lesse ado than they feared: so in the citie, after a calme and peaceable state, there arose between the Com. and Nobles, a world of discords and troubles more than they expected. Which began upon occasion of doubling the number of Questors. For when the Consuls had propounded, that besides two Questors or Treasurers of the cittie, there should bee other twaine readie to attend upon the Consuls, for all services and charges belonging to warre: and when the Nobles also with all their power had approoved it, the Tribunes of the Commons entred into a contention  with the Consuls, and required that some of the Questors (for untill that time they had been created from out of the degree of the Patritij onely) might be like wise of the Commons. Against which demand, at the first, both Consuls, and also the Nobles, laboured with might and maine. But afterwards having graunted thus much, That as the use and practise was in creating of Tribunes,

 with Consuls authoritie, so in like manner, in the Election of Questor's, the people should have their free libertie to chuse. And seeing they gained little thereby, and could effect no good, they wholly let fall their former matter, about increasing the number of the Questor's. But although it were thus by them given over, the Tribunes tooke it in hand againe, and set it on foot: yea, and other seditious actions besides eftsoones sprang forth, and among the rest; those also concerning the law Agraria. Vpon which troubles, when as the Senate was of mind, that there should be Consuls rather than Consular Tribunes created; and by reason of the Tribunes stepping betweene with their negative voice, no decree of the Senate could passe, the governement of the Commonweale was devolved from Consuls to an The vacancie of the soveraigne magistrate. Interreigne, but not without exceeding great debate: for that the Tribunes kept the Patritij from meeting and packing together.
 Now when as the greater part of the yeare following was spent, with much strife and contention betweene the new Tribunes and certaine Interregents, whiles one while the Tribunes staied the Nobles from assembling together about the chusing of an Interregent, and another while crossed the Interregent for graunting out any Act of Senate or warrant, for the election of Consuls: at the last,The Oration of L. Papyrius Muguillanus, to the Nobles and Commons of Roa.^^ L. Papyrius Mugillanus, being declared Interregent, sometimes rebuked the Nobles, and sometimes blamed the Commons, and said: That the Commonwealth neglected and forlome of all men, was taken into protection of the gods, and guided by their care and providence: standing upright and safe only, upon the truce observed by the Veientians, and the slow speed or small hast that the Aequians made to warre. From whence, if any trouble should happen to arise, it is your will (quoth he) and pleasure belike, that the state should bee surprised and assailed,  whiles it is without any Magistrate of the Nobilitie. For neither is there an armie readie, nor yet a captaine to raise an armie. What? thinke ye to put backe forraine war abroad by civile discord at home? Which if they both should come together, there were no other remedie, though all the gods in heaven should set to their helping hand, but that the Commonweale of Rome should utterly be subverted. Yet rather remit every one of you somwhat, of the rigor of your full jurisdiction, and (for the love of God) take some indifferent course to joine in unitie: the Nobles for their part, by suffering Militarie Tribunes to be created in lieu of Coss. the Tribunes again, by no more thwarting and interposing their negative, but that four Questors may be chosen by the free voices of the people, from out of the Commons and Nobles, one with another. First therfore was the High court held for choosing soveraigne Tribunes: and Tribunes there were created in  Consular authoritie, all of the Nobilitie, namely, L. Quintius Cincinnatus the third time, Sex. Furius Medullinus the second time, M. Manlius, and A. Sempronius Atratinus. When this Tribune last named, was president of the Election for Questours, and the son of Antistius a Tribune of the Commons, and a brother besides to another Tribune, one Sex. Pompilius stood for the dignitie, among certaine other of the Commoners: neither all their owne meanes that they could make, nor all the voices they could procure, were able to prevaile, but that the people preferred persons to the place, according to their gentrie and high birth: namely, whose fathers and grandfathers they had seene Consuls. All the Tribunes of the Commons stormed and chased at this,The complaints of Pompilius and Antistius against Atratinus the ^^ibune militarie. but especially Pompilius and Antistius, being set on fire at the repulse of these their friends.
What should this meane (say they) that none of the Commons, neither in regard of  their owne merites, nor considering the injuries at the Nobles hands, ne yet for desire they might pretend to the first hansell of that authoritie, which now was lawfull, and never heretofore: that none of the Commons (I say) was created, if not a Militarie Tribune, yet not so much as a Questour? What? that neither the fathers praier in the behalfe of his sonne, nor a brothers suit in favour of a brother, being Tribunes both of them, invested in that sacred authoritie, and which first was erected for the maintenance of common freedome, could ought at all prevaile? Surely there is some fraud and juggling in the matter: and A. Sempronius, hath in the Election used more art and cunning than truth and fidelitie. Complaining that by his injurious and indirect dealing, their friends had taken the foile. When as therefore they might not by any violence touch his owne person and attach him, being senced with innocencie in this Action, and  secured by vertue of the office which then hee bare: they wreaked their selves and discharged their choler upon C. Sempronius, the cousin germaine of Atratinus by the brother: and with the helpe of M. Canuleius, one of their collegues, arrested him for the ignominious service in the Volscian war. Eftsoons also the same Tribunes made some words and motion in the Senat house, concerning the division of lands, and revived the law Agraria (which C. Sempronius at all times most

sharpely and eagerly had withstood. Supposing, as it fell out in deede, that the accused person  should either by giving over the cause, be lesse esteemed of the Nobles: or if he stood to it still untill the time of judgment drew neare, he should displease and offend the Commons. But he chose rather to be the object of the displeasure and malice of the people, that were opposed and bent against him, and so to wound his owne privat estate: than to betray the common and publike cause: and persisted resolute in the same minde still, that there should no bribing donative be granted,(...) that might winne and procure favour unto those three corrupt Tribunes.
For it is not land and living (quoth he) that they shoot at, for the benefit of the Commons; that is not their seeking: but their drift is to worke and procure displeasure unto me: and therfore I will for my part, abide that storme and tempest with a resolute mind. And the Senat ought not to esteeme either of me, or of any cittizen els so highly, as to buy the sparing of one man so deare, even with the harme and dammage of the whole state. The day of judiciall triall came. When as he had pleaded for himselfe, and seemed nothing daunted at the matter: yet, for all that ever the Nobles could doe, who tried all meanes, but in vaine, to mittigate and delay the heat of the Commons, condemned he was in (...) fifteene thousand Asses. The same yeare Posthumia a Vestall Nun, was called in question for incontinencie and incest, and came to her answere. A Virgin guiltlesse for any deede done: but scarcely of good name and fame: by reason that she was s
uspected for her apparell and going more light and garish in her attire: yea, and for her wit, more conceited and pleasant, than became a maiden, and nothing respective of the speech of the world. Her triall was put over to a farther day, and she (after she had twise pleaded) in the ende was acquit: onely the high priest by the advise, and in the name of the whole colledge: schooled her, and gave her warning to leave her sports, taunts, and merry conceits: and in her raiment to be seene not so deft as devout, and weare her garments rather sainctly than sightly. The same yeare was Cumes, a cittie inhabited at that time by the Greekes, taken by the Campanians.
The yeare following had militarie Tribunes with Consuls authoritie, Agrippa Menenius Lan^tus, P. Lucretius Tricipitinus, Sp. Nautius Servilius. A yeare, by the happinesse and good fortune of the people of Rome, more notable for a danger escaped, than for any harme received. Certaine bond-servants had conspired to fire the cittie in divers places farre asunder:(...) for this intent, when the people should be busily occupied, here and there, to save their houses, then by force and armes to surprise the Castle and Capitoll. But Iupiter turned away and disappointed their wicked dessignes. For by the peaching and information of twaine, the rest of the malefactours  were taken and executed. But those that disclosed and revealed the conspiracie, had ten thousand pound in brasse mony (which was in those daies thought to be a great riches) weighed them out of the Cittie chamber,(...) and freedome besides, for their reward.
After this, began the Aequians to renue warre: and word was brought to Rome by credible persons, that certaine new enemies also, to wit, the Lavicans, joyned together in counsell with the olde. These Aequians, were good neighbours: for once a yeare ordinarily, they used to put the cittie of Rome to the paines of warring with them, and not misse. Embassadours then were sent to Lavicos, who brought doubtfull answeres from thence: whereby it appeared that neither at that instant they were readie to warre, nor yet were like to continue long in peace. The Tusculanes were charged, to take good heede, and have an eie that way, that no new sturs and troubles  should arise at Lavicos. There came Embassadours from Tusculum, to L. Sergius Fidenas, M. Papyrius Mugillanus, and C. Servilius, the sonne of Q. Servilius Priscus: (by whom, being Dictatour, Fidene was won) who were Militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie the yeare following. These Embassadours brought news that the Lavicans were out, and in armes, and joyning with the Aequians armie, had forraied the countrie of Tusculum, and encamped themselves in Algidum. Then was warre proclaimed against the Lavicans. And when by a decree made by the Senat, that two of the Consular Tribunes should go to warre, and one manage the affaires of Rome: there arose a contention on a sundaie, among the said Tribunes. Every one thought himselfe the meetest and most sufficient man, to be generall of the warre, refusing the charge of the cittie, as a base, dishonourable, and thankelesse office.
As the Senatours mused and wondred, to see amongst those that were fellows in government, so undecent a strife and contention; then Q. Servilius: Seeing that (quoth he) there is no reverent regard, either of this honourable house, or of the common-wealth: the father his countenance and dread majestie, shall end this debate. My sonne without any lot casting, shall governe the cittie as President. God grant, that

 they which love warre so well, may manage it with more discretion and concord than they wish it. As for a generall muster to bee levied out of all the people indifferently, that was not liked of. So ten Tribes were drawen by lot, out of which, the yonger fort were prest forth to war under the conduct of the two Tribunes. The strife which began to be kindled among them in the cittie, through the same desire still of soveraigntie, brake foorth and grew much hotter in the campe. In nothing agreed they, striving whose opinion should stand: each one would have his owne way: his owne commandements obeyed and none els: one despised another, and were despised one of the other: untill at length, upon the Lieutenants reproofe, they grewe to this point, and this order was taken: That they should each other day, rule one alone by himselfe absolutely. Which newes being brought to Rome, it is reported that Q. Servilius, a man  for his yeares and long experience right skilfull, praied of the immortall gods, that by the variance and discord of the Tribunes, the common-wealth sustained not more harme, than they had received at Veios. And as if there were no doubt, but that some great losse and overthrowe was readie to happen, he was instant upon his sonne, to levie souldiors, and to provide munition for warre. Neither proved he a false and vaine prophet. For by the leading of L. Sergius, whose day it was to rule, when as the enemie under a colour of feare, withdrew unto the trench, and to trained them thither upon a foolish hope to win the campe, even under the very campe of the enemies in an uneven ground of disadvantage, they were sodainly charged by the Aequians, discomfited and chased downe the valley: and many in their fall, which was greater than the flight, were trod under foote and slaine, and with much adoo that day kept they their owne tents. The  morrow after, when as now the enemies had beset a great part of the camp, they shamefully fled away, at the backe gate, and forsooke the campe. The Captaines, Lieutenants, and the strength remaining of the armie, which kept to their ensignes and colours, went to Tusculum. Other that were scattered here and there about the fields by sundry waies, made hast to Rome, and reported there the overthrow to be greater than indeed it was. Lesse was the trouble and sorrow, because men looked for better issue and successe: and also for that, there was helpe and succour (which they were to have an cie unto in so fearefull a case) provided by the Tribune aforehand. At whose commandement, when as the tumult was by the inferiour magistrates appeased in the cittie, espials were sent out in hast: who brought word that the captaines and the armie was at Tusculum: and that the enemie had not removed his campe. And then (which encouraged them  most of all) by the Senats decree, Q. Servilius Priscus was chosen Dictatour, a man whose providence over the common-weale, the cittie as manie other times afore, so in the event of that war had experience of: for that he only suspected the contention of the Tribunes afore this unhappy soile. Who having nominated Generall of the horsemen, his son (as some say) by whom being militarie Tribune, himselfe was declared Dictatour (for others there be that write howe Servilius Hula was that yeare Generall of the horse) went forth with a fresh armie to war, and having joined unto him those which were at Tusculum, he pitched his tents, two miles from the enemie. But see the fruit of good successe. The pride and negligence which had been amongst the Romane Captaines, went from them to the Aequians. Therfore in the first beginning of the conflict, when the Dictatour with his horsemen whom he sent against them, had disordered  and put out of array the formost rancks of the enemies, then commanded he the ensignes of the legionarie footmen with all speed to follow hard upon: and one ensigne-bearer of his owne, who made some stay, he slewe with his owne hand. Then were they so earnestly set to give an hoat charge, that the Aequians could not abide their force: and being in fight overthrowen, when as they fled all amaine to the campe, the assault thereof was both shorter and with lesse adoe, than was the battaile. When the campe was taken and spoiled, and that the Dictatour had given the pillage unto the souldiors: and that the horsemen, which chased the enemies from the campe, had brought word backe, that all the Lavicanes were overthrowen, and a great part of the Aequians were fled to Lavicos: the day following was the armie also led thither, and the towne compassed and beset round about, skaled, and sacked. The Dictatour having brought home to  Rome his victorious armie, upon the eight day after he was chosen, gave over his office. And in very good time, before there was any sedition stirred up about the law Agraria, by the motion of the Tribunes of the Commons,A Colonie planted at Lavicos. for the division of the Lavicanes lands: the whole bodie of the Senat appointed that a Colonie should be sent to Lavicos. So there were sent from the cittie a thousand and five hundred to inhabite there, and two akers a piece given them of land.

After the winning of L^vicos, there were created Militarie Tribunes with Consuls authoritie, to wit, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, and L. Servilius Structus, with P. Lucretius Tricipitinus (all three the second time) and Sp. Veturius Crassus: and the yeare following A. Sempronius Atratinus, the third time, and these twaine, M. Papyrius Mugillanus, and Sp. Nautius Rutilius the second time: for these two yeares there was peace abroad, but discord at home about the lawes Agratia. They that troubled the people, were Sp. Mecilius, who now the fourth time, and Metilius, who the third time were made Tribunes of the Commons, both absent. And when they had published their Act, That all lands conquered from the enemies, should be devided by the poll: by which Ordinance, the possessions of a great part of the Nobilitie became confiscate, (for since their cittie was scituate and built in a straunge ground, there was in a manner no land lay to it, which had not been purchased by the sword, neither enjoied the Commons any, but that which  either had been sold or assigned to the Commons) this seemed to bee a bone cast betweene the Nobles and the Commons, to set them together at strife and contention. Neither knew the Militarie Tribunes any way to take counsell in this case, albeit one while they assembled the Senate, and another while met in private conference with the Nobilitie.
Then Appius Claudius, (the nephew or grandsonne of notorious Appius the Decemvir,(...) created for the making of lawes) the punie of all the counsell of the Nobilitie, made (as it is reported) this speech, and said, That hee would impart unto them that which he had received by tradition from his auncestours, to wit, an old devise, and appropriate to his house, for that his great grandsire App. Claudius, had shewed unto the Nobles the onely way, to abate and take down the Tribunes power, namely, by the comming betweene and negative voice of their fellowes. For men new come up, and risen to promotion, might soone by the authoritie of the cheefe rulers be brought from their purpose, and made to change their mind, if otherwhiles those great men in place would use some speech unto them fitted and framed rather to the time and present occasion, than respective to their owne high place and dignitie: for evermore the heart and courage of such, is according to their degree and wealth. And when they see once their fellowes possessed first afore them of the cause, and thereby crept wholly into all the favour with the Commons, and that no roome is left for themselves to have any part thereof, they will bee willing ynough to encline and condescend unto the Senate, and take their part: by meanes whereof, they might wind into the love and good grace of that universall state, and particularly with the principal lords of the Nobilitie. Which speech, when they all had approved, and especially Q. Servilius Priscus, who praised the young Gentleman, for that he was not grown out of kind, nor degenerate from the stock and rase of the Claudij, then every man was set about this businesse, to see whome of the Colledge or companie of Tribunes, they could win and draw to crosse and stop the Act for going forward. The Senate now being broken up, the cheefe of the Nobles caught hold of the Tribunes, and were in hand with them, persuading, exhorting, and assuring them, that they should every one in private gratifie not onely, but also the whole bodie of the Senate in generall: and never gave over, untill they had procured sixe of them to interpose their negative, and to crosse the law. The morrow after, when as of purpose a matter was propounded afore the Senat, about the sedition which Mecilius and Metilius had raised, by a Largesse of dangerous consequence; such speeches were by the principall of the Nobles delivered, that each one for himselfe confessed, that now they were to  seeke for counsell, and saw no other helpe nor remedie but in the authoritie of the Tribunes: to the protection and safegard of which Magistracie, the Commonweale betooke her selfe, and fled for succour, as being beset with daunger, like some poore private person, and had no other means to save her selfe: saying, That it would be both for themselves, and also for their authoritie, an honorable thing, if it might appeare, that the puissance of their Tribuneship were not more imploied in molesting the Senate, and making discord among the States, than in resisting the peevish wilfulnes of their colleagues. Wherupon arose a great noise through the whole companie of the Senatours, whiles out of all parts of the Court there assembled, they called upon the Tribunes for their helping hand. Then after silence made, they (who for the favour of the Lords of the Senat, were made aforehand to their cause) declared and confessed, that they were readie  to crosse that act, by their fellowes published, seeing the Senate judged it to be prejudiciall to the Commonwealth. These Tribunes for the offer of their good service, were by the Senate highly thanked. But the authours and patrones of the Act aforesaid, calling together an assemblie of the Commons, when they had inveighed against their fellows most sharpely, tearming them betraiers

 of the Commons wealth, and slaves to the Nobles: and using other bitter speeches, gave over their action and suit.
Two greevous warres had continued all the yeare next following (wherein P. Cornelius Cossus, C. Valerius Potitus, Quintius Cincinnatus, and M. Fabius Vibulanus, were militarie Tribunes in Coss. authoritie) but that the Veientian war was deferred by the superstitious feare of their owne princes; whose grounds, Tybris (overflowing the banks) had spoiled, and overthrown also the villages and houses that stood therupon. The Aequians likewise by reason of their losse received three yeares before, made no great hast to aid and assist the Volanes, a people of their own nation. For they had made certaine rodes into the Lavicanes countrie, confining upon them, and warred upon the inhabitants, lately there planted. Which trespasse by them done, they hoped to have ben  able to maintaine, by the banding and assistance of all the Aequians: but being forsaken of their allies, they lost both their towne and territorie, onely by siege, and one light skirmish, and never fought for it anymemorable war. L. Sextius also Tribune of the Commons, assaied to make an Act, that there might be sent to Volae as wel as to Lavicos, Coloners to people it: but by the negative of his confreeres, who shewed, that they would not suffer any Statute of the Commons to passe without the assent of the Senate, it came to nothing.
In the yeare following, the Aequians having recovered and woon againe Volae, and brought a Colonie thither, fortified the towne with a fresh power, at what time were Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie at Rome, Cn. Cornelius Cossus, L. Valerius Potitus, Q Fabius Vibulanus the second time, and M. Posthumius Regillensis. The warre against the Aequians, was committed to  this Posthumius, a man of a crooked disposition, as his victorie shewed more than the whole course of the warre. For having levied an armie in hast, and brought it before Volae, after some small skirmishes, he ^amed the Aequians, and at length entred the towne. And when he had done with the enemies, hee began to quarrell with his owne souldiors: for whereas during the time of the assault, he had given out by proclamation, That they should have the saccage after the town was once woon: he brake promise with them. For I am induced to beleeve that this was the cause rather why the armie mutined and was discontented, than for that in a towne lately sacked before and in a new Colonie, there was found lesse spoile than the Tribune made boast of. But this displeasure and anger once conceived, was made the worse, after that he returned into the citie: for being sent for by his fellowes, upon occasion of the Tribunitian seditions, there escaped him an  indiscreet speech, I must needs say, yea, and without all sence, wit, and honestie. Which he let fall in an assemblie of the Commons: wherein it happened, that as Sextus, a Tribune of the Commons, was preferring the law Agraria, and saying withall, That he would propose an Act, that Coloners should likewise bee sent to Volae, for that they were worthie to have both the towne and lands of Volae, who had by sword and speare conquered the same. Posthumius caught the word out of his mouth: And that shall my souldiors deerely abie (quoth hee) unlesse they bee more quiet. Which word being overheard, offended not so the Com. presently there in place assembled, as the Lords of the Senat a while after. Moreover, the Tribune aforesaid, an active man, and eloquent withall, having among his adversaries met with a prowd humourous spirit, and an insolent and intemperate tongue, which walked so freely and so long by his provocation, that hee  uttered these speeches, which bred not onely ill will and displeasure to himselfe, but also wounded the cause, and the whole state of the Patritij. This Sextus (I say) was busie, and quarrelling with none of all the Militarie Tribunes, more than with Posthumius. And even at that time, taking advantage of the same cruell and unhumane speech of his:The Oration of Sextius against Posthumius. Here yee not, o yee Commons (quoth he) how hee threateneth mischeefe unto his souldiours, as unto bondslaves?
And yet his beast yee will thinke more worthie of so great dignitie wherein yee have placed him, than those that indue you with house and land, that send you abroad to inhabite Colonies, that provide habitation for you against old age, that tendering your wealth, take part and defend you against so cruell and prowd adversaries. Begin now henceforth to mervell why so few take in hand to maintain your cause. For what may they looke for, and hope at your hands? for honours? which yee bestow  rather upon your adversaries, than those that are affectionate defenders of the people of Rome. Yee sighed even now and groned again, at the words uttered out of this foule mouth. But what matter makes that? If yee were now to goe to an election, and to give your voices, ye would no doubt for all that, preferre this man (who threateneth to mischeefe you) afore them that are willing and desirous to establish your lands, your dwelling places, and the whole state of your

substance and living. But when that leaud language of Posthumius was reported once to the souldiours, it bred a farre greater indignation (besure) within the campe. How now? (say they) is hee, who hath intercepted our bootie, and defrauded us poore souidiours of our due, not content therewith, but must menace mischeefe besides unto us, as his varlets? When as therefore they openly muttered thereat, and the Questor or Treasurer P. Sestius thought that the mutinie might be restrained with the same violence by which it was first raised ^he sent an Officer to one clamorous souldior, that kept a yauling above the rest. Whereupon arose an outcrie and a brawle: and he got himselfe a good rap with a stone for his labour, that he was faine to goe out of the prease. And he that smote him, spake alowd besides, and bad the Questor take now that for his paines in a mischeefe, which the Generall had threatened his souldiours. Posthumius in this hurliburlie was sent for, and he when he wascome, made all worse and worse with his sharpe examinations, tortures, and cruell punishments. At the last, when he could not see ^o make an end, nor bridle his choler: they all ran on heapes together, at the lamentable crie of those whom he commaunded to be choked in the mire, and killed under the hurdle: and he halfe besides himselfe, full foolishly stept downe in more hast than good specd from the Tribunall seat, to chastise one that contested with him, and made a great brawling. Now when as the Lictors and Centurions every where laid about them to make way, and ill intreated the multitude in the throng, they mooved their patience so much, that in that furious fit of the souldiours, the Militarie Tribune was by his owne armie stoned to death.(...) Which horrible act, after it was noised at Rome, and the Militarie Tribunes by the Senats authoritie, were about to fit in commission for the examination of the death of their colleague, by way of rigour and torture: the Tribunes of the Communaltie opposed  themselves, and resisted them. But that contention depended upon another quarrell. For the Senate doubting least that the Commons for feare of those examinations intended, would in their anger create Tribunes militarie from out of their owne bodie and degree; were very carefull, and studied all they could, that Consuls might bee chosen againe. But when as the Tribunes of the Commons would not suffer an act of the Senate to passe, and hindered also the election of the Consuls, the matter came to an Interreigne. But in the end the Nobles had the upper hand. For when as Q. Fabius Vibulanus the Interregent, held a Court for the said Election, there were created Consuls A. Cornelius Cossus, and L. Furius Medullinus.
In the beginning of these Consuls yeare, the Senate made a decree, that the Tribunes with all speed possible should propose unto the Commons, concerning the inquisition of Posthumius his death: and that they should make cheefe Commissioner and Iudge, whom they would. The Commons by the consent of the whole people,(...) gave the Consuls commission to see it done, and performed accordingly. Who notwithstanding, that with exceeding moderation and lenitie, they dispatched and ended the matter, by punishing a few, who (as it was crediblie thought) made themselves away: yet could they not for all that bring about, but the Communaltie tooke it very hainously, and in the highest degree, saying, That the Acts and Ordinances, which had ben propounded concerning their weale and commodities, those lay a long time asleepe in the deck, and nothing done: but an order graunted for their bloudshead and death, that was presently put in execution. Of so great force and importance was it. Now this had been the fittest time, that after these mutinous souldiours were chastised, the division of the Volane territorie, should have  been offered unto them, for to comfort their poore hearts again. By which deed (no doubt) their hote desire and longing after the law Agraria, had been abated, which tended to dispossesse at length the Nobles of the common grounds, which they injuriously were seized of. But this indignitie stucke in their stomackes, and was taken neerer to the heart, when they saw the Nobilitie so stiffely bent, not only to keepe the common grounds in their hands, which they held by force: but also unwilling to devide among the people so much as the wast and voide ground, lately gotten by conquest from the enemies: but that it was like, within a while (as all the rest) to bee a bootie, and dividend, to be shared among a few.
The same yeare, were the legions led by Furius the Consull, against the Volscians: who harried the borders of the Hernicks. But finding not the enemie there, they wan Ferentinum, whether  a great number of the Volscians had retired themselves. The bootie there, was lesse than they hoped for: by reason that the Volscians, seeing small hope of keeping the towne, trussed up and carried away both bag and baggage in the night, and quit the towne: which was won the morrow after, being left well neare destitute and emptie. All the lands were given freely to the Hernicks.

 When this year now was passed in good quiet by the modestie and peaceable carriage of the Tribunes, then in place: there succeeded another Tribune of the Commons L. Icilius, when Q. Fabius Ambuslus and C. Furius Pacilius were Consuls. Whiles this man in the very beginning of his yeare, was busie in stirring new seditions (as if it had been a taske imposed upon his name and linage) by proposing of the Agrarian laws:A pestilence. behold, there arose a pestilence, more fearefull than hurtfull, which turned away mens mindes, from their publicke assemblies and accustomed contentions, to tend their houses, and to care for the cherishing of their bodies. And (as men verily thinke) the sicknesse was lesse dangerous than the seditions were like to have been. When as the cittie was now excused, as it were, and well escaped, with the sicknes only of many, and death of very few:A famine. presently after this pestilent yeare, followed (as it is commonly seene) a great death  of corne, by reason of the neglect of tillage. M. Papyrius Atratinus, and C. Nautius Rutilius being Consuls. This famine would have been more grievovs than the plague, had they not provided well for come, by sending forth their Embassadours to the neighbour nations all about, inhabiting along the Tuscane Sea and the Tyber, for to buy graine. Proudly were the Embassadors prohibited all commerce and traffique with the Samnits, who held at that time Capua and Cumes: but contrariwise bountifully were they releeved by the tyrants or potentates of Sicilie. And such was the willing endevour of Hetruria, that great store of victuals came down the Tyber. In what desolation the cittie was, during this affliction, the Cos. tried by this: that when they could not furnish an Embassage, but with one Senator, they were compelled to adjoine two Knights unto them. And setting a side the sicknes and dearth, there was no trouble either at home or abroad for  those two years. But when these storms were once overblown, and that care past: then began again the old troubles wherwith the citie had usually bin disquieted: dissention at home, and war abroad.
When M. Aemylius and C. Valerius Potitus were Consuls, the Aequians made preparation for wars, and banded with the Volscians. Who albeit they tooke armes by no publike commission; yet such as would of themselves serve for hier or wages, followed the wars. At the bruit of which enemies (for they were alreadie come over into the countrie of the Latines and Hernicks) whiles Valerius the Consull mustered his men and levied souldiors: M. Menenius a Tribune of the Commons, and a publisher of the Agrarian laws, opposed himselfe against him. And when as by reason of the protection and assistance of the Tribune, no man would be compelled to take a souldiors oath against his will: sodeinly newes came, that the Castle of Carventus was by the  enemies forced. This dishonour thus received, as it was a cause that Menenius was hated among the noblemen, so it gave to the rest of the Tribunes, who were alreadie framed and prepared to withstand the law Agraria, more just cause to resist their collegue. The matter being thus for a long time protracted by much debating, the Consuls called both God and man to witnesse, that whatsoever shame or losse, either had been alreadie received, or were like to be susteined by the enemies: the blame should be imputed to Menenius, who hindered the mustering. And Menenius protested againe aloud, that if the unlawfull landlords, would surrender the tenure of the common fields which they unjustly deteined, he would not stay the musters. Then the nine Tribunes, by setting down a decree between them, made an end of the strife: and pronounced by authority of their colledge, that they would assist C. Valerius the Cos. (all contradiction of their collegue  notwithstanding) to award any penaltie restreint or chastisement, upon them that refused to be enrolled for warfare. The Cos. being armed with this decree and warrant, after he had caused some few to be had away by the necke and laid fast, that called upon the Tribune for helpe, the rest for feare were sworne to serve. Thus the armie was led forth to the Castle of Carventus. And although the souldiors were as odious to the Consull, as wickedly bent against him, yet at the very first comming, having manfully and lustily dispossessed the garrison, they recovered the fort. The souldiors who were slipt away from the hold, and gone a boothailing, by their negligence gave the Romanes a fit opportunitie to enter and to surprise it. And a good bootie there was: by reason that they had continually gotten prises, and laid up all there as in a place of safetie. Which being sold in portsale, the Consull commanded the treasurers for to bring the mony into  the common chamber of the cittie: giving out these words withall, that the armie should then have part of spoile, when they denied not their service in warre. Hereupon both Commons and souldiors were more angrie with the Consull. And therfore when as by a decree of the Senate he entred the cittie Ovant, in a petie triumph, the souldiors according to their licentious manner (in that case permitted) followed after with songs and sonnets, answering one another in rude

rime and grosse meerer, by alternitive staves. Wherin the Consull was greatly blamed, but Menenius the Tribune, his name was set out to the height, his praises were blasoned and extolled aloft: and at every time that he was named, the affectionate favour of the people that stood in the streets appeared, by clapping of hands and great applause, striving avie to exceed the songs chanted by the souldiors. Which caused the Nobles to looke to it, and troubled them more than the malapert saucinesse of the souldiors with their Consuls, which is an ordinarie and usuall fashion among them. And Menenius (who doubtlesse had ben one of the Militarie Tribunes, if he had sued for it) was excluded from that dignitie by an Election of Consuls. So there were created Consuls. Cn. Cornelius Cossus, and L. Furius Medullinus the second time.
Never took the Com. the matter more to the hart, that the Election of Tribunes escaped their hands: which griefe of theirs in the Election of Questors, they both shewed and revenged. For this  was the first time that the Questors were made of the comminaltie: so that in chusing of 4, there was but one place left for C. Fabius Ambustus, a Nobleman: and 3 of the comminaltie, Q. Silius, P. Aelius, and P. Pipius, were preferred before yong gentlemen, of most noble houses. I find that the persuaders of the people to use their full libertie in bestowing their voices, were the three Icilij, (descended of that house, which ever was most malitiously bent against the Nobles) who were for that year chosen Tribunes of the comminaltie, and possessed the peoples heads with a world of great matters, after which they gaped greedily: but so, as they flatly gave out and said, They would not stirre at all, if the people had not courage enough, so much as in the election of Questors, which onely the Senat had left indifferent to the comminaltie and Nobilitie, to effect that which so long they had desired, and now by law was warranted. Thus the Commons assured  themselves hereby of a mightie great victorie: and esteemed not the dignitie of Questourship to be the end and type of honor, but that thereby they seemed to have made a way and ouverture for new risen upstarts, to be advanced to Consulships and triumphs. The Nobles contrariwise stormed, not for that their dignities were made common and imparted to other, but for the utter losse thereof: protesting that if things went so on end, they would neither get, nor bring up children any more: who being put from their Auncestours place, and seeing others in possession of their dignitie, should be disabled for bearing rule and authoritie in the stare, and be good for nothing but onely to be made priests for Mars, and Flamines for Iupiter, imploied about nothing els but to sacrifice (forsooth) for the people. Thus on both parts were their mindes netled and provoked, whiles the Commons tooke heart, and had three champions of great reputation to  back them, and maintaine their cause: and the Nobles, seeing all would prove like to the Questors Election (if it lay in the peoples choise) addressed themselves to the Election of Consuls, which as yet was not so free, and indifferent both for Commons and Nobles. Contrariwise, the Icilij persisted still, and urged the point, that in any hand Tribunes Militarie should and must be created. For now it was more than time that the Commons had their part in offices of state. But no Action hitherto belonging to the offices and charge of the Consuls had been presented unto them, by the hindering whereof they might wring from them, that which they desired and sought for. But see, how even then, in wonderfull good opportunitie, word was brought that the Volscians and Aequians were departed out of their owne Confines, and made an expedition into theLatine pale for to rob and spoile. To the which warre, when as by vertue of an order from  the Senat, the Consuls began to muster: the Tribunes laboured tooth and naile to hinder it: giving out that this occurrent fortuned happily on their sides and the Commons. Three there were of them, and all most quick active and couragious men: yea (and for commoners) of good birth, and worshipfully descended. Whereof twaine tooke in hand, by their continuall travaile to attend and watch the Consuls, to keepe them a worke, and either of them to hold one occupied: the third, was appointed to intertaine the comminaltie: and in all assemblies, with their Orations, one whiles to reine them in, another while to give them the head, as occasion required. But all this while, neither Consuls went through with the musters, nor the Tribunes with the election which they desired. But afterwards when fortune began to incline to the Commons side, messengers came with newes, that whiles the souldiors that lay in garrison at the Castle  Carventana, were stept aside to get a bootie, the Aequians having slaine a few warders that kept the hold, entred it: and that all the souldiors were slaine: some as they ran into the fort againe, others as they were scattered in the fields. This thing falling out so crosse against the whole State, gave strength yet unto the designments of the Tribunes. For being dealt withall, that now

 at length they would surcease from hindering the warre, nothing would prevaile: for that they neither gave place to the publike calamitie and necessitie, nor yet regarded their owne privat perill of displeasure: and they obtained in the end that an Act of Senat was granted for to chuse Tribunes Militarie. How beit with this expresse proviso, it was capitulated; That none of them who had ben Tribunes that yeare of the Commons, should be eligible and propounded: no, nor chosen againe Tribunes of the Commons for the year following. Wherby, no doubt, the Senat noted and pointed at that Icilij, whom they charged to seeke to be Consuls, for a reward of their seditious Tribuneship. Then went the mustering forward, and preparation of war, by consent of all the States.
Sundrie authors write diversly and make doubt, whether both the Consuls went to the Castle  Carventana, or whether one of them staied behind in the cittie for to hold the foresaid Election. In this they disagree not, but set downe for certaine: that when they had assailed the Castle a long time without effect, they were compelled from thence to remove: and that Verrugo in the countrie of the Volscians by the same armie was recovered, and that great forraying there was, and driying of booties, both in the countrie of the Aequians and also of the Volscians. Now at Rome, as the victorie of the comminaltie rested in this, that they had the Election which they desired: so in the issue and successe of the Election, the Nobles had the better. For besides all mens hope and expectation, there were three Tribunes Militarie chosen with Consuls authoritie, all of the Nobilitie, C. Iulius Tullus, Cn. Cornelius Cossus, C. Servilius Hala. Men say that the Nobles used a subtile practise and cunningdevise, which even then the Icilij charged them with:  to wit, that by intermingling a many of unworthie and unmeet competitours with others of marke and qualitie, they had alienated the peoples heartes from the commoners, seeing them to be men of no worth, and loathing the notable basenesse that appeared in their persons.
After this, tidings came, that the Volscians and Aequians (were it that the castle of Carventus which they held and guarded still, put them into some hope: or their garrison and fort lost at Verrugo drave them into anger) were up in armes, with all force readie to make warre: that the Antiates were the principall and cheefe in this intended action: that their Embassadours had sollicited the people of both Nations, rebuking their cowardise, for keeping within their wals, and suffering the Romans the yeare before, to harrie and drive booties in their territories, and the garison of Vertugo to be surprised and lost. Moreover, that not only hosts of armed men were sent  against them, but Colonies also were planted in their ^^ontiers and marches: and that the Romans not content to devide their lands and goods among themselves, had bestowed upon the Herniks the towne Ferentinum, which they had woon from them. At these speeches they were kindled and set on fire: and in all places whether they went to sollicite, the younger sort and able men in great number were levied. So the youth and manhood of all those Nations, gathered together to Antium, where they encamped themselves, and expected the enemie. Which tidings being brought to Rome, caused more feare than need was. And the Senat presently (which in all fearefull occurents was ever their last remedie and refuge) gave order that a Dictator should be created. Which thing Iulius and Cornelius, two militarie Tribunes (they say) took in great displeasure. And hereof ensued much hartburning and dissention: whiles the LL. of the Senat of one side complained  in vain of their greevances, That the Tribunes Militarie would not be ordered by the authoritie of the Senat: and at the last had recourse to the Tribunes of the Commons for help: alledging withall, that the very Consuls power upon the like occasion had been by their authoritie overruled and set downe.
And the Tribunes of the Commons on the other side, rejoicing at the discord of the Senatours, made answere againe, and said, That for their parts, they were not able to yeeld any succour at all, who were of no reckoning themselves, being reputed neither in the roll of citizens, ne yet so much as in the number of men. But if so bee (say they) dignities and honours were communicated to us, then would ^ee provide and take order, that by no pride of any magistrate whatsoever, the Senats decree should be made frustrate and disanulled. And in the mean whiles, seeing the Nobles were exempt from all reverence of laws, and regard of Magistrats, let them of  themselves also exercise the Tribunes authoritie if they would. This discord falling out so unf^ly, when so great warre was in hand, occupied and possessed mens heades a long time: whiles Iulius and Cornelius one after another, thus reasoned and discoursed: That seeing they themselves were captaines good enough for the conduct of such a warre, it was not meete, that the honour once bestowed upon them by the people, should be made voide and taken from

them.(...) Then Servilius Hal^, who also was a Tribune Militarie spake and said: I have been silent  thus long, not for that I was doubtfull in mine opinion, or to seeke what to say, (For what good cittizen (quoth he) would have his advise by himselfe, and go from the publike counsell?) but because I had leiser, that my brethren of their owne accord should give place to the Senats authoritie, than to suffer the Tribunes power to be called for, against them. And even now also, if the case would permit, I could willingly give them time and space to retract againe their too too obstinate, perverse and peremptorie opinion. But seeing that the necessities of war, waite not upon humane counsell, I will have more respect and consideration of the weale publicke, than of the favour of my brethren. Wherefore, if the Senat persist still in that mind and resolution of theirs, I will the next night following nominate a Dictatour. And if any one withstand me, I will aske no more, than the power and vertue of the Senates Act. By which speech of his, having woon  deserved praise and thankes of all men, he declared Publius Cornelius Dictator, and was himselfe by him nominated Generall of the horsemen. A singular example to teach as many as beheld him and his Colleagues, That otherwhiles favour and honour soonest fall to them that least desire the same. The warre was small and nothing memorable: for in one easie and slight battaile were the enemies overthrowne and slaine at Antium. The armie upon this victorie wasted the Volscians countrie, wan by force the castle upon the lake Fucinus, and within it took three thousand prisoners: having chased all the rest of the Volscians within their wals, not able to keepe their frontiers. The Dictatour, after he had performed this warre in such sort, as onely he might not seeme to neglect his wonted fortune but keepe it still in ure, returned into the citie with greater felicitie than glorie, and resigned up his place.
The Tribunes militarie, making no words at all of the chusing of Consuls (for anger, I suppose, that a Dictator had been created) published the Election of Tribunes Militarie. But then the Senatours were in greater care and perplexitie, seeing their cause betraied even by those of their owne companie. Wherefore, as in the former yeare, by foisting in the basest of the Commons for competitours, they had caused even men of good worth to bee despised: so, now by procuring the principall of the Nobilitie, both for honour and for favour, to stand for the dignitie, they obtained all the places to themselves: so as no one Commoner could bee chosen. So there were created foure, all having afore born that Magistracie, L. Furius Medullinus, C. Valerius Potitus, Cn. Fabius Vibulanus, and C. Servilius Hala. This man was chosen again to the place, as well in regard of other vertues and worthie parts, as for the late favour which he woon by his rare  moderation, and singular carriage of himselfe.
In that yeare, for as much as the time of truce with the Veientian Nation was expired, they began by Embassadours and Heraulds of armes, to challenge of them amends and restitution. Whom, as they entred into their territorie, the Embassage of the Veientians encountred in the way, requesting them not to goe forward to Veij, before they had presented themselves to the Senate of Rome. Who being thither come, obtained of the Senate, that for as much as the Veientians were at civile discord among themselves, they would not claime any Almendats at their hands. Lo, how far they were from seeking their own vantage by other mens distresse and calamitie. Also at the Volscians hands they sustained dammage by losse of their garison at Verrugo. But (see what a thing it is to slack the time) For whereas the soldiors besieged there, by the Volscians, and sending for aid in due time, might have been rescued if speed had been made, the armie which was sent for succour, came too short, and after the fray was ended. Onely this exploit they did: The enemies, who after their fresh massacre committed upon the garison, were gone abroad stragling for to raise booties, were by them overtaken and put to the sword. The cause of this slackenesse was imputed to the Senat, rather than the soveraigne Tribunes: who because intelligence was given, that they in the garrison resisted and defended themselves most manfully, little considered, That there is no prowesse of man whatsoever, but by valour againe it may bee overmatched. Most brave and valiant souldiours they, that neither whiles they lived, nor after death were unrevenged.
The yeare following, when P. and Cornelius, both surnamed Cossus, C. Fabius Ambustus and  L. Valerius Potitus were Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie, began the Veientian watre, by occasion of a proud and arrogant answere returned by the Senat of the Veientians: Who commanded that the Embassadors which came to claime a mends, should take this for their dispatch: That unlesse they departed presently out of the cittie and countrie, they would serve them as

Lars Tolumnius had done others before. The Senatours of Rome hardly could digest that and therefore decreed, that the Militarie Tribunes, should propose unto the people as speedely as might be, even the day before to morrow, concerning proclamation of open war, and sending defiance to the Veientians.
Which as soone as ever it was noised and published, the younger sort and men of service, murmured and muttered in this manner: That as yet they had not fully ended the warre with the Volscians: that even of late two whole garrisons were lost, and their throats cut, and the forts kept still with danger and great hazard. There is not (say they) a yeare passeth over our heads, but one field or other is fought: and as if we had not worke and trouble enough alreadie, there was now intended new warre with a most mightie nation confining upon them, and which was like enough to raise against them all Hetruria. And as they were forward  enough of themselves to conceive thus, and utter these speeches, so the Tribunes of the Commons were not behind to buzze more matters into their heads, and set all on a light fire. Who gave out stillefrsoons, That when al was done, the greatest warring was between the Nobles and Commons: and that the Commons for the nonce were to be toiled out with travaile orwarfare, and exposed to the enemies for to be murdered: and that they were to be kept far off from the cittie, and as it were confined and sent out of the way: least by being quiet at home, and minding their freedome and colonies, they should consult and devise, both how to dispose of the common grounds, and to give their voices freely. And ever as they could meete with any olde beaten souldiours, they would hold them with talke, take them by their hands, reckon up how many yeares they had done service in warre, fall to telling of their gashes and skars, asking them  what whole place they had left in their bodies for to receive new wounds, and what bloud was behind to spend and shed, in the quarrell of the common-wealth? When as by iterating these and such like speeches, both in their private talke and conference, and also other whiles in their publike assemblies, they had turned clean away the hearts of the comminaltie from taking war in hand: the foresaid Act propounded, was put off untill a farther day, and lay still for the time. Which no doubt, had been nipt in the head, and never would have passed farther, in case it had been referred and subject to the hard opinion and conceit of men, as then they stood affected. In the meane whiles agreed it was, that the Militarie Tribunes should conduct an armie into the Volscians countrie. C^. Cornelius alone was left at Rome. The three Tribunes, after that they perceived the Volscians in no place encamped, and nothing minded to trie a battaile, parted themselves  three waies to wast and harrie the frontiers. Valerius hee marcheth to Antium, Cornelius to Ecetre. And everie way as they went, they spoiled all before them, both house and field, and all to amuse and keepe the Volscians occupied that way. But Fabius without any forraying at all, came directly to assault Anxur, which was the service most desired. Now Anxur was that, which at this day is calledTarracine, a cittie seated upon marishes. And on that side Fabius made shew of assault. But there were foure cohorts under the leading of C. Servilius Hala sent out to fetch a compasse: who having gained the hill that overlooketh and commandeth the town, from that higher ground, with a mightie shout and outcrie assailed the wall, where it was disfurnished of guard to defend it. At which suddaine al'arme, they were amazed who manned the wall of the base towne against Fabius: and suffered them to set ladders to, and to skale. By which meanes every place  was full of enemies. And upon the walles for a good while there was nothing but killing, as well those that fled, as those that resisted, armed and unarmed, one with another. So that, albeit they were too weake, yet forced were they to fight: because in yeelding they saw no way but one. But upon proclamation once made, that none but armed men should be killed: all the multitude besides willingly were disarmed. Of which number there were upon two thousand and five hundred taken alive. From the saccage Fabius kept the souldiours, untill his Colleagues were come: saying, that Anxur was taken as wel by those armies, which had driven away the rest of the Volscians from the defence of that place, as by themselves. Who being come, the three armies jointly ransacked it, and had the pillage for their labor of that rich town, that had gathered wealth a long time. Which courtesie and bountifulnes of the commanders, was the first thing that reconciled Commons  and Nobles together. Over and besides this munificence of the Rulers, the Nobles also began in most happie hour to be liberal unto the multitude. For before that either the Com. or Tribunes made the motion, the Senat decreed, that souldiors might have their paie out of the cittie chamber: whereas before that time, every man in that service had borne his owne charges.
Never was there any thing, by report, so joifully accepted of the Commons: who ran by heapes

together to the counsell house: tooke the Senatours by the hands as they came forth, and said, They were now truly called Patres, i. Fathers, confessing that now the day was come, that in the quarell of so bounteous a citie, there was no man would so long as his breath lasted, spare either lim or life. Seeing that this commoditie they should have to helpe them, namely, that during the time that their bodies were imploied, and busily occupied in the defence of Commonweale, their privat estate should stand at one yet, and not decay. And for as much as it came of themselves, and never moved by any of the Tribunes of the Commons, nor called for and craved importunatly, by their importune speeches; that was it, that multiplied their joie, and made the boon it selfe much more acceptable. But the Tribunes of the Commons (who onely had not their part in this common joy and concord of all States) came in with their vie, and said, that it would not prove so joyous and happie to the Nobles all in generall, as they supposed: that this  course and order taken, was at the first sight better than it would be found in the practise and execution. For how could that monie possiblie be made and raised, but by levying a tribute or paiment of the people? they were therfore liberal, but of other mens purses. But admit or say that the rest would beare it, yet those neither could nor would endure it, who were past warre-service, and lived upon their pensions and annuall salarie: who would grudge and repine, that others hereafter should serve in warre for more gaine than they had in their time done; who having beene charged with the pay of their owne service, should now againe bee put to contribute to the wages of others. With these words they moved part of the Comminaltie. Last of all when there was a levie exacted, the Tribunes also proclaimed, That they would beare as many out, as would not contribute to the souldiors pay. The Nobles continued still to maintain that which they had  so well begun, and were the first that opened their purse, and for that as yet they had no silver coine, some of them carried grosse peeces of brasse in waines to the treasure house, and made a goodly shew of contribution. When as the Nobles had most faithfully paied according to the rate of their wealth: the cheefe of the Commons also, friends of the Nobilitie, as it was afore agreed, began to lay their pennie to theirs: whom when the common sort saw both to bee commended of the Nobles, and to be admired and reverenced of the souldiours as good citizens: they all upon a suddaine, refusing the Tribunes assistance, began to strive who should pay first. And the decree or act being once passed; of proclaiming war against the Veientians, the new Tribunes Militarie led an armie to Veios, consisting much upon voluntarie souldiours. Now the Tribunes were T. Quintius Capitolinus, P. Quintius Cincinnatus, C. Iulius Tullus the second time, A. Manlius, L. Furius Medullinus the third time, and M. Aemylius Mamercus. And these were the first that besieged Veij.
About the beginning of which siege, when the Tuscanes held a counsell in a solemne assemblie at the temple of Volumna, they could hardly agree upon this point, Whether the Veientians should be defended by generall warre of the whole Nation, or no. The yeare following was the siege not so hote, by reason that some of the Tribunes, and part of the forces, were called away to the Volscian war. The Tribunes Militarie in Coss. authoritie, that yeare were C. Valerius Potitus the third time. M. Sergius Fidenas, P. Cornelius Maluginus, Cn. Cornelius Cossus. C. Fabius Ambustus, Sp. Nautius Rutilius the second time. With the Volscians there was a pight field fought betweene Ferentinum and Ecetra. Wherein the Romanes had the day. Then the Tribunes began  to lay siege to Artena a towne of the Volscians: where, by reason of a sallying forth by them attempted, the enemies were driven backe into the towne, and the Romanes tooke occasion and vantage thereby, to breake in with them pell mell, and so they woon all, save only the castle. Into this fort naturally fenced, a good companie of armed men betooke themselves: but beneath the castle, many a man was either slaine or taken prisoner. Afterwards was the fortresse besieged also: Neither could it by assault be forced, for that there was a guard sufficient to man it, considering the bignesse of the place: nor gave the assailants any hope of yeelding, for before the towne was lost, they had conveied al their publicke provision of come into the castle. So that the Romanes had for very wearisomnesse departed from thence, but that a bondslave betraied it unto them. Who let in certaine souldiours at a steepe high place, and those were they that woon the fortresse: for when the warders were by them slaine, the rest of the multitude with suddaine fright were soone overcome, and yeelded. Thus, when both the castle and town of Artena was sacked and spoiled, the legions were brought backe from the Volscians, and all the Romans power imploied against Veij. To the traitour aforesaid, there was given besides libertie, the pillage of two

 housholds for a reward. And he was named ever after Servilius Romanus. There be that think Artena was a towne of the Veientians, and not of the Volscians: the occasion of which error is, for that there was a towne of that name betweene Cere and Veios. But that towne the Romane kings destroied: and it belonged to the Ceretes, and not to the Veientians: but this other, wherof we have reported the destruction, was in the countrie of the Volscians.


 THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

 The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the fifth Booke.
AT the siege of Veij, the souldiors had bolds made them for to winter in. Which being a new^ kind of service, stroake an beat in the Tribunes of the Commons, who complained that they had no rest from warfare, so much as in the winter season. Then the Gentlemen of Rome began first to serve upon their owne horses. When the Albane lake overflowed, a certaine prophet or wisart was taken captive from the enemies, who should interpret that strange wonder. Furius Camillus, after ten yeares siege, wan Veij: be translated the Image of Iuno from thence to Rome. The tenth part of the spoile and saccage besent to Apollo at Delphi. The same Camillus being Tribune militarie, Whiles he laied siege unto the Falisci, sent backe againe to the parents, his enemies sonnes that were betraied unto him: Whereupon the Falisci yeelded themselves, and so by his  righteous and inst dealing, obtained victorie over them. When one of the Censors C. Iulius was deceased, M. Cornelius was substituted in his place: Which was never done againe afterwards, because in that five yeares space, Rome was taken by the Gaules. Furius Camillus, being indited by L. Apuleius a Tribune of the Commons, departed into exile. When as the Senones a people of the Gaules, besieged Clussum, and the Embassadours sent from the Senat to conclude a peace betweene them and the Clusines, fought themselves in persons against the Gaules in the Clusines armie. The Senones hereupon made quarrell, and with a cruell armie came against the cittie of Rome: and after they had defeated the Romanes at the river Allia, they were Masters of the cittie, all but the Capitoll, into which the able and serviceable young men of the cittie betooke themselves. The elders with their ornaments of state belonging to the offices that each one had borne, they slew sitting in the porches and entries of their houses. And when they were now gotten up to the toppe of the Capitoll, by the backe side of the hill, they were discovered by the gagling of geise, and were turned downe, principally by the valour of M. Manlius. Afterwards when through famine the Romanes were forced to covenant and grant for to give  them the sum of 1000 pound weight of gold, and for that to buy their redemption from the siege: Furius Camillus, who was created Dictatom in his absence, came with an armie, whiles the gold was in weighing: and drove the Gaules out of the cittie, after they had been possessed of it six moneths, and slue them. A chappell was built to Locatius: in that place where before the taking of the cittie, there was a voice heard, that the Gaules were comming. Whereas it was purposed and propounded to remove to Veij, because the cittie of Rome was burnt and rased: that course by the advise and authoritie of Camillus was crossed and dispatched. The people was moved thereto the rather, by occasion of the osse of a word spoken by a Centurion, who being come with his band of souldiors into the Forum, was heard to say thus, STAND SOVLDIORS, HERE WILL BE OVR BEST ABIDING PLACE.

 WHEN peace elsewhere was obteined, the Romans and Veians were at war, with such mutuall malice and hatred; that it seemed, whether part were vanquished, should come to finall destruction. The assemblies for the Election of the rulers of both nations, far differed one from the other. The Romanes augmented the number of Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie: for eight of them (so as never afore) were created: M. Aemylius Mamercus the second time, L. Valerius Potitus the third time, Appius Claudius Crassus, M. Quintilius Varus,

M. Iulius Tullus, M. Posthumius, M. Furius Camillus, and M. Posthumius Albas. The Veientians  contrariwise, being wearie of suing for dignities every yeare (a cause sometimes of civill discord) made themselves a King. Which offended the people of Hetruria: who as they abhorred all regall government, so they hated the person of the King himselfe. He had aforetime oppressed that nation, in regard of his greatnesse and pride withall: in that he had violently put downe their solemne plaies, the intermission whereof was held unlawfull and detestable. For upon a time, in an anger that he received a repulse, and by the Suffrages of the twelve nations, another was preferred before him to bee high Priest, in the very midst of their solemne Games and sports, he tooke from them the very plaiers and actors, whereof a great sort were his own servants. That people therefore, given to superstition above all other, and so much the rather for that they excelled in the skill of religious observing the same, decreed to denie the Veientians  their aide, so long as they were governed under a King. This decree was suppressed and not spoken of at Veij for feare of the King, who would have accompted him that should report such a rumour, for a sower of sedition, rather than an authour of newes. The Romanes, albeit they heard that all was quiet from Hetruria: yet because they were advertised that in all the diets and counsels of that nation, the question was on foote and much debated, made their fortifications at Veij, so as they stood two waies: some looked towards the citie against all fallies and eruptions of the townesmen: others fronted Hetruria, to stop all succours that haply might come from thence. But the Romane captaines having greater hope in long siege, than in quick assault, began to build wintring harbours (a strange thing to Romane souldiors.) Their intent was all winter time to keepe continuall warre.
Which after it was told at Rome to the Tribunes of the  Commons (who now a long time could finde no matter and occasion of troubles and alteration) they leapt forth into the assembly of the people, sounding and solliciting the minds of the Commons, and eftsoones saying, That this was the onely matter, why a set paie was appointed for the souldiors: and that they were not ignorant, That the gifts of enemies would prove to be besmeered with poison: That the freedome of the Commons was bought and fold: That their young men were sent away farre off, and as it were banished from the citie and common-wealth, so that now they had not so much spare time as winter, nor any season els of the yeare, for to visit home and see unto their estate. What thinke yee (say they) is the cause of continuing this warfare? No other verily should they find it but this, least by reason of the frequent number of those young men, in whom the whole strength of the communaltie consisted, there might bee  something dealt in, and effected, concerning their commodities. Over and besides they complained how they were much more hardly used, than the Veientians. For as for them, they spent the winter within their owne houses, defending their cittie, fortified both with goodly walles, and also by naturall situation of the place: but the Romane souldiors abode by it still in labour and travaile, throwded under boothes of poore hides, overwhelmed with snowes and frosts, not laying away their hamesse and weapons, so much as in winter: the ordinarie time of rest from alwars both by sea and land. This manner of hard bondage, neither the Kings, nor those proud and imperious Consuls (before the Tribunes authoritie was ordeined to take them downe) ne yet the Lordly ruling Dictatour, nor the insolent and unsupportable Decemvirs, ever enjoyned; thus to dwell in in continuall soulderie, as these Tribunes Militarie doe: who exercise upon the Commons  of Rome, an absolute and kingly authoritie. What would they doe another day, when they were Consuls or Dictators indeed, who now but representing onely the Consuls government (as vice Consuls) are so cruell and unreasonable? But we are well enough served, and justly have deserved no lesse. For that there was not so much as one place for a commoner, amongst eight Tribunes. Aforetime, the Nobles were wont with much heave and shove, to fill but three rownes: and now they goe eight in a rancke together, to obtaine all charges and dignities of State and government: and in that throng, a Commoner cannot have a place amongst them, to put his colleagues in mind (if he did nothing els) that they that goe to warfare were freemenyet, and citizens with them, and not bondslaves. Who in Winter at the least, ought to be brought againe to their houses and homes, and once a yeare visite their loving parents, their sweet children, and best beloved wives: to make some use of their libertie, and chuse their Magistrates. These and such like speeches, whiles they broadly uttered and multiplied, they met at length with an adversarie that was able to match them, Appius Claudius, left for the purpose at home by his brethren in office, to restraine the Tribunes seditions: a man ever from his tender youth

 trained up in the broiles and contentions of the Commons. Who certain yeares before (as wee have said) gave shrewd and unhappie counsell to dissolve and put downe the Tribunes authoritie, by the contradiction and inhibition of their owne Colleagues: This man being not onely in wit prompt and readie, but also exercised by long practise, made at that time this or such like speech:The Oration of App. Clau^ius. If ever doubt were made, o Quirites, whether the Tribunes of the Communaltie have for love of your good or their owne particular vantage, been alwaies the authors and beginners of discord and dissention, this yeare I know assuredly, yee need no more to stand in doubt.
And as I rejoice that yee are at length come to an end of this your long wandering, so I congratulate both you, and the Commonweale for your sake, that this error is cleared, and especially in the middest of your prosperitie. Is there any man maketh question now, that the Tribunes of the  Commons were not offended, nor tooke snuffe so much at the injuries at your hands received (if haply there have sometimes been any) as at the bountie of the Nobles, towards the Commons, in allowing pay to those that serve in war? What think ye els, either they feared then, or would at this day disturbe and disquiet: but only the concord and agreement of the States? Which they suppose tendeth most, and is sufficient; to abolish and overthrow the Tribunes authoritie. And verily, as naughtie Artisanes or lewd leeches, seek for work still, and would be ever doing: so they likewise desire to have some thing or other out of frame and amisse in the Commonweale; that to the repaire and cure thereof, they mightbe ever sent for and emploied. For whether doe yee, (and speake truth) maintain or impugne the communaltie? Are you the adversaries or the advocates of them that serve in the wars? Vnlesse peradventure this be your saying, Whatsoever the  Nobles doc, it misliketh us, be it for the good of the common people, or to their prejudice and dammage. And even as maisters forbid their owne servants and slaves, to have any dealing at all with strangers, and thinke it meet and reason, that they meddle neither hot nor cold with them: even so forewarne yee the Nobles from all commerce and entercourse with the Commons: to the end, that neither we by our courtesie and liberalitie, should allure and winne them; nor they againe become dutifull and obeysant to us. How much more ought you (I pray you) if there were any sparke (I say not) of civilitie, but of common humanitie and good nature in you, rather to favour, and as much as lieth in you, softer and cherish, as well the gracious kindnesse of the Nobles, as the willing service and obedience of the Commons? Which accord, if it were perpetuall, who would not undertake to warrant, that this Seignorie and Empire, within a while, might  prove the mightiest and most renowmed of all those States that border hard upon our confines? As for this purpose intended, and plot devised by my Colleagues, whereby they would not have the armie withdrawie away from the siege of Veij, before the service were brought to an end: how it would be not onely profitable, but also necessarie, I will hereafter argue and prove. Now for this time, I list rather to treat and speake of the present condition and state of those, that are emploied there in warfare. Which Oration of mine, if it were pronounced, not before you only, but also in the camp, and there canvassed and skanned of, by the very armie itself, I suppose, would seeme equall, and be received for good and reasonable. Wherein, if nothing els should come into my head to speake, I would content my selfe, and rest satisfied with the onely speeches given out by the very adversaries. They said of late, That pay was not to be allowed to the souldiors, for  that never before it had been allowed. How then can they now be offended, and so male content, if they who have some new commoditie comming to them, be enjoined also new labor proportionablie? For never lightly is there travell any where without gaine, nor gaine commonly without travell and emploiment. Paines and pleasure, things of themselves in nature most unlike, yet by a natural kind of societie (I know not how) are linked together. The soldier (aforetime) thought much to bestow his labour and service upon the Commonweale, at his owne proper charges: yet was he glad with all his heart, that one part of the yeare, he might looke to home, husband his land, and get maintainance to find himselfe and his, both at home in cittie, and abroad in warre. Now, taketh he contentment, and is well pleased, that the Commonweale is gainfull to him: and with joyfull heart receiveth his wages. Let him likewise bee content, with patience to forbeare  his house and familie (since hee is at no great charge) somewhat longer than ordinarie. Might not the Common-wealth, if shee would call him to a reckoning, justly say: Yearely pay thou hast, performe therefore thy yearely service? Doest thou thinke it reason, to receive full wages for the whole yeare? and to bee emploied but sixe moneths for it? Much against my stomacke, o Quirites, enforce I this point, and dwell still in this one part of my Oration.

for in this wise ought they to reason that have mercenatie and hired souldiours: but we  will use them as fellow citizens, and thinke it meet likewise that they entreat us kindly, and speak unto us as to their native countrie. Either it behoved us, not to have begun the warre at all: or els to proceed forward, now it is begun: yea and for the honour of the people of Rome, to finish it with all speed possible. And finished it will be, if we presse upon our enemies thus besieged: if we depart not afore we have accomplished our hope, by the winning of Veij. And surely, if ther were no other cause but this, even the very shame and indignitie of the thing, might force us to continue siege unto the end. In olde time, the whole power of Greece laied siege full ten years to one cittie, and that for one only woman: How farre (good god) from their owne home? how many lands and seas betweene? Are we then loth and weary being within 20. miles of our dwelling place, and almost in the sight of our ownecittie, to endure the toile of one yeares siege? Because  (forsooth) we have but small cause given us to warre: and not griefes enough that might justly provoke us to abide and see the end. Seventimes alreadie they have rebelled: In peace never were they true. Our countrie have they spoiled and wasted a thousand times. The Fidenates they have caused to revolt from us. Our inhabitants there by us placed, they have slaine: and against all law of nations they were the principall instruments of that unworthie and unhumane murder of our Embassadours. All Hetruria would they have raised up against us, and at this day about it they go. And when our Embassadours came to demaund amends, they had like to have runne upon them and killed them. And ought we then with these kind of men to stand at a bay, and to warre coldly and by leisure? But if so just an hatred as this move us not: doe these things (I pray you) nere a whit move you neither? Their cittie is environed and beleagured with deep  trenches: blocked with mightie skonces, whereby the enemie is pent up and pinned within his owne wals. His fields he cannot till, and whatsoever was afore tilled, hath been destroied by war. If we dislodge and withdraw our armie backe, who doubteth, but that they (not for desire onely of revenge, but upon necessitie also and constreint to prey of other mens goods, having lost their owne) will invade and overrun our countrie? So that by this meanes we defer not the war, but bring it within our owne borders and confines. But now as touching that which properly indeed concerneth souldiors (of whom our good Tribunes of the Commons would now in all the hast seeme to have so great regard, from whom ere while they would have wrested their wages:) but what is that (I say?) A trench they have cast, a rampier and platforme they have raised, (matters of exceeding travaile and labour) so far about: skonces at the first a few, but after as their  armie increased, they have erected very thicke in every place. Forts they have built, not onely to commaund the towne, but also looking toward Hetruria, to impeach the avenues if any aid should from thence come. What should I speake of the rolling frames and toures, the mantilets and other Fabricks? What should I speake of the tarraces, torteises, rams, and all other engins of assault and batterie? Thinke yee it meet, that after so great toile and paines taken, now that the workes at length are brought to an end, these things should be left and abandoned, that against summer we should be newe to begin againe, and sweat a fresh about the same? How much lesse travaile rather is it to keepe these munitions alreadie made? to be instant, and constant to endure, and abide? yea and to rid our hands of all the care at once? For surely we may soone dispatch the service, if it be plied throughly and followed on still without stay; and if we  ourselves by these intermissions and respites between e, make not a long piece of worke of it, and drawe our hope a length. Thus much of the labour and losse of time. What els? Considering these so many parliaments, these diets and Councels continually in Tuscane, about sending aid to Veij, can we forget the danger that we incurre by deferring the warre? Indeede (as thinges now presently stand) I confesse the Tuskanes with the Veientians are angrie, they hate them and denie to send: and for any thing by them done, we might win Veij out of hand. But who dare warrant, that if the warre be delaied, they will hereafter be of the same mind? Seeing that if the Veientians have any rest and breathing time given them, they are like, to send oftner their embassages, and those more honourable than heretofore. Also the King who newly is set up and created at Veij (the onely thing that now offendeth the Tuscanes) in processe of time, may be changed  for another governour, either by agreement of the State (thereby to reconcile the hearts of the Tuscanes) or of his own accord: who will not peradventure that his princely regiment should be hurtfull to the safetie of his subjects. See how many things, how many inconveniences follow and ensue upon that course and manner of proceeding. The losse of the fabricks and fortifications,

 with so great labour alreadie prepared and achieved: the imminent and present wasting our owne borders: the Tuscanes warre in steed of the Veientians. These your devices, o ye Tribunes, are much what like to his, that offering a sicke man some kinde of meat or drinke, for the very present to gratifie him withall, to please his palate and to content his talage, maketh his disease long and peradventure incureable: who might have been recovered out of hand; in case at once, he would have resolutely endured the right cure of a skilfull physitian. And certes, if it were not materiall to the managing of this warre in hand, yet would it import much to martiall discipline, that our souldiors should be acquainted, not onely with the sweet fruit of a victorie atchieved, but also if occasion required longer time, to abide this tediousnesse: and to wait for the end of their hope, be it never so long: and if war be not finished in summer, to stay for winter:  and not as sommer birds, by andby in the fall of the leafe, to looke about and seeke for housing, harbour and covert. Consider, I beseech you, and see. The love and pleasure of hunting, carrieth men into mountaines, woods, and forests; through frost and snow, after their game: shal not we then use the like sufferance in the needfull exploits of warre, which pastimes, sports, and delights, are wont to draw and fetch out of us? Thinke we the bodies of our souldiors so effeminat, their hearts so tender and delicat, that they cannot for one winter abide in campe, and forbeare their home, but must needs warre as men at sea, watching times and seasons, and observing the quarters of the yeare? Cannot they endure both parching heat and chilling cold? They would blush and be abashed verely, if a man should therewith charge them: and they would stand stifly in this and avouch, That they had both in bodie and mind manlike sufferance and patience: and  that they were souldiors as well for winter as sommer: and that they set not the Tribunes a worke for any patronage of cowardise and shelter of idlenesse: but remembred wel enough, that their forefathers were not under shade for feare of sunburning, nor had their houses over their heads for taking cold, when they first created and ordeined that magistracie of Tribunes. This rather is beseeming the valour of your souldiors, this fitteth well the name of Romanes, not to have their eie upon Veij onely, and this warre now in hand, but to seeke for fame and glorie both by other exploits, and also with other nations in time to come. And thinke yee that there would ensue hereupon a small crack of credit, and hazard of reputation? Would ye have the neighbour nations confining upon us, conceive thus of the people of Rome, That if a cittie could receive their first brunt, and abide their assault for a very small while, it neede not after to feare any more? Or  rather should not this dread and terrour of our name spread all abroad, both far and neare, That no wearisomnesse of long siege and assault, no violence of bitter winter, is able to raise the Roman armie from any towne once by them invested? as knowing no other ende of warre but victorie? and whose manner of service is not by way of violent force more than of obstinate continuance, which (as in all other militarie occasions) so in besieging of citties is most needfull: the greatest number whereof, being either by strong bulwarkes and other fortifications, or by naturall situation impregnable, yet by famine, by hunger and thirst, processe and tract of time only doth force and overthrow. As it will (I doubt not) Veij at length: unlesse the Tribunes of the communaltie succour our enemies: unlesse that the Veientians find that reliefe and aid at Rome, which they seeke in vaine throughout all Hetruria. For can there ought happen to the Veientians  so wishedfor, as that first the cittie of Rome should be full of variance, and then the campe (as it were by a contagion from thence) as full of mutinies? But contrariwise I assure you, amongst the enemies, so good order there is and government, that neither the tediousnesse of long siege, ne yet the loathing of kingly rule, hath caused any stur or garboile among them. No not the deniall of helpe from the Tuscanes hath one whit troubled and distempered their mindes: but die he shall forthwith, that is the author of sedition. Neither shall any man there be suffered to speake those words, which are spoken here amongst you without any punishment or controlling. He deserveth the bastanado, to be drie beaten and well cudgeled, that forsaketh his colours, or departeth from his guard and quarter. But here, in open assemblies, they that persuade and counsell not one or two souldiors, but whole armies to leave their standerds and ensignes, and abandon  the very campe, have audience with applause. In so much, that whatsoever a Tribune of the Commons speaketh, although it were to betray the cittie, and undoethe whole state, ye are used to hearken and give good eare to him: and being ravished and carried away with the sweetnesse of that authoritie, yee suffer under it to lurke any misciefe whatsoever. There remaineth now no more but this, that the words they give out here with open mouth, the same they might iterate

in the campe among the souldiors, to corrupt the armie, and not suffer them to obey their captaines. For to such licentious libertie they are growne at Rome, that they feare and reverence neither counsell nor magistrate, neither lawes nor auncient customes, neither decree of Senatours, ne yet the discipline of militarie service.
Now was Appius with his orations good enough for the Tribunes, and able to meet them at everie turne: But see; (a thing that no man would have thought) a losse and foile received before Veij made Appius to have the better hand of the cause, wrought a greater unitie among the states, and kindled an ardent desire to assaile Veij more hotelie, and to beseege it with more resolution. For when they had raised up a mount neere to the citie, and approched in a manner to the wals thereof, with their rolling towers and roufed mantlets, whiles (I say) they were not so vigilant in the night season to tend and watch these Fabrikes, as they were busie and earnest in the  day time to reare and plant them; behold, all of a suddain the enemies opened a gate, and armed in great numbers, especially with burning firebrands, set all on a light fire: and in the space of one hower consumed both the mount and the mantlets, which had cost so long time in making. And many a man besides that came to helpe (but in vaine) by sword and fire lost his life. Which being reported at Rome, made all men heavie and sad, and caused the Senatours to take care and feare, how upon this accident, they might possiblie prevent and stay, either commotion in cittie, or mutinie in campe: doubting least that the Tribunes would have insulted over the Commonweale, as if they had gotten a great conquest. At what time, they that were by calling Gentlemen and so assessed, and had no horses of service assigned them from the cittie, after some consultation together among themselves, suddainely came into the Senate: and having libertie graunted  of speech, promised to serve in the warres with horses of their owne. After that the Senate had right honourablie thanked and given them most gracious words, the newes thereof was no sooner bruited through the market place and whole cittie, but behold, all on a suddaine the Commons came running unto the counsell house, saying, that as they were then to serve as footmen, so they offered their service to the Commonweale extraordinarily without mustering, whether they should be led, either to Veij, or to any other place whatsoever. And if they were conducted to Veij, they would not returne againe (they say) from thence, before they had woon that citie from their enemies. At which words, the Senatours so exceedingly joied above measure, that hardly they could temper themselves. For they tooke not order, as they did by the Gentlemen and horsemen afore, that they should be praised by the mouth of the Magistrates thereto  appointed, nor called them into the counsell house, there to give them an answere, neither could they keepe themselves within the counsell house dore. But every one of them in his own behalfe so well as he could, signified from alost, both by word of mouth, and gesture of hand, unto the multitude standing in the Comitium, a generall joy conceived: saying, That the cittie of Rome in that concord and unitie would be happie, invincible, and perpetuall: commending the horsmen, praising the footmen, extolling and magnifying that very day, and confessing that now they had surpassed the courtesie and bountie of the Senate. So that Nobles and Commons both, for joy wept againe who could weepe most, untill the Senators were recalled into the court: where a decree was made, That the Tribunes Militarie should assemble the people, and give thankes both to horsemen and footmen, and promise in the name of the Senate, that they would bee mindfull of  their affectionate kindnesse to their countrie: and to signifie that it was their pleasure, that they all, who had offered extraordinarie service so willingly, should have their pay notwithstanding: yea, and for the horses also there was assigned a certaine rate and proportion of wages. This was the first time that the Gentlemen began to serve on horsebacke for money. This voluntarie armie marched to Veij, and not onely repaired againe the workes which had been destroied, but also went in hand to erect new. And from the cittie was provision of victuall brought, with greates care of convoy than afore, that nothing might be wanting to an armie so well deserving of the Commonweale.
The yeare following had for their Militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie, C. Servilius Hala the third time, Q. Servilius, P. Virginius, Q. Sulpitius, A. Manlius the second time, and M. Sergius the second time. In these Tribunes time, whiles every mans care was bent to the Veientian war, The fort of Anxur being neglected, by occasion that the garrison souldiors were disbanded and raunged much abroad, and commonly received Volscian marchants into the town, was suddainly surprised, by reason that the warders of the gates were betraied. Lesse companie of souldiours

 there were slaine: because that all of them (besides those that were sicke) found themselves occupied and traded all the countrie over, and in the citties adjoyning, like to lawlesse lackies that follow the campe. Neither was there better successe at Veij, wherein rested the chiefe care now, of all their publicke affaires. For not onelie the Romane captaines were more angred one at an other, than couragious against the enemie: but also the forces of the enemies were increased by the suddain comming of the Capinates and the Falisci. Which two nations of Hetruria, because they inhabited next, supposing when Veij should be forced and lost, that their turne would be next to be warred upon by the Romanes: and the Faliscians besides, upon a speciall grudge and old quarrell of their owne, for that asore time in the Fidenate warre, they had intermedled and interessed themselves: sent their embassadours to and fro, and by binding themselves  by a solemne oth one to the other, came unlooked for with their power to Veij. And by chance they assailed that side and quarter where M. Sergius a militarie, Tribune had the charge of a skonce. Who gave a great al'arme and caused exceeding fright: because the Romanes supposed certainlie that all Hetruria was raised out of everie part, and there present, with all the power they could make. The same imagination animated the Veientians also within the cittie, to make a falley. So was the campe of the Romanes assailed on both sides. And whiles they ran together up and downe, and turned their ensignes everie way, and could hardlie keepe the Veientians within the strength of their fortresse, nor yet repulse the violence from their owne fortifications and rampiers, and defend themselves from their forraine enemies behind: their onely hope was to have helpe from the greater leaguer: that the legions in sundrie places  might make head, some against the Capenates and the Falisci, others against the sally of the townsmen. But Virginius had the charge of that maine campe, one that bare a privat grudge and inward malice against Sergius, and was hated againe of him. This man, when word was brought that most of the Fabricks and bulwarkes were assaulted, that the ramparts and trenches were won, and that the enemies on both sides charged lustily, kept his soldiors wel appointed in armes: saying, that if there were any need of helpe, his Collegue should send unto him, if he would. And he for his part was not so arrogant and insolent, but the other was as peevish and wilfull. Who because he would not seeme to seeke unto his adversarie, nor crave aide at his hand, chose rather to be vanquished of his enemie, than to overcome him by helpe of a fellow citizen. Thus betweene them for a good while the poore soldiours went to wrecke, and were slaine. At the last,  forsaking their rampiers, a verie few of them escaped into the maine campe. But the most part, with Sergius himselfe wentthrough to Rome. Where when he had laid all the fault upon his fellow in government, it was thought good that Virginius should be sent for out of the campe: and that in the mean while their deputies and lieutenants should command the forces. Herupon was the matter debated in the Senat, and the two Tribunes kept a taunting and reviling: and many hard termes were delt between them. Few there were that tendred the common good, but took part either with the one of the other, as ech of them were fancied and beloved. Howbeit the LL. of the Senat thoght good, howsoever that so shameful chance hapned either through the default, or unluckie fortune of the captains, not to expect the ordinary ful time of the election, but that presently ther should be new Tribunes militarie created, to enter into their office on the 1 day of October kalends of October. To which  opinion when they were all agreed, the other Tribunes militarie nothing gain said it. But Sergius and Virginius (for whose sake it appeared that the Senat was weary of the magistrates that yeare) at the first made meanes and besought them not to disgrace and discredite them so: and afterward assaid to crosse the decree: denying that they would give over their place, before the The 13 day of December. Ides of December, which was the set and usuall day of entring yearelie into newe offices. Amid this businesse, the Tribunes of the Commons, who had kept silence even against their wils, so long as men were at unitie and the affaires of the cittie prospered, upon a suddaine brake out and threatened sharpelie the two Tribunes Militarie, that unlesse they would submit themselves, and rest in the authoritie of the Senate, they would commit them to warde.
Then C. Servilius Hala, a Militarie Tribune, stood up and said, As for you and your threats, o ye  Tribunes of the Commons, in good faith, I would gladlie see once, that there were no more power and authoritie in these here, than will and stomack in you. But who seeth not that there is no striving against the authoritie of the Senat? And therfore hold ye content: and forbeare you to seeke oportunitie and occasion upon our variance to offer wrong. And my brethren for their parts shall either do that which the Senat thinketh good: or els if they shall continue stubborne

still in their contumacie, I will presentlie nominate a Dictator, to force them to leave their office. This speech was approved with a generall accord. And the Senatours being glad that without the terrours and scarbugs of the Tribunes authoritie, there was found out another greater power to bridle magistrats: the two militarie Tribunes aforesaid, were overweighed with the consent of all parties, and held a new election of militarie Tribunes, to begin their government on the (...) Kalends of October: and before that day they resigned up their places. Thus were L. Valerius Potitus the fourth time, M. Furius Camillus the second time, M. Aemilius Mamercus the third time, Cn. Cornelius Cossus the second time, C. Fabius Ambustus, and L. Iulius Tullus, Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie.
In whose time many worthie Acts were performed both at home and abroad. For not onelie they had war in sundrie places at one time, namely at Veij, at Capena, against Falerij, and with the  Volsci, to the end that Anxur might be won again and recovered from the enemies: but at Rome also, what about musters and paying the tribute for soldiours pay, there was much trouble. Besides there was some variance, about taking in certaine Tribunes of the Commons to the rest: and the two arraignments of those, who a little before had governed in Consuls authoritie, caused no small stirre. But the principall care of the Tribunes militarie, was that the muster should go forward. Neither were the yonger sort and serviceable men only prest forth, but the elder also compelled to give their names, and to keepe watch and ward in the cittie. But looke how much greater was the number of soldiors, so much more mony they needed for their paiment. And the same was levied by a contribution: but unwillinglie of as manie as taried at home. For that besides the levie, they were enjoyned to become soldiours also, in defence of the citie and to serve  in person for the Commonwealth. These things, grievous as they were of themselves, so by the seditious Orations of the Tribunes in their assemblies, they seemed more grievous and heavie.
Who argued and discoursed thus, That wages was appointed for soldiours to this end, only that what by warfare, and what with exactions and impositions, they might undoe the Commons, and make an end of them at once for ever. One warre (say they) hath now continued three years, and the same, for the nonce, ill managed, that it might be drawen out the longer. Againe, in one muster there were armies enrolled for no fewer than foure wars, wherunto beardlesse boyes and old crasiemen, were taken up and haled forth. Now there was no difference of winter or sommer: so as the poore Commons at no time can have any rest. Who now at last are taxed also and racked to the uttermost, so that after they have brought home with them their bodies overtoyled with  travaile, weakned with wounds, and last of all, wasted and spent with age: and finding all things at home unhusbanded by reason of the long absence of the masters and owners, they must be faine to pay Tribute even out of their poore decaied quickestocke, and repaie againe with great usurie to the Commonwealth, their wages received in warre, as it were upon interest.
Betweene the musters of one side, and the leavie of soldiours pay on the other side, and their mindes occupied about greater affaires, at the Election of Tribunes of Commons, the number could not fullie be made up: Wherupon there was great labour made, that into the rowmes that were void, there should be some of the Nobilitie taken in and admitted. VVhen that could not be obtained, yet to impeach and overthrow (...) the Tribunes law, it was effected or brought to passe that they should assume unto them for Tribunes of the Commons. C. Lacerius, and  Marcus Atilius, by the might and practise no doubt of the Patrilij. It hapned, so that the same yeare C. Trebenius was a Tribune of the Commons, who would seeme to undertake the patronage and defence of the law Trebonia, and discharge it as a duetie to that name and house belonging.
He spake alowd and said, that whereas the Tribunes Militarie had wonne that, wherof some of the Nobles had borne the repulse in their first suit,(...) and that the law Trebonia was disanulled, in that certaine Tribunes of the Comminaltie were taken into their fellowes, not by suffrages and free voices of the people, but by the rule and commaundement of the Nobles: and that the matter was come to that passe, that either Noblemen, or their favourites and followers were to become Tribunes of the Commons: that their sacred lawes were taken from them perforce, and the Tribunes authoritie wrested from out of their hands by violence: All these inconveniences he  complained to have hapned through the fraudulent practise of the Nobles: and the mischievous leawdnesse and treacherie of his owne companions in office. Thus whiles there grew great hartburning among them, and that not the Nobles onely, but also the Tribunes of the Commons, as well they, which were elected, asthey that were electors, were hardly thought of by the people:

 Then three of the companie, P. Curiatius, M. Metilius, and Minutius, fearing some shrewd turne like to fall upon Sergius and Virginius, (the Tribunes militarie of the former yeare) and by serving processe, giving them a day to answere, turned from themselves the anger and displeasure of the commons, upon those two persons: publishing openly, That whosoever were grieved for the musters and the Tribute, whosoever thought the warre long, and the continuall soulderie tedious, whosoever sorrowed for the dammage and discomsiture received at Veij, whosoever for the losse of their children, brethren, kinsfolke, or any of their alliance had heavie and mournefull houses: to them they offered libertie and power to wreake their publicke and privat greefe, upon these two guiltie persons and offenders, Sergius and Virginius, the very causes of all the mischeefes and calamities that were hapned. For why? the adversarie charged them  with no more than was confessed by the very parties: who finding themselves both faultie, laid the blame one upon the other: whiles Virginius reproched Sergius with running away, and Sergius laid treason to Virginius his charge, in that hee denied his helpe in time of need. For to say they were both of them so inconsiderate and foolish onely, were to speake beyond all compasse of beleefe. But much more likely it was, that there was some packing rather, and that the matter was contrived, and practised of set purpose, and by an ordinarie and common fraudulent plot of the Patritij. By whose meanes, both at the first the Veientians gat oportunitie to fire their workes, thereby to draw out and prolong the warre, and also now the armie was bought and sold, and the Romane campe betraied to the Falisci. And all this, to no other end, but that the youth and flower of the citie might wax old at Veij, and that the Tribunes might not propose and  consult with the people about the distribution of lands, or any other commodities of the poore commons, or in frequent and full assemblie of citizens intend and follow their publicke actions, and withstand the conspiracie of the gentrie and Nobles. Moreover there is alreadie (say they) a prejudice passed against these offenders, both by the Senate and people of Rome, and also by their colleagues. For as they were displaced and deposed from their office, by an Act of the Senate: so when they refused to give over, they were for feare of a Dictatour forced by their owne companions to resigne up their government: and the people of Rome had created other Tribunes militarie to enter into their charge, not upon the usuall day which was in the 13. day of December. Ides of December, but forthwith in the Kalends of October: as who would say, the common-wealth had not been able to stand any longer, if these men had remained still in place. And yet for all this,  these persons thus convicted and fore-condemned by so many prejudices, come now to be judged of the people: thinking they are sufficiently quit, and discharged, yea and have suffered punishment enough, in that they were two moneths sooner than ordinarie, made privat persons; and perceive not, that thereby was taken from them the power onely to doe any harme, and no punishment inflicted upon them. For as much as, even their very colleagues, who had not offended, were likewise discharged as well as they. Let the Quirites therfore and people of Rome, take that heart to them again, which they had upon the late overthrow, fresh and bleeding new, when they beheld the armie running in fearfull flight, sore wounded and agast, arriving at the gates, blaming no fortune, nor any of the gods, but onely these their two brave leaders. And as for us, we know assuredly that there is not one of all them here presently assembled, who that day cursed  not in his heart and detested the head, the house, and whole estate of L. Virginius and M. Sergius. Neither is it convenient, that upon whom, ere while every man praied that the anger and vengeance of God would light, against them now when they both may and ought, they should not extend their full power with rigour. Since that even the very gods never lay hand themselves upon sinners and offenders: but it sufficeth that they arme the wronged and oppressed persons with meanes and opportunitie of revenge. The Commons upon these speeches moved with indignation, condemned these two offenders in 26 lib. 5 ^^^sterl. 10000 brasen Asses a piece: notwithstanding that Sergius pleaded for himselfe, blamed the common fortune of warre, and laid all upon fortune: and Virginius besought them (but both in vaine) that he might not be more unhappy, and speede worse at home, than abroad in warre. Thus the peoples wrath being diverted upon  these two, obscured and darkned the remembrance both of the assumption and admitting of the Tribunes aforesaid, and of deluding and disanulling the law Trebonia. The Tribunes thus having gotten the upper hand, to the end that the communaltie might have a present reward for awarding this dome, publish the law Agraria, and forbid the levying of the Subsidie for souldiours pay: seeing there was neede of pay for so many armies: and sped so well they had, in the managing

of warfare, as they were like to come to an end, without any warring at all. For at Veij the  pecie campe which was lost, being recovered againe, was fortified with strong bulwarks, and furnished with good guards. The Tribunes Militarie, M. Aemylius and Q. Fabius, had the charge there. And as for M. Furius in the Faliscan, and Cn. Cornelius in the Capenate countrie, they could meet with none enemies without their towne wals. But they drave away booties, and wasted their marches, by firing their villages and their corne: but as for their townes, they neither assaulted nor besieged them. But in the Volscian countrie, after their territorie was wasted, Anxur also was assaulted (but in vaine) for that it was situate on high. Whereupon Valerius Potitus, who had the charge of that province, seeing that force would not prevaile, began by trench and rampier to laie siege to it, and invest it round. The affaires of war abroad standing in these termes, there arose domesticall strifeand sedition at home: and the same was followed more earnestly  and with greater adoe, than the wars were managed without. And when by reason of the Tribunes there could no subsidies and exactions be gathered, nor mony for souldiors pay sent to the Generals, and that the souldiours called on them hard, and were hastie for their wages: the campe also had like to have beene troubled and infected with the contagion of those civill mutinies. During these heates and angrie fits of the Commons against the Nobles, albeit the Tribunes of the people said, That now the time was come of establishing their freedome, and translating the chiefest dignitie from the Sergij, and Virginij, to the Commoners, such as were men of va our and action: Yet they prevailed no more than thus, that one onely of the communaltie, (as it were to make entrie and take possession in the right of that dignitie) to wit,(...) P. Licinius Calvus, should be created Tribune Militarie with Consuls authoritie: the rest were all of the Nobilitie, Pub. Manlius, and P. Titinius, P. Melius, L. Furius Medullinus, and L. Popilius Volscus. The very Commons themselves marvelled, that they had obtained so great a thing, and not he onely who was created, a man that aforetime had never been in place, and borne no magistracie, yet an ancient counsellor of State, and elderly person, and well stept in yeares. Neither as yet is it for certaine knowne, why he first and above all others was counted a meet man to take hansell, or take sey of this new dignitie and promotion. Some thinke, that for his brother Cn. Cornelius his sake, who had been the yeare afore a Tribune Militarie, and had given to the horsemen triple pay, hee was through favour drawne in, and called to so great honour. Others, for that himselfe had picked out a convenient time, and made a plausible Oration, that both Nobles and Commons liked very well, concerning the agreement and unitie of the States. The Tribunes of the Commons  rejoycing highly for this their victorie in the Election, remitted and called in the Inhibition of the subsedie or imposition aforesaid, the thing that most of all prejudiced the service of the C.W. By meanes whereof paiment was made in all dutifull obedience, and sent it was unto the armie. Then within short time was Anxur (in the Volscians countrie) recovered: by occasion that on a feastivall holyday, the watch and ward of the citie was neglected. This was a yeare notable and famous for the cold and snowie winter, so as the high waies were choked up, and Tyberis was unnavigable. Howbeit, by reason of provision brought in aforehand, the price of comarose not. And for because P. Licinius, as he entred his government without any troubles, and with greater joy and contentment of the Commons than indignation of the nobles; so also ruled and executed it all the yeare long accordingly: therefore their teeth watered the next election also, to  make Tribunes militarie of their owne bodie. One'y M. Veturius, of all the Nobilitie that stood in suit for the dignitie, had a place among them. But as for the other Tribunes militarie in Consular authoritie, all the Centuries in a manner chose Commoners, to wit, L. Titinius, P. Menenius Racilius, Cn. Genutius, and L. Attilius.
After this hard Winter, either by reason of a distemperature and disposition of the weather, suddainely chaunging to a contrarie; or upon some other hidden and vnknowne cause, there followed presently a contagious and dangerous summer, by occasion of a pestilence, noisome to all kind of living creatures. Of which incurable maladie, when as neither the reason could be found, nor any end thereof seene, the bookes of Sibylla, were by a decree of the Senate perused and Duumvirs appointed for divine rites and ceremonies, by celebrating a Lectisterne, (then first instituted in the citie of Rome) to appease and pacifie Apollo, Latona, and Diana, Hercules, Mercurie, and Neptune; feasted them (as it were) for the space of eight daies together, and for that purpose they set out three beds or banquetting tables; with as magnificent and stately furniture as could be for that time possiblie devised. Which solemnitie was privately also performed.

 All the gates and doores through the cittie stood wide open: all sort of viands were set out abroad to be used in common: open house kept for all commers, one with another, as wel vnknown strangers as their acquaintance with all friendlie welcom and interteinement: Kindlie, and courteouslie would they talke and devise, even with their adversaries: all chiding and brauling was laid aside and put under foot. The prisoners also for that time were enlarged, yea and conscience made afterwards, that any should be laid or kept in yrons, unto whom the gods had vouchsafed that gratious meede.
But all this while much trouble there was, and many al'armes before Veij, by reason that three warres were joyned now in one. For when as all at once the Capenates and the Falisci came (in manner as afore, about the fortifications and trenches of the Romans) for to rescue the besieged,  they were forced to make head, and hazard a doubtfull bartaile against three armies. But the best helpe they had, was the remembrance of the late condemning of Sergius and Virginius. Therfore having conducted by a neerer way, their forces from the greater campe (which before lay stil and would not come to succour) they set upon the Capenates backes, as they turned against the rampier of the Romanes. The battaile there begunne, made the Falisci also afraid: in which affright of theirs they suddainlie sallied out of the lesser hold, in so good time that they forced the enemies to turne their backes, all quaking for feare. And having gotten the upper hand, they followed the traine of the victorie, and in the chase made a verie great slaughter and carnage of them. And not long after, the forraiers that wasted the land of the Capenates, as they raunged abroad heere and there, encountred the residue and remnant of this battaile, as if fortune of purpose  had presented them to their hands, and swoopt them up cleane. Also many of the Veientians as they fled backe into the cittie, were cut in peeces before their verie gates: whiles they within for feare least the Romanes at once should rush in, made the gates fast and so shut out the hinmost of their owne men. These were the atchievances of this yeare.
And now approached the Election of the Tribunes militarie, whereof the Nobles had in a manner a greater care than of the warre: as who saw now that the soveraigne rule was not onlie parted with the comminaltie, but welneer on their own behalfe quite lost. Therfore albeit of set purpose they had prepared most noble and excellent men to stand in suite, whom to passe by and overhip, they thought the people would have bene ashamed: yet nevertheles they themselves (as if they had bene the parties that stood) tried everie way, and not onely sought the helpe of men,  but also craved it at the hands of the gods: making it great scruple and a matter of conscience: and alleadging that the elections for two yeares past were not according to the will of God: as appeared by this, say they, that in the former yeare, there was an intollerable winter, and such as portended some heavie judgements from above; how also the yeare following, there were no prodigious tokens shewed aforehand, but even the verie events and effects therof, were seene and felt: namelie the pestilence both in countrie and cittie, through the verie indignation, no doubt, of the gods, for that in the fatall bookes of Sybilla it was found out, that they ought to have bene pacified, for the diverting away of that pestilent influence. As if in those solemne assemblies which ought in the name of the gods and religiouslie to be held, the gods thought it an indignitie and unseemelie thing, that the honourable offices of state should be made common: no distinction  of degrees, no difference of houses observed, but all confused and shuffled together. The people therfore being driven into a maze, not onelie in regard of the majestie and dignitie of those that were competitors, but also of a verie remorse of conscience, chose for Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie, all of the Nobilitie: and a good part of them, the most honorable personages of the rest, to wit, L. Valerius Potitus the first time, M. Valerius Maximus, M. Furius Camillus the third time, L. Furius Medullinus the third time, Quintius Servilius Fidenas the second time, Quintus Sulpitius Camerinus the second time. How beit in this yeare no great exploit worthie of record, was performed at Veij under these Tribunes. All the service that was, consisted in forraying and wasting. The two Lord-generals raised huge booties, to wit, Politus from Falerij, Camillus from Capena: leaving behind them nothing whole and untouched, that might be spoiled  by fire or sword. In this meane time, many fearfull prodigious tokens were reported, the most part whereof were slenderly credited, for that of each there was but one onely author: and because there were no soothsayers, by whom they might make procuration therefore (since that the Tuscanes were now professed enemies) they were altogether neglected. But one especially there was, which all men had an eie and regard unto, namely, for that a certaine poole within the Albane

bane forrest,(...) without extraordinarie raine from above, or any other occasion which might make the thing seem lesse miraculous and wonderfull, was risen unto an unusuall heigth. Certain Oratours therefore were sent to the Oracle of Delphi, to know what the gods foresignified by that prodigious token. But they, as God would, met with an interpreter of the Destinities neerer home, to wit, an auncient Veientian. Who (upon a time, when as the souldiors, both of the Romans and Tuscanes, let slie one at the other taunts and scotfes from their stations and guards) thus spake in propheticall wise: That until the water were drained and let out of the Albane poole, the Romans should never be maisters of the towne of Veij. Which saying of his was at the first contemned as a foolish word, rashly let fall from him: but after, it began to bee much talked of, so long, untill a certaine Romane souldiour from out of his ward, enquired of a towns-man that warded next unto him (for now by reason of longwarre they had entercourse of speech one with another) what he was who had cast out such an ambiguous riddle of the Albane lake? When he heard that he was a soothsaier, being himselfe also a man not without some sense of religion, trained that wisard forth to communication, pretending, that he would gladly be resolved himselfe, as touching a particular prodigious object that troubled his mind: and therefore requested him at his good leasure, to take so much paine as to conferre with him, and give him counsell about the expiation and diverting the danger thereof. Now when they were both gone a good way from their fellowes, unarmed, and without all feare and suspition one of the other, the Romane being a lustie tall young man, caught the feeble old fellow in the sight of them all, and notwithstanding a great stirre that the Tuscanes made (but all in vaine) had him away perforce to his owne companie. Who being brought before the Generall, was sent afterwards to Rome unto the Senat.
And  being demaunded what the meaning of that should be, which hee had prognosticated and presaged concerning the Albane lake, answered thus: Certainely the gods were offended with the people of Veij, that day on which they put this into his mind to bewray the fatall and inevitable destruction of their State and countrie: and therefore that, which as then he being stirred by divine inspiration had prophesied, neither might he call backe againe and unspeake: and besides happily by concealing those things which the immortall gods would have to be published, there might be committed as great sinne, as by disclosing mysteries to bee concealed. Thus therefore (quoth hee) is it written in the fatall bookes of fortunes, and thus in the Tuscanes learning, to us it is delivered,(...) THAT VVHEN THE ALBANE VVATER OVERFLOVVED, IF THEN THE ROMANS WITH DUE AND RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES LET IT OUT, THEY SHOULD HAVE  THE VICTORIE OF THE VEIENTIANS: BUT BEFORE THAT, THEGODS VVOULD NOT FORSAKE THE VVALS OF THE VEIENTIANS. Then went hee on still, and shewed what was the solemne and right manner of deriving the water. But the Nobles supposing the author to be but light of credite, and not of sufficient account in so weightie a matter to be beleeved, resolved to expect the Embassadours, and the answere of the Oracle of Apollo. But before these messengers were returned from Delphi, or any expiation found out for this Albane miracle, the new Tribunes Militarie with Consuls authoritie. L. Iulius Tullus, L. Furius Medullinus the fourth time, L. Sergius Fidenas, A. Pesthumius Regillensis, P. Cornelius Maluginensis, A. Manlius, began their government.
In that yeare there arose new enemies, the Tarquiniens. They seeing the Romanes busied with  many warres at once, with the Volscians at Anxur, who laid siege to the fort there: with the Aequians at Lavicos, who assaulted the colonie of the Romanes: besides, with the Veientians the Faliscians and Capenates: and that within the cittie there was no greater quietnes, by reason of variance between the Nobilitie and Commons: supposing, I say, that hereby they had good opportunitie to doe some injurie and harme, they send forth certaine bands of soldiours lightlie appointed, into the territorie of Rome, to for^ay and make spoile: thinking that the Romanes would either put up that wrong at their hands without revenge, because they would not charge themselves with a new warre: or encounter them and make head with a small power and the same but slender and disfurnished. The Romans were more offended at the indignitie of these bravadoes, than they cared much for the spoile done by the Tarquiniens. And thereupon they neither made  much adoe about the matter, nor drove it off any long while. A. Posthumius and Lu. Iulius levied a power, without any ordinarie muster (for letted they were by the Tribunes of the Commons) even in a manner of voluntarie souldiours, whom they had procured with good words and comfortable speeches. And passing throughout the countrie of the ^^rites by crosse and crooked

 waies, surprised the Tarquiniens upon a suddaine, as they returned from boothaling, and loden with great prises. Many they slew, all they eased of their loding: and thus having recovered the spoiles of their lands, they returne to Rome. Two daies were allowed for the owners, everie one to owne his proper goods: and on the third day, such goods as were unknowne (wherof the most part belonged to the enemies) were sold in portsale: and that mony which was made thereof was devided among the soldiors. All other warres and especially the Veientian, had doubtfull issew. For now the Romanes despairing of all mans helpe, regarded and expected onelie the course of destinies and the will of the gods. By which time the Embassadours were returned from Delphi, bringing the answere of the Oracle, agreeable to the former answere made by thewisard, which was taken prisoner:The answere of the Oracle. and it ranne in this forme: BEVVARE o ROMANE THAT THE  ALBANE VVATER BE NOT KEPT TOO LONG IN THE POOLE. BEVVARE THOU LET IT NOT DISCHARGE IT SELFE INTO THE SEA. LET IT FORTH AND VVATER THE FIELDS THER VVITH, BY SVNDRIE RIVERETS OR STREAMES THOU SHALT VVAST IT AND DRAW IT DRIE. THEN ASSAULT VALIANTLIE THE ENEMIES VVALS, REMEMERING THAT OVT OF THAT CITIE VVHICH SO MANIE YEARES THOU HAST BESIEGED, VICTORY IS PROMISED TO THEE ASSVREDLY, BY THOSE DESTINIES VVHICH NOVV ARE REVEALED. AND AFTER THE VVARRE ENDED AND CONQVEST ATCHIEVED, SEE THOU BRING UNTO MY TEMPLE, AN AMPLE AND HONOVRABLE PRESENT: AND PERFORME THE SACRED CEREMONIES OF THY COUNTRIE ACCORDING TO THE OLD CUSTOME, AND RENEVV THOSE A FRESH VVHICH HAVE OF LATE TIME BEN NEGLECTED. Hereupon  grew this captive prophet abovesaid to be greatlie accounted of: and the Tribunes militarie, Cornelius and Posthumius, began to take his counsel and advice, about the procuration of the Albane miracle, and to appease the gods in due order. And sound it was at last where it was that the gods blamed the neglect of ceremonies, and for-letting the ancient solemnities and sacrifices: and that certainly it was nothing else, but that there was an errour committed in creation of the magistrats: and they so created, had solemnised the Latine holidaies wrong, and celebrated the sacrifices in the Albane mount amisse. The onely purging or expiation wherof was, that the Tribunes militarie should give over their office, and that they should take new Auspices againe by the flight and singing of beards, and so to proceed to an Interreigne. All which things were according to a decree of the Senate performed. Wherupon three Interregentes succeeded one after another. L. Valerius, Q. Servilius Fidenas, M. Furius Camillus. But all this while no end there was, nor intermission of troubles and dissentions. For the Tribunes of the Commons, disturbed and staied the assemblie for the election so long, untill it was agreed that the greater part of the Tribunes militarie, should be created from among the Commons.
During these affaires, the Tuscanes held certaine Diets and Councels at the Temple of Voltumna: where when the Capenats and Falisci required that with one common assent and resolution, all the people of Hetruria should raise the siege from Veij, this answere was returned: That heretofore they had denied the Veientians their helpe in this regard, that they were not to seeke for aide at their handes, from whom in so weightie a matter they had not sought for counsell. But now their owne fortune made answere for them. For such was the difficultie  of their present state, That if they would yet they well could not: considering especially how into that part of Hetruria there were newly arrived to seat themselves there, the Gaules, a strange nation unto them: with whom they neither had assured peace, nor yet certaine warre to trust unto. Howbeit for bloud sake, and for the very name, and in regard of the present perils of their kinsmen, they would grant thus much: that if any of their youthwould go forth to the war willingly and of themselves, they would be no hinderance. Now was it noised at Rome, that a mightie great number of these enemies were come to levie the siege. Whereby, the civill discords (as it is commonly seene upon a generall feare) began to wax more calme and to slake. For the principall Tribe that had the prerogative to give their first voice, chose P. Licinius Calvus Tribune Militarie, without his owne suit (but not against the will of the Nobles) a man of approved good  carriage, and moderation in his former government, but exceeding old.
And it appeared evidently, that all the rest for that yeare, should be chosen a new after him, out of the Colledge of those that had been Tribunes Consular beforetime: namely, L. Titinius, P. Menenius, Cn. Genutius, L. Atilius: who before they were elected and pronounced, P. Licinius Calvus spake in this maner (by the permission of the Interregent) unto the other Tribes, that were called in their

right and orderly course,(...) to their suffrages. I see well, my masters, o yee cittizens of Rome, that  in this Election, wherein ye have in remembrance our former magistracie, yee osse and presage happely against the yeare ensuing, concord and unitie: the onely thing at this time of all others most profitable: in case I say, you chuse againe, those who by experience also are become nowe more sufficient. But as for me, you see I am not the same man I was: but a bare shadow and name onely is all, that is left of P. Licinius. The strength of my bodie crasie, and feeble: the senses of mine eies and eares dim and dull: my memorie faileth: the quicknesse of my spirit growne heavie and lumpish. But behold (quoth he, laying hand on his son) this young man, the very image and portraiture of him, whom yee aforetime made Tribune Militarie, the first that ever was out of the communaltie. Him trained and brought up after mine owne order and discipline, in steed of my selfe, Ibequeath, I give, I dedicate unto the commonweale. And I beseech you, o Quirites, that the dignitie which of your selves you have offered unto me, without my seeking, you would bestow upon him at his owne humble suite, and the rather shewe him this favour at my earnest request in his behalfe. The father had his desire granted. And so his sonne P. Licinius, was with them whom before we named, declared Tribune Militarie in Consuls authoritie. Titinius and Genutius Tribunes Militarie, made an expedition against the Falisci and Capenates. Who managing the warre in greater heare and courage, than with sage advise and counsel, plunged themselves headlong into an ambushment of their enemies. Genutius paied for his rashnesse, and made amends by an honorable death. For he was slaine even before the ensignes, valiantly fighting in the vaward of the battaile with the formost. But Titinius, having after much feare rallied his souldiors, retired himselfe unto an high hill, and made head againe. Howbeit, he durst  not encounter the enemie on even and plaine ground. The shame of this defeature was greater than the losse otherwise. And yet it had like to have turned into a right great dammage and overthrow. So great was the feare, not at Rome onely whether much newes came diversly reported: but also in the campe before Veij, that hardly could the souldiours be kept from running away. For it was noised all over the campe, that the Capenates and Faliscians had gotten the victorie, slaine the Generals and the whole armie: and that all the floure and strength of Tuscane was not farre off. But at Rome there was much more hurliburly. For there it was verily beleeved, that the leaguer about Veij was assaulted, and that, part of the enemies alreadie were comming in warlike manner against the cittie: so as they came running on heapes to man the wals. And even the very matrones and dames of the cittie, whom publike fear had caused to leave their  houses, fell to their beades and supplications in the churches: beseeching the gods to forfend and divert destruction from the houses, Temples, and wals of the cittie of Rome, and to turne away that feare from them, upon Veij: if they renued aright their festivall daies, if they made satisfaction by sacrifice for the prodigious sights, and no otherwise.
Nowby this time were the solemne plaies and the Latine holidaies renewed, now was the water let out of the Albane lake into the fields, now Veij drew neere to her finall end, hastened by the course of the Destinies. Therfore there was created M. Furius Camillus Dictator, the fatall captaine, predestined to destroy that cittie, and to save his owne countrie: who appointed P. Cor(...) Coronell of the horsemen. The chaunge of the Generall made a change soone of (...) things else. The hopes of men were other than afore, the mindes of men were altered, yea  the fortune of the citie seemed not the same. But first of all, he proceeded by martiall law against them, who in that fearefull fright at the last al'arme, were fled from Veij: and taught his soldiours not to feare their enemies most, but likewise to stand in awe of their own Commander. And after he had published to take musters upon a certain day, himself in the mean whiles rode post to Veij, there to encourage the harts of thesoldiors. From thence he returned to Rome, for to levie a new armie: and there was not one that refused to serve under his standerd. For even the youth of the forrainers both Latins and Hemicks, came and offered their service in that warre. Vnto whom, when as the Dictator had in the Senate house yeelded thankes, and that all things now were in sufficient readines, by a degree of the Senate he made a vow, That when he had woon Veij, hee would incotinentlie celebrat the great games, and reedifie and consecrat anew, the Temple to dame Matata, which afore time had beene dedicated by king Servius Tullius, Thus when hee was gone forth from the cittie, and his armie on foot, with greater expectation of the people than hope: first hee fought a field with the Faliscians and Capenates, in the countrey of Nepet, [called at this day Nepe] where hee ordred all his exploites with as great discretion and

 pollicie as might be: and as it commonly falleth out he chi^ved as well, and fortune favoured his dessignes. He not onely defeated his enemies in battaile, but also drave them out of the field, and gained a huge bootie, wherof the greatest part came to the Treasurer his coffers, and somewhat (though not much) was given to the soldiours. From thence he marched with his armie to Veij, and there he caused more skonces and bastillons to be made, and to stand thicker together. And having made proclamation, that none should fight without speciall commandement, he withdrew the souldiors to the making of trenches and rampiers, from their skirmishes that they made oftentimes and that rashly, betweene their campe and the wall of the towne. The greatest worke of all the rest and most laborious, was the undermining that was begun into the Castle of the enemies. And to the ende that this worke should not be intermitted, ne yet  the continuall labour still under the ground might not out-toile them: he devided the pioners into sixe parts, and each of them wrought six houres round by turnes, so that both night and day, they never gave over before they had wrought a way to the Castle.
The Dictatour seeing now the victorie as it were in his hands, and a most rich cittie readie to be taken, and that there was like to be such saccage, as never had beene the like in all the warres put together aforetime: least that he might incurre either any mutinie and anger of the souldiours in pinching and skant parting of the pillage, or displeasure and miscontentment of the Rulers and Nobles of Rome, by so prodigall a largesse in sharing all: dispatched his letters to the Senate, to this effect, That whereas by the goodnesse of the immortall Gods, his owne pollicie and direction, and the travaile of his souldiours, the cittie Veij was now in a manner at his devotion; what they would  advise, should be done with the rich spoiles thereof. There were two divers opinions that mightily distracted the Senat: the one of olde P. Licinius, whose mind being asked of his sonne, spake first (by report) and said: That his opinion was, there should a proclamation be published abroad among the people, that whosoever would be partaker of the bootie, should go to the Leaguer before Veij.Difference in the Senat about the (...) of Veij. The other of Ap. Claudius, who finding fault with this new, prodigall, unequall, and undiscreet largesse, in that they thought it unlawfull and unfit, that the treasure gotten of the enemies should come once at leastwise to the common purse of the cittie, which had bin emptied so often by reason of wars; was of advise, that the soldiors should have their pay out of it, that the Com. thereby might bee eased, in the charges of the subsidie levied of them: for so should every mans house equally feele the societie and part of that benefit, and the hands of idle persons  remaining at home in the town, greedie now of rifling, and who would be fingering of pillage, should not pluck from the hardie warriors their due rewards. For as much as, it is usually seene, that as the valiantest man commonly aimethat the greatest part of travaile and perill, so the more coward alwaies reacheth at the biggest portion of the spoile, and hath his hand deepest therein. Contrariwise, Licinius alleadged that such mony laied up would be alwaies suspected and odious, and would minister matter unto the Commons of criminations and finding one fault or other, whereof seditions and commotions may arise, and would give occasions of newe lawes to be preferred: and therefore better it were, that by this gift and boone, the hearts of the Commons were won and reconciled: who being spent and eaten out by reason of the charges of so many yeares, herewith might be well relieved. And that they ought to tast the fruite and  sweetnesse of the bootie out of that war, in which they had spent their yeares, and were waxen old men. And that it would be more welcome and acceptable, that every man should be his own carver, and with his own hand catch from the enemie what he could, and bring it home with him: than if they should receive much more by a great deale at the discretion and pleasure of another. And the Dictator himselfe (faith he) hath avoided as neer as he could, the displeasure, hatred, and offence that might arise thereof, and therefore posted it off to the Senat: the Senat ought likewise seeing the matter is put to them, to let the Commons alone therewith, and permit every man to have such share as the fortune of warre will allot him. This advise, which made the Senat gratious with the people, was thought to be the safer and better of the twaine. Whereupon proclamation was made, That whosoever would have part of the spoile of Veij, should shew himselfe  before the Dictatour in the campe. So there went a huge multitude, that they filled the campe againe.
Then the Dictatour after sacrifice done, and advise taken of the luckie signes of birds, went forth, and commanding his souldiours to take armes and weapon in hand, spake these words and said: By thy conduct and the instinct of thy divine power o Pythius Apollo, I set forward to the winning of the towne of Veij, and now to thee I vow the tenth part of the spoils therof.

And thee withall (o Queene Iuno) who at this houre doest inhabit within the compasse of these  wals, I beseech, that thou wouldest vouchsafe, to follow us after conquest into this cittie, ours now, and thine within a while: whereas thou maiest be shrined in a Temple meet for thee, and the grandeur of thy majestie. Having made these praiers, with an exceeding multitude he invested the cittie, and assaulted it round on all parts: to the end that they within might have lesse perceivance of the perill intended toward them from the undermining. The Veientians little knowing that they were betraied, partly by their owne prophets, and partly by the Oracles abroad, and that some of their gods were invited and bidden to part of the spoile and saccage, and other by vowes and praiers trained and called out of their owne cittie; began to looke after the temples of their enemies and other newe habitations: little weetting that this was their last day, and fearing nothing lesse than that their wals should by undermining be overthrowen, and that  their Castle was full already of enemies: every man for himselfe ran armed to the wals, mervailing what the matter should be, that whereas for so many daies space no man stirred out of the Romanes Leiger, then of a sodaine (as if it were in a wood rage) they ran upon head so rashly to the assault. But hereto longeth a tale. That when the Veientian King was at sacrifice, this voice of the Southsaier was overheard out of the mine under the ground, THAT HE, VVHOSE HAP VVAS TO CUT FORTH THE INVVARDS OF THAT SACRIFICE SHOULD OBTAINE VICTORIE, and moved the Romane souldiors, to breake out of the undermining, and to catch up the entrailes and bowels, and carrie them to the Dictatour. But as in things of so great antiquitie it sufficeth me, that those which carrie some likelihood of truth, be received for true: so for fabulous matters fitter in deed to make a shew in a stage plaie (where people take delight in such  miracles) than tobe sadly beleeved, it will not quit for the paines either to avouch them, or disavow them. The mine or cave at the same time (no doubt) full of chosen souldiours, yeelded forth all at once armed men into the church of Iuno, which was in the Castle of Veij. And some of them set upon the backs of their enemies that were on the wals: others plucke up the portcullis of the gates: some of them, whiles from the houses the women and servants flung downe stones and tiles, cast fire abroad. So that every place was full of cries and voices, partly of them that frighted others, and partly of those that were affrighted, with a confused skriking of women and children. When as now in a moment, the armed souldiors were throwne down from the wals every where, and the gates set open: whiles some entered marching in array, others scaled the naked wals,(...) the cittie was filled with enemies: and skermishes there were in every place. After great  massaker and execution committed, the fight began toquaile: and the Dictatour commanded the Bedles to proclaime and give commandement, to spare the unarmed. Thus the bloudshed ended. Whereupon the unarmed people began to yeeld: and by permission of the Dictator the souldiours ran to the spoile.
Which being brought in sight of the Dictatour, of greater price and valor a good deale, than either was hoped or looked for: it is said that he stretched forth his hands towards heaven and praied, That if his own fortune and the felicitie of the people of Rome were thought by any god or man to be excessive, the envie belonging thereto, might be mitigated with as small privat losse of his owne in particular, and with as little common calamitie of the people of Rome in generall, as might possibly be. And it is recorded, that in this manner praying and worshipping, as he turned himselfe about, he slipt forward and caught a fall. And as  men afterward guessed by that which fell out, it was supposed that the ominous token bodened the condemnation of Camillus himselfe, and the ruine of the cittie of Rome, which happened within few yeares after to be forced and sacked. Thus was that day spent in the slaughter of enemies, and in rifling of that most wealthie cittie. The morrow after, the Dictatour sold in port sale the bodies of as many as were freeborne. That mony only came into the common treasurie not without some anger and repining of the Commons. And as for that bootie and spoile which they brought with them away, they counted themselves beholden therefore, neither to the Generall himselfe (who to colour and excuse his owne nigardise had referred the matter to the Senat: wherein he might have used his owne libertie and discretion) nor to the Senate: but unto the house of the Licinij, whereof, the sonne propounded the matter before the Senat, and the father  was the author of so popular an overture.
When as now worldly and earthly riches, were caried forth and tumbled out of Veijby heaps, then began they to remove and have away the sacred gifts and oblations of the gods with the gods themselves, but after the maner of devout worshippers, rather than of gredie spoilers. For chosen there

 were out of the whole armie, certaine youths in the flower of their age, who having their bodies cleane washed, and being arraied in white robes, had in charge to carrie Queene Iuno to Rome, and entred into the church with great adoration and reverence: and at the first, very charity and religiously laid hand upon her, for that (after the Tuscane maner) there used none to handle that Image, but the priest of one certaine tribe. After this, when as one of them, whether it were upon a certaine divine inspiration, or in some youthfull sport, cast out these words, WILT THOU WEND TO ROME DAME IUNO? The rest with one voice cried alowd, That she gave a nod, and seemed thereto to give assent: whereupon this also was added to the tale, that she was heard to say, I WILL. But for certaine it is reported, that shee was stirred out of her footstall, with the helpe of a small levar, and that as she willingly was displaced, so she was easily removed and translated,  and so safe and sound conveied into the mountaine Aventine, there to abide and remaine forever. Which was the place assigned unto her by the vowes of the Romane Dictatour. And there Camillus according to his vow, dedicated to her afterwards a temple. This was the finall end and fall of Veij, the richest cittie of all the Tuscanes, which even in this last and uttermost calamitie shewed her mightinesse, that having been besieged round about continually the space of ten summers and winters, and in that time done much more annoiance and hurt than it received, was now at last through the necessitie of fatall destinie, gained rather by long siege and secret undermining, than won by forcible assault and violence.
When tidings came to Rome of the winning of Veij, albeit both the prodigious sights that were seene, had ben expiate by sacrifice, and that the answers of prophets and wisemen, yea, and  the Oracles of Apollo were well knowne; and that so far forth as mans counsel and policle might helpe, they had chosen for Generall M. Furius, the most Noble captaine and warrior of all other: yet considering they had there warred so many yeares with variable fortune, and received manie losses and overthrowes, their joy was exceeding great, as if a thing had happened unlooked for. And before that the Senate could make a decree, all the churches were ful of the dames of Rome giving thankes to their gods. And the Senate ordained by an Act, that supplications should continue for foure daies, the like as never had been aforetime in any warre. The Dictatour also was met upon the way as he came home by all degrees and estates in greater number, and was more welcommed and honoured than any man aforetime, to that day. And the triumph far exceeded the usuall manner of the solemnitie to that day belonging. But most of all was hee himselfe all  goodly to bee seene, entring into the cittie in a chariot drawne with white steeds. And that was thought an honour, not onely unmeet for the qualitie of a cittizen, but hardly be seeming the condition of any man whatsoever. For they made it a matter of conscience, that their Dictator should bee equall with Iupiter, and the sunne, in respect of their horses: for which onely cause especially, the triumph was more glorious than gracious, and taken in good gree. Then assigned he and set out unto Queene Iuno a church in Aventine hill,The temple of Queene Iuno, The temple of Matuta. and dedicated another to dame Matuta and so having atchieved and performed these divine and humane deeds, he resigned up his Dictatorship.
After this began some speech about the Present to Apollo* Vnto whome, when as Camillus said, that he had vowed the tenth part of the spoile: and the priestes and prelates thought good that  the people should discharge their conscience in that behalfe: there could no readie meane be found how to commaund them to give backe againe the spoile, that the due portion thereout might be set apart for the holy oblation. At the length they grew to this point, which was thoght the easiest course of all, that whosoever would acquit himselfe and his house in conscience, should, after he had made an estimate to himselfe of his owne share in the spoile, bring the value and price of the tenth part into the common chist: that thereof might be made a golden oblation, meet for the state of that Temple, beseeming the power of that god, and answerable to the dignitie of the people of Rome. Yet, even this contribution alienated the hearts of the people from Camillus.
Amid these affaires, there came Embassadours from the Volscians and Aequians, to treat for peace: and peace obtained they, rather because the cittie, wearied with continuall warres, might  now take rest and bee at quiet, than for any deserts of them that sued for it. After Veij was taken, the yeare following had sixe Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie, two F. Cornelij, namely, Cossus and Scipio, M. Valerius Maximus the second time, C. Fabius Ambustus the second time, L. Farius Medullinus the second time, and Q. Servilius the third time. Vnto the Cornelij fell out by lot the Faliscane warre, to Valerius and Servilius the Capenates. Who neither assaulted their

citties by force, nor wearied them with siege: but forraied the countries, and drave booties away  of such things as were in the fields, not a tree that beareth fruit, not any fruitfull thing besides, escaped their hands. This distresse and calamitie subdued the Capenates: who thereupon sued for peace, and had it graunted. But amongst the Faliscians the warre continued still. In the meane time, at Rome there were sundrie seditions. For the appeasing whereof, it was thought good to send a Colonie to Volsci, and thither three thousand Roman cittizens were appointed in checkroll. And Triumvirs were thereto chosen, who devided to every man three acres of ground and a (...), and one twelfth part. That began to be despised, because they thought it but a poor comfort offered to stop their mouths withall, and to put them beside a greater hope. For why should the Commons be sent away into the Volscians land, seeing there was Veijwithin their eyesight, a most faire cittie, and the land about, more plentifull and large than that of Rome? And as for  the cittie it selfe, they preferred it, either for the site, or state of privat and publicke buildings and other places, before the cittie of Rome. Moreover, a motion also was made (which, after that Rome was woon by the French, was more hotely followed) concerning a generall transmigration and removing to Veij for ever.
Marry, they intended that Veij should bee inhabited, partly by the Commons, and partly by the Nobilitie: saying, That the people of Rome might wel ynough inhabite two citties jointly in one state of Commonwealth. Against all this, the LL. of the Senate laboured what they might, and plainely said, they would sooner die in the sight of the people of Rome, than any of those matters should passe. For why? if there were now in one cittie so much dissention, what would there bee in twaine? Would any man be so mad, as to preferre a conquered cittie, before his owne countrie that had conquered the same? and suffer Veij after it is woon  to be in better estate than it was afore, even when it was at the best? Finally, well might they bee forsaken at home in their owne countrie by their cittizens, but to forsake their countrie and cittizens, they would never bee brought by any force whatsoever. They would not follow to Veij, T. Sicinius as their founder, (for he amongst the Tribunes ofthe Commons persuaded this Act) and leave their god Romulus the sonne of a god, the first stockefather and beginner of the cittie of Rome. Whiles these matters were in handling with foule stir and much debate and variance, (for the Nobles had woon to their opinion some of the Tribunes) there was nothing else that staied the Commons hands from outrage, but this, that when as there was an outcrie made to begin the quarrell, and to set them together by the eares, the cheese and principall Senators first came forth to the multitude, and offered themselves to be laid at, smitten and slaine. In regard of  whose age, dignitie, and honour, they forbearing to doe violence, were likewise for shame staied in their mood, for any the like attempts besides.
Camillus taking vantage hereof, ever and anone in all places, made speeches unto the people, and said: That it was no marvell truly, that the citie was in a rage and madnes, which being charged with a vow, made more care of all things els, than to discharge their conscience thereof, and to see it performed. As for the collation and gathering of a smal donative, rather than a tithe, he said nothing of it: seeing that every man privatly bound himselfe thereto, and the bodie of the people stood freed therefro. But one thing there was, that his conscience would not suffer him to hold his peace, that, out of that bootie onely which was of moveable things, the tenth was appointed to be levied: as for the cittie and ground that was won, which also was comprised within the vow, there were no words at all made. When as the debating  of this matter, which to the Senate seemed doubtfull and hard, was put over to the Priests and Prelates: their colledge calling to them Camillus, thought good, That whatsover the Veientians had before the vow made, and whatsoever after the vow, came into the hands of the people of Rome, the tenth part thereof should be consecrated to Apollo. So both the citie and the lands were valued: and monie taken forth of the citie chamber. And the Tribunes militarie Consular enjoined, therewith to buy gold. Whereof there being not store ynough, the dames of the cittie having their assemblies and meetings by themselves for to consult thereabout, by a common decree made promise to the Tribunes militarie, and brought into the exchequer their owne gold, and all the ornaments and iewels they had. This was as acceptable a thing, and as well taken of the Senate, as ever any had been: and for this their liberalitie (men say) they had this honour  graunted unto them, as to ride to church and to plaies in hanging or ship-coaches, and as well on working daies as holidaies, to be at their wagons. When the gold was of everie one received by weight, and prised to the worth, that they might again be paied mony therfore: it was agreed that a standing cup of gold should be made therof, and presented as an oblation to Apollo

 at Delphi. So soone as they had eased and disburdned their minds of this religious vow, the Tribunes of the Commons began sedition a new. So as the multitude were incited and stirred up against all the peers, but above all other against Camillus: charging him, that what by confiscating and consecrating the bootie of the Veientians, he had brought it to just nothing. Those nobles that were absent they blamed and cried out against mightilie, but of such as were present in place, and offered themselves unto them in their anger, they had some reverence. Now so soone as they saw the matter in question to be deferred and continued past that yeare, they chose againe for the yeare folowing, those Tribunes of the Commons, which were the authors of that Act and law. The Nobles likewise endeavoured the same for those that should oppose themselves against the law. So the Tribunes of the Commons (a good part of them) were chosen the verie same againe. But at  the election of the Tribunes Militarie, the Patritij after verie much adoe got at length, that Furius Camillus was created. They made semblance and pretended, that they would be provided of a Generall for warre, but indeed their purpose was to be furnished of an adversarie, to withstand the Actes and proceedings of the Tribunes. Together with Camillus were made Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie. L. Furius Medullinus the sixt time, C. Aemylius, L. Valerius Publicola, Sp. Posthumius, P. Cornelius the second time.
In the beginning of the yeare, the Tribunes of the Commons stirred not untill M. Furius Camillus was gone against the Falisci, as his charge required for that warre. And by delaies afterwards the matter was well cooled. As for Camillus, whom of all other they most feared to be their adversarie, he waxed great and glorious, by his service against the Falisci. For when as at  the first, the enemies kept themselves within the wals, thinking it the safest way: he by wasting their countrie, and setting fire upon their villages, forced them to come forth of their towne, howbeit they feared to be too bold, and to go farre forward: and encamped themselves a mile and lesse from the towne; reposing their safety and securitie in nothing else, but in the dangerous and hard passage, the waies all about being rough, ragged, and stonie, in some places straight and narrow, in other up hill and stiepe. But Camillus having taken a prisoner out of the fields, and being guided by his direction, late in the night dislodged his camp, and betimes in the morning at breake of the day, shewed himselfe upon the higher grounds a good deale. The Romane on three sides, fell to fortifie by trenching and casting rampiers, whiles the rest of the armie stood readie raunged for battaile. And where as the enemies assaied to hinder the worke,  he discomfited them and put them to flight, wherupon the Falisci were so frighted, that as they fled amaine in disaray, they passed beyond their owne campe, which was neerer; and made as fast as they could to the towne. Many were slaine and manie wounded, before that in this affright they could hit upon the gates. Their campe being taken, the bootie thereof came unto the Questors coffers, with the great grudging and anger of the soldiours. Howbeit, yeelding to the severitie of discipline and good government: the same vertue which they had hated before, they now honoured and held in admiration. After this was the cittie besieged, and sconces and platformes raised about it. Otherwhiles also, as occasion was offered, the townesmen would sally forth and assaile the Romanes campe, and make light skrimishes. Thus the time passed without anie great good hope of either side: for that they within the town besieged, had of their  former provision more store of corn and other necessaries than they that lay at siege without. And it seemed they would have had as long a peece of work there, as they had at Veij, had not fortune yeelded to the Romans General, both a trial of his approved vertue in war, and also speedie victory.
It was the manner amongst the Faliscians, to entertaine for the governance of their children, one that should both teach and instruct them in schoole, and withall beare them company whersoever they went: and many children together (as the guise continueth still even to this day in Greece) were committed to the charge and tuition of one man. As for the nobles and principall mens sonnes of this cittie (as it is usually everie where else) a speciall man had the teaching of them, such an one, as was thought most learned and the greatest clerke of all other. This man, having in time of peace begun to bring the children forth before the towne side, to disport and exercise  themselves, gave not over his wonted manner now in time of warre. And using still to traine them abroad one while neerer, an other whiles further off from the gate: it fel out so, that one day what with pastime, and what with pleasant talke and discourses, he drue them further than he accustomed: and seeing his time, went forwards as farre as the enemies corps de gard, and so forth on, till he had brought them within the compasse of the campe, and even to Camillus his pavilion.

Where to his wicked intended act, he added also a more gracelesse speech, saying, That he  yeelded (...) Falerij into the Romanes hands, in that he gaue them those children to doe with what they would, whose parents were the rulers and commaunders of the cittie. Which words when Camillus heard,(...) Thou commest not (quoth he) lewd wretch as thou art, with thy lewd and cursed present, either to a people or to a captaine like thy selfe.
We have not indeed with the Faliscians any league at all, by covenant of man concluded and established: yet by nature, there is and will be still a kind of amitie or societie betweene us and them. There are lawes due for warre as well as for peace: and those have we learned to observe no lesse justlie, than valiantly. We bare armes not against that sely age, which usually is spared in rasing and sacking of townes: but against armed men, and those, who being by us neither harmed nor provoked, have assailed the Romanes campe at Veij. And yet those enemies (as bad as they be) like as thou hast for thy part exceeded  them, in a new and strange kind of wickedness: so will I conquere I doubt not, by feats that the Romanes professe; by vertue, by travaile, by hardie sight: like as I have done Veij alreadie. After this he caused him to be stripped naked, and so with his hands bound behind him, he delivered him to the children, for to bring him backe to Falerij: and gave them rods withall, wherwith they might whip and drive this traiterous person forward into the cittie. At which sight the people at the first, came running together: and then the magistrates called a Counsell to sit upon this strange occurrent. But see what a change it wrought in their hearts. They who a while before were with hatred and anger so cruelly set, as that they wished rather in a manner to be destroied with the Veientians, than to accept of peace as the Capenates had done: now throughout the whole cittie required to be at accord with the Romanes. No talke in the market place, no speech in the  Counsell house, but of the faithfulnes and truth of the Romanes, and of the justice of their Generall. And with one general consent of all, Embassadours were sent to Camillus into the campe. And from thence by permission of Camillus, to the Senate at Rome they went, to deliver up Falerij: and being admitted into the Senate house, in this wise (by report) they spake: In that victorie (right honourable) which neither God nor man can chuse but allow, are we by you and your Generall overcome and vanquished.(...) And here we render ourselves unto your hands: supposing this (than which to a conquerour there can be nothing more honourable) that we shall live better under your government, than under our owne proper lawes and liberties. The event and yssew of this warre, hath assourded to mankind two worthie examples to follow.
Yee for your part have made choice to observe faithfulnes in warre, rather than to attchieve a present conquest: and we  again, by this your faithful dealing induced and provoked, have willingly yeelded unto you the victory confessing our selves now presently to be your leige and lawful subjects. Send whom you wil, to receive our armor, our hostages, our town with open gates. Neither shal you ever repent of our alleageance: nor we think much of your rule and goverment. Camilius had thanks both of the enemies and of the citizens. The Falisci were charged with mony for that years pay, that the people of Rome might be freed of their subsidie. Thus when peace was graunted, the armie was brought backe againe to Rome.
Whenas Camillus was returned after this conquest of his enemies into the cittie, with much better commendation, than when as in triumph he rode in a chariot drawne with white horses through the cittie, as being now famous for his just dealing and faithfulnesse: secretly the Senate  was abashed for verie reverence of the man, and could no longer beare, but without further delay to acquire him of the vow he made. So there were sent L. Valerius, L. Sergius, A. Manlius as Embassadours in one galley unwasted, to present unto Apollo at Delphi by way of oblation, a standing cup of gold. Who not farre off from the narrow seas of Sicilie, were encountred and bourded by certaine Liparensian pirates or men ofwarre, and had to Lipara. Now the manner was of that cittie, (as common rovers use to doe) for to devide the prise amongst them. Haply, the chiefe officer or magistrate for that yeare, was one Timasitbeus, a man more like to the Romanes than his own countrimen. Who having himselfe some reverent regard of the name of Embassadours, and the present of the god to whom it was sent, and the occasion therof: possessed the multitude also (which alwaies lightly resembleth their governor) with due religion and pricke of conscience. This head ruler brought the Embassadours into their lodging, and entertained them courteouslie at the cities charges, wasted them with the convoy of a sufficient fleete: accompanied them in person to Delphi, and from thence conducted them home againe safe to Rome. Whereupon by an Act of the Senate, there was a contract made with him of amitie and

 mutuall intertainement, and giftes bestowed upon him at the citties cost. The same yeare there was doubtfull warre with the Aequians, so as it was uncertaine both in the armie and at Rome, whether they had woon or lost the victorie. The Generals for the Romans, were of the Tribunes Militarie, C. Aemylius, and Sp. Posthumius. At the first they warred both together, but after, when the enemies were in sight discomsited, it was agreed, that Aemylius should keepe Verrugo with a garrison, and Posthumius wast the borders. Where, as he marched somewhat negligently with his armie out of order, as presently after a field woon, the Aequians set upon him, and having put him in fear, chased him unto the hils next hand. The fright whereof came from thence to the other garrison also at Verrugo. Posthumius, after that he had retired his men into safetie, and assembled them together, and there in an Oration greatly blamed and  cried out upon their feare, andrunning away: and that they were discomsited by a most dastardly fugitive enemie: the whole host cried out with one voice, That they deserved to be told of it, and confessed that they had committed a foule fault; but they themselves would make amends therfore: and promised that the enemies should carrie it neither to heaven nor hell, nor joy long therwith. Requiring that he would conduct them presently to the enemies campe (which in sight was pight upon a plaine) protesting to refuse no extremitie of punishment, if they were not masters of it before night. Hee then commended them, and willed them to refresh their bodies, and to be readie at the releese of the fourth watch. Now lay the enemies likewise in the passage, to intercept the Romanes, as they fled by night from the hil, even in the way which leadeth to Verrugo.  And before day they encountred together (but you must thinke the moone shone all night) and saw how to fight, as well as by day light. But the noise being heard to Verrugo, strake so great feare amongst them, thinking, the campe of the Romanes had been assailed, that for all Aemylius could doe to hold them, and to beseech them to the contrarie, they fled scattered to Tusculum. From whence the newes came to Rome, That Posthumius was slaine, and his armie lost. But hee riding about the hoast (after that in the morning betimes the day light shewed them that followed apace on every side, that there was no feare of ambushments and forelayings) charged them with their promises, and set them in such a heat, that the Aequians could no longer abide their violence. Then slew they the enemies in the chase every one, and made havock of them as they fled, more like men that doe things in a furie and rage than by plaine valour. And presently upon the  tidings from Tusculum (which put the citie in a vain or causelesse fright) there came from Posthumius letters, dight with lawrell, importing newes, that the Romanes had the victorie, and the Aequians the overthrow.
Because as yet the actions and sutes aforesaid of the Tribunes of the Commons could come to no end: both the Commons laboured to continue the Tribuneship in them that were the maintainers of the law preferred: and also the Nobles endevoured to make those rulers againe that had opposed themselves against the same law. But as the Commons in their owne Election prevailed and had the better: so the Nobles were revenged of them againe for this greese they tooke, by an Act of the Senate, that Consuls (hated magistrates of the Commons) should bee created. Thus after fifteene yeares were Consuls reelected, L. Lucretius Flavus, Servius Sulpitius Camerinus.
 In the beginning of this yeare, when as the Tribunes of the Commons bestirred themselves stoutly to goe through with their law, for that none of their brotherhood was about to denie and nip the same: and whiles the Consuls for that very cause resisted them as earnestly, and the whole cittie was hereabout amused: the Aequians wan Vitelia, a Colonie of the Romanes, seated within their owne countrie. Most part of the Coloners (because the towne being by night betraied and woon, yeelded unto them free passage to escape away on the backe side) fled safe to Rome. So that service befell unto L. Lucretius the Consull. Who went with a power, and vanquished the enemies in fight, and with victorie returned to Rome to a greater conflict a good deale. Aulus Virginius, and Quintus Pomponius, two Tribunes of the Commons the two yeares past, were accused: for whose defence it was for the credite of the Senate, That the Nobles should  agree and sticke close together. For no man laid to their charge either dishonest behaviour in life, or corrupt carriage of themselves in their office, but onely this, That to please and gratifie the Nobles, they had set themselves against the Tribunes law. Howbeit the anger of the Commons went beyond the favour of the Senate, and (that which was a most shamefull precedent) they (guiltlesse men) had a fine set on their heads of 26 lib. 5. ^^. Ber^. ten thousand pound of brasen coin. Wherat

at the Nobles tooke great displeasure.
Camillus openly blamed the Commons for this their wicked  part:(...) who now setting themselves against their owne patrones, perceived not that by a perverse proceeding in judgement against their Tribunes, they had lost the libertie of opposing themselves with their negative voice: and take that away once, and farewell all authoritie of the Tribunes forever. For where as they hoped that the Nobles would endure the unbridled and licentious libertie of that office, they were much deceived: for if these hard courses of the Tribunes might not bee restrained by helpe of the same Tribunes, the Nobilitie would find some other weapon to fight withall. He rebuked the Consuls also, for that they suffered those Tribunes to faile of their protection and safe conduct, who had done and said nothing but by the authoritie and warrant of the Senate. Whiles openly he used to make these and such like Orations to the people,Camillus his speech in the Senate. hee thrust himselfe daily more and more into mens anger and displeasure. But to  stir up the Senate against the foresaid law, he ceased not still: willing them, that when the day came of proposing the law, they should come into the common hall, with no other mind but this, To remember they were fight for god and countrie, for the temples of the gods, and the very soile wherein they were borne. And as for his owne selfe privately, if it were lawfull for him amids these civile troubles of his native countrie, to thinke upon and respect his owne proper glorie, it were right honourable for him, to have the cittie which he had woon, peopled and resorted unto: and daily to behold and enjoy the memorable monument of his own glorie: to see before his eies the very cittie, whereof the counterfeit was borne in the pompe of triumph: and that all men els should tread in the steps of his noble acts. But hee thought it a shamefull and abhominable thing, that a cittie left and forsaken of the immortall gods, should be inhabited: and that  the people of Rome should dwell in captive soile, and to make this exchange, to leave a naturall countrie which hath conquered, for it that hath beene conquered. With these persuasions and exhortations were the cheese rulers excited, and the Nobles old and young, came troup-meale, (when as the law should be propounded) into the hall. And as they were dispersed and sorted into Tribes, every one taking hold of those of his owne tribe, began to beseech them even with teares, not to forsake that countrie now, in the quarrell wherof they and their fathers had fought most valiantly and happily: shewing herewith ever and anone the Capitoll, the temple of Vesla, and other temples thereabout of the gods: that they should not therefore, drive the people of Rome, as exiled and banished, out of their native soile from their own home and housegods, into their enemies cittie, nor bring the matter thus about, that it had been better that Veij had not  ben woon, rather than Rome should bee abandoned. Because their dealing was nothing but by way of praier and persuasion, and in their praiers much mention and naming of the gods, the most part of them were touched in conscience: so as more Tribes nipped that one law for going forward, than gave their voices to approove it. Which victorie was so joyfull to the Nobles, that the morrow after, by the motion of the Coss. a decree was made, That amongst the Commons should be a division of seven acres for a man out of the Veientian lands: and not for housholders onely, but that consideration and reckoning should be had also, in every house, of all free borne persons: to the end, that they should bee willing to breed up children to the like proofe, and for the hope of like commoditie. When the Commons by this bountifull gift and liberalitie, were well pacified and stilled, there was no stirre at all to hinder the election of the Consuls. So there  were created Consuls, Lu. Valerius Potitus, and M. Manlius, who afterwards was surnamed Capitolinus.
These Consuls set out the great solemn games and plaies, which M. Furius the Dictator had vowed in the Veientian warre. In the same yeare the Temple of Iuno Regina vowed by the same Dictatour and in the same warre, was dedicated. And it is reported, that the dedication thereof was celebrated with exceeding great resort and forward endevour of the dames of Rome. War there was (but not greatly to be spoken of) in Algidum with the AEquians, for that the enemies were in a manner discomfited before that they joyned battaile. Valerius because he followed still and killed the enemies in chase, was allowed by decree to triumph at full: and Manlius, that he should enter into the citie only Ovant, in petie triumph. The same yeare arose a new war with the  Volsinians: against whom by reason of a famine and pestilence that grew about Rome upon exceeding drought and heat, an armie could not be led forth. For which cause the Volsinians puffed up with pride, joining untothem the Salpenates, invaded first the countrie about Rome. Wherupon war was proclaimed against both nations. C. Iulius the Censor departed this life. In whose

 roome M. Cornelius was substituted. Which after bred some scruple of religion, for that Rome in that five yeares space was taken. So that never after that is there any Censor chosen into the place of the deceased. And the Consuls also being sicke and thereby disabled to governe, it was thought good to take new counsell and advise of auspices or tokens of birds, by an Interreigne. When as therefore by an act of the Senat, the Consuls had resigned their office, M. Furius Camillus was created Interregent. Who named after him P. Cornelius Scipio: and he afterwards Lu. Valerius Potitus to be Interrex. By whome were made six Tribunes Militarie with Consuls authoritie: that in case any of them should bee sicke and crasie, yet the common-wealth should have governours enough. The first day of Iuly entered they into their office: namely, L. Lucretius, Servius Sulpitius, M. Aemylius, Lu. Furius Medullinus the seventh time. Agrippa Furius, C. Aemylius the second time.Of these, Lu. Lucretius and C. Aemylius had in commission to go against the Volscians: but Agrippa Furius, and Servius Sulpitius against the Salpinates. And first were the Volscians fought withall. A great warre in respect of the number of enemies ^ but for the conflict and battaile, nothing fierce and sharpe. For their armie at the first encounter was put to flight, and eight thousand souldiours were by the Roman horsemen environed, wherupon they threw their weapons away and yeelded. The tidings of this war caused the Salpenates not to adventure upon fight: but they kept themselves armed within the wals, and stood upon their guard. The Romanes then all abroad drave booties both out of the Salpenats countrie, and the Volscians, and no man withstood their violence: so long untill the Volscians wearied with warre, had truce granted unto them for twentie yeares, upon this condition, To make restitution  againe to the Romanesof their goods, and to paie the souldiours for that yeare their wages.
The same yeare one M. Caeditius a commoner, gave notice to the Tribunes, that in the newe Causey, where now there standeth a Chappell above the Temple of Vesta, there was in the still time of the night a voice heard, louder than any mans, willing that the governours might have intelligence, that the Gaules were comming. This, by reason of the basenesse of the authour (as commonly it is seene) was not credited: besides, they were a nation farre remote, and therefore lesse knowne and of small accompt. Thus were not onely the advertisements of the gods despised, when as their fatall time of destruction was toward: but also the helpe of man (which rested onely in Furius Camillus) they rid out of the cittie. Who being arrested to appeare at  a day, by L. Apultius a Tribune of the Commons, and to make answere for the saccage of Veij, and having buried about the same time his sonne, a toward young Gentleman, sent for home to his house, those of his owne tribe, his kinsfolke and followers, whereof a great part were of the Commons. And when he had sounded their mindes, and received this answere from them, That they would defray and laie downe so much, as he should be condemned in: but as to acquit him, that they could not possibly.M. Finius Camillus goeth into exile. Hereupon he departed into exile: praying to the immortall gods, that as he was guiltlesse and wrongfully dealt withall, so they would with all speede, cause (...) unthankefull cittie to stand in neede, and to have a misse of him. In his absence condemned hee was in 39 lib. 7 sh. 6 d. s^crl. fifteene thousand pounds of brasse coine. When this cittizen was thus expulsed, who if he had tarried still, (so farre as we may make reckoning of any earthly securitie) Rome could never  have been woon: behold, embassadours come from the Clusines, requesting aid against the Gaules.
This nation (as it is reported) allured with the sweetnesse of corne and wine especially (daintie chaffer and a new delight in those daies) passed over the Alpes, and possessed those countries which had been aforetime by the Tuscanes inhabited. The voice goeth, that there was one Aruns a Clusine, who had brought wine into Gaule, to entise that people withall, upon an anger and displeasure that his wife had beene defloured by one Lucumo (whose guardian Aruns himselfe had been) a young gentleman of great might and power, and whom Aruns could not chastice and bridle, without assistance of forreine forces: this man was the Gaules guide in passing over the Alpes, and the principall instrument to set them a worke for to assault Clusium. I would  not for my part denie, but that the French were brought to Clusium by Aruns or some other Clusine: but most certaine it is, that they who assaulted Clusium, were not the first that passed the Alpes. For the Gaules two hundred yeares before they assaulted Clusium and won the cittie of Rome, came over into Italy. Neither fought the Gaules first with this nation of the Tuscanes, but long afore, and that oftentimes, with those that dwell betweene Apeninus and the Alpes.

For, the Tuscanes had all soveraigne command, both by land and sea, before the Roman Empire  was erected. The names of upper and nether sea, wherewith Italie is compassed about, as it were an Island, may be a sufficient proofe, how great and puissant they were: seeing, that the one is by the generall name of the Nation, called of the Italians, the Tuscane sea: and the other the Adriatike of a towne or colonie of the Tuscanes called Adria. The Greekes doe call the selfe same seas the Mar. T^^^o or Mar. de Marseille. Tyrrhene and the Adriatike seas. These Tuscanes bending to both seas, inhabited those countries, consisting of twelve citties: having sent before on this side Apennine, toward the nether sea, and afterwards beyond the Monte Fis^ello. Apenine, as many Colonies in number according to the princes at the first beginning, and held in possession all those parts beyond the Po unto the Alpes, except that Angle onely of the Venetians, that are seated about the gulte of the Adriaticke sea. And doubtlesse, the nations about the Alpes, especially the Rhetians, had their beginning thus: whom the verie countrie itselfe made savage, so as they reteined nothing of old, but the sound of their language, and the same broken and somewhat corrupted. Now for the comming of the Gaules over into Italie, thus much we have learned. In the daies of Priscus Tarquinius king of Rome, the (...) the Celtes, which are a third part of the Gaules, were under the rule of the Bituriges at this day. Bituriges, who chose a king over the Celtes, named Ambigatus, a great potentate and mightie, both in regard of valour and vertue, and also of his owne private wealth and publicke weale: for that under his regiment, Gaule was so fertile of corne, and grewe so populous, that the exceeding number of the people could not well be governed. This man being of great age, and desirous now to disburthen his Realme of that pestering multitude, declared that he would send Bellovesus and Sigovesus his sisters sonnes (two forward young men) to seeke adventures, into what  lands soever the gods and goddesses should by their tokens direct them: giving them commission to gather what number of men they would, to the end that no nation might withstand their comming. So it fell to Sigovesus lot, for to enter the forrest and woodland countrie of Hercinia. Bellovesus his fortune was a good deale better, to take his way (by the gods guidance) unto Italie: And he levied of the Bituriges,(...) Averni,Sens. Senones,(...) Hedui,(...) Ambarri,(...) Carnutes, and (...) Aulerci, those that might be spared out of those countries: and setting forward with a mightie power of footmen and horsmen, came unto the (...) Tricastines. Now stood the Alpesfull against them in their way, which I mervaile not were thought insuperable and impassable, as having not as yet any way made over them, (so farre as anie constante record maketh date) unlesse we list to beleev^ the tales of Hercules. Now when as the Gauls there, were hemmed in as it were on everieside with  those high mountaines, and that they looked everie way about them, how they might get over those high hils reaching up to the heavens, and so passe (as one would say) into an other world; they were staied there and went no further, upon scruple of conscience, for that it was reported, that certaine strangers seking land to inhabite, were by the people of (...) Sallies set upon and assailed. These strangers were the (...) Massilians, who sailed from Phocis. This the Gaules supposing to be a fortunate ossing of their successe, helped them forward, and tooke part with them: so as what place first they gat after they were landed, they fortified within the wide or broad forrests. They themselves passed through the countrie of (...) Taurini, and over the streightes of the Alpes called (...) Iulia: and having vanquished the Tuscanes in fight, not farre from the river (...) Ticinus, hearing that the countrie wherin they abode and setled, was called Insubrium (after the name of a territorie  and shire of the Heduans) they following and imbracing the luckie name of that place, so conformable to the other of their owne, builded a cittie and called it (...) Mediolanum. Afterwards another power of Germanes with their captaine Elitovius, following the steps of the former Gaules, by the same streights (with good leave and favour of Bellovesus) passed over the Alpes, and remained there: and where now (...) Brixia and(...) Verona two towns stand (the(...) Libu^ then inhabited those parts) made their abode. After these, the Saluvij passed over, who expelled all the Ligurians that dwelt on this side the river Ticinus, but onely the Levi; an ancient nation. After them the (...) B^^^ and (...) Lingones passed over the hill S. Barnardi. Peninus, dispossessed the Tuscanes and the Vmbrians of their territorie, yet so as they kept them within Apenninus. Then the Senones which were the last commers of these strangers, inhabited the countrie from the river (...) Vfens unto (...) Athesis. This nation I  find to have come to (...) Clusium, and afterwards from thence to Rome: mary it is not certaine, whether this nation alone came, or that they were aided by all the Gaules that dwelt on this side the Alpes.
The Clusinos terrified with this new warre, advising well both their number and the unaccustomed

 looks, and visages of the men, which they had not seene afore, and their strange armour withall: and hearing besides that the legions of the Tuscanes both on this side the Po and beyond, had bene often times by them discomfited: Albeit in the Romanes they had no interest at all in regard of any league or amitie, onely this, that they had not maintained their kinsfolke the Veientes against the Romanes, sent their Embassadours to Rome, to crave aide of the Senate.
Aid they obtained none: Embassadours there were sent three, the sonnes of M. Fabius Ambustus, who in the name of the Senate and people of Rome should treate with the Gaules and persuade with them, not to set upon the confederates and friends of the people of Rome, namely, such as at whose hands they had received no wrong: saying moreover, that if they would put the, Romanes to it, the Romanes were to defend them by warre: howbeit they thought it better, if it  might be, to have no wars at all: but that the Gaules a new come nation should grow into knowledge and acquaintance, rather by peace than by warre. The embassage was mild and mode^t enough, but the Embassadours themselves were over fierce and hastie, and more like Gaules than Romanes.The answere of the Gaules to the Embassadors of Rome. Who having done their message in the assemblie of the Gaules, were thus againe answered. Although the name of the Romanes was but of late heard of, yet theywere persuaded that they were hardie men, at whose handes the Clusines in their feare, sought and requested succour. And whereas they choose rather to defend their allies by way of embassage, than by open warre, they likewise neither disdained nor refused peace which they offered: If the Clusines would grant the Gaules (which wanted ground to inhabite) a part of their marches, whereof they held in possession more than they did well people and occupie: Otherwise, no peace would be  had. And hereof would they have an answere, whiles the Romanes were in place: and if they were denied ground, they would also fight even before the Romanes face, that they might make report at home, how much the Gaules went beyond other men in valour and chivailrie. And when as the Romanes demaunded againe what right they had to require ground of the owners, or to threaten warre? For what interest or title had the Gaules in Tuscane? They againe stoutly made answere; That they caried their right in their swords point, and that valiant men were lords of all the world. So they were on both sides so set on fire, that they ran to their weapons and skirmished with the Tuscanes. Then against all law of nations (a thing that hastened the destruction of the Romane cittie) the Embassadours tooke armes. Neither could this be so secret but it was known. For even before the ensignes of the Tuscanes, there were sene three most noble and valiant knights of the Romanes for to fight: so farre exceeded the valor of those strangers above all the Clusines.  Moreover and besides, Quintus Fabius riding out of the battaile on horsebacke, charged his lance upon the captaine of the Gaules, as he fiercely assailed the ensignes and battaile of the Tuscanes, ran him through and slue him: and as he rifled and disarmed him, the Gaules tooke knowledge of him, and throughout the whole host notice was given, that it was an Embassadour of the Romanes. So, leaving their quarrell against the Clusines, they sound the retreat, and threatened the Romanes. There were of them, that thought good presently to advance forward to Rome: but the elder sort prevailed, that there should be sent Embassadors first to complaine of the iniuries, and to require that for the law of armes broken, the Fabij should be yeelded unto them. Whenas the Gaule Embassadours had declared their message according to their commission,  the Senate nothing liked of the Fabians deed, and thought the barbarous Gaules required nothing but just and reason. Howbeit suit of friends and private respectes, would not permit to make an Act of that, in personages of so great marke and nobilitie, which they deemed meet and requisite. Therfore to the end it might not be imputed to them and they blamed, if peradventure any foile or overthrow should happen unto them, by warring with the Gaules: they referred the hearing and discussing of the Gaule demands unto the people. Where might and favour so much prevailed, that even they who were in question to be punished, were created for the yeare folowing Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie. At which the Gauls being offended (as good cause they had) with open threats and menaces of warre, returned again to their companie. There were with the three Fabij, P. Sulpitius Longus, Quintus Servilius the fourth time, and P. Servilius Maluginensis.  Whenas now so great danger was toward and neere at hand (see how fortune blindeth mens eies, when as she will have her sway and not be hindered) that cittie which against the Fidenate and Veient enemie and other nations bordering therby, tried the utmost help, and oftentimes made a Dictatour: now being threatned with a strange enemie never heard of before, comming to war upon them from the Ocean sea and the farthest parts of the world, sought neither for governour

nor helpe more than ordinarie. Even those Tribunes, by whose rash dealing that war was first caused, had the managing of all: and made no more choise, nor mustering of soldiors than usually had been in common wars: making but a light matter of it and of no consequence, and setting little by, and elevating the rumour of the warre. The Gaules in the meane time having heard, how for the nonce those breakers of humane law were soone advanced to honour, and how their embassage was deluded and dalied with, all on a fire, (as they are a nation that way impatient and in anger outragious) pluckt up their standards forthwith, and marched with all expedition on their voiage. At whose noise and hurliburly (as they passed by in such hast) when as the townes thereby were put in feare, and ran to their weapons, and the countrie pesants fled away: they with open mouth gave out and signified, that they went to Rome. All the way as they journeied, what with horse and men, both in length and breadth, they tooke up a mightie roome in their march. But what with the fame that went before, and the messengers of the Clusines and of other people that followed one at the heeles of another, this speedie comming of the enemies brought right great feare and terrour to Rome. For notwithstanding, that they went with a power of men in all hast sodainly mustered, hardly met they them at eleven miles end, where as the river Allia running downe from the hils of Crustuminum, with a very deepe channell (not much beneath the highway) dischargeth it selfe into the Tyber. And now by this time the whole countrie before them, and all the coasts about were overspread with the enemies. And (as they are a nation naturally given to vain tumults and therein born and bred) with an hideous and dissonant kind of singing (like a blacke Santus) they filled all about with a fearefull and horrible noise. There the Tribunes Militarie without getting aforehand a convenient place to pitch their tentes in, without  fortifying the same with any trench or rampiers, whereunto they might safely be take themselves, even without any regard of God, whom at leastwise they should have been mindfull of, if they had forgotten man, without Auspices and bird-tokens, without reconciliation to God by sacrifice, full unhappily and in an ill houre, ranged their battell devided into wings, for feare of being compassed with multitude of enemies. Yet might not the vaward answere the breadth of the enemies, notwithstanning they made their rankes and files so thin, that the middle ward of the battaile was weake, and skant joyning close together. On the right hand there was a little higher ground, where they thought to bestow men for supplie, which as it gave the first occasion of feare and running away, so was it the onely safetie of them that fl^d. For Brennus the Duke or prince of the Gaules, fearing exceedingly in that small number of the Romanes, some stratageme, and  supposing that the higher ground was for this purpose kept, That when the Gaules should have encountred with the forefront of the legions, then the rescues would charge them both upon their backes and their flankes, displaied and advanced his standerds against those in rescue: nothing doubting but if he had once driven them from their holde upon higher ground, on the plaine he should soone have the victorie, considering that in number he overwent them. See how the Barbarians had not onely lucke; but pollicie also on their sides! Contrariwise, the Romans in their camp were nothing like themselves, either for captains or souldiors. Their mindes were so possessed with feare and thinking of running away, and so forgetfull besides, that the greater part of them chose rather to flie to Veij, (their enemies citie) although the Tyber were full in their way, than to take the streight course to Rome, to their wives and children. For a while, the advantage  of the ground defended those that were for rescue: but in the rest of the hoast, so soone as they that were next, heard the shout from the sides, and those that were farthest off from behind, before any stroke strucken, and before they were once touched, they fled from their unknown enemie, in a manner before they saw him. And so farre off they were from trying fight, that they answered them not so much as with a countershout againe. So as there were not any slaine in fight. But they were killed behind at their backes, even by occasion of their own selves, who with their hurrying hindered one another in their flight. About the bancke of Tyber, where unto the whole left wing was fled downe, and had flung away their weapons, there was a great slaughter. For many of them that could not swimme, and were weake, by reason of their weightie corselets and other harneis, were drowned and swallowed up of the surging whirlepoles. Howbeit, the most  part escaped safe to Veij. From whence there came to Rome, not onely no succour to guard the cittie, but not so much as a messenger to bring newes of this their overthrow. But from the right wing which kept farther from the river, and more under the hill, they all went to Rome. And finding not so much as the gates of the citie shut, they all fled into the castle. The very Gauls themselves

 astonied at so wonderfull and suddain victorie, stood still at the first in a great amaze, as who knew not what had happened, and wist not what to make of it. Afterwards they feared some ambush, and at length fell to gathering the spoiles of them that were slain, and to lay all their armor and harneis upon heaps, as their manner is. At last, seeing no enemie nor shew of hostilitie, they put themselves in their journy forward, a little before sunsetting, and marched to the citie of Rome. Where, upon word brought by the foreriders, that the gates were not shut, nor any ward kept afore the gates, nor armed men upon the wals, they stood in the like amaze as before, upon so strange and wonderous a thing. But fearing the night and the situation of a citie unknown, they set them downe, and rested betweene Rome and Anio, having sent their espials and skouts about the wals and gates, to understand what their enemies meant to doe in so desperate a state. The  Romanes, for that a greater part had taken their way to Veij, than to Rome, and weening that there was none left alive, but those that were fled backe to Rome; bewailing and bidding adieu; both to those that were dead, and those alive, set the whole cittie almost a weeping and lamenting. But afterwards, the publicke feare astonied them, and tooke all sense away of their private sorrowes, when they heard once that the enemies were come. And within a while, as these barbarous people coasted and raunged about the wals by troupes, they might hear their yelling, their houting, and uncouth, confused hideous cries. So were they held all the time in suspense of mind, until the second day after: one while thinking, that at their first comming they would have surprised the citie, for unlesse they had so meant, they would have taried (they thought) at Allia still: again, a little before sunsetting (because the day was welnie done) they supposed they would enter upon them  before night. But anon they feared that they differred this enterprise until night was come, to the end they might strike a greater feare and terror amongst them. And last of all, the day light approching, astonied them clean: so as they were in a continual agonie, even untill the mischiefe came indeed which they so long doubted, and that now the bloodie banners of their enemies were displaied before their gates. Howbeit neither that night nor the day following, was the citie in the like feare, as when they fled so fearefully at Comina^e (...) Rio de M^sso. Leandro. Allia. For being past nope, that the citie could be defended with so smal power as remained, they determined that with their wives and children, all their serviceable youth, such as were meet to beat arms, yea and the more able men, and strength of the Senat, should retire themselves into the castle and Capitoll: and after they had thither brought their armor and corn, from thence as from a defensible place to protect their gods, their men, and the  Roman name: to save from fire and sword (so farre as they could) the Flamin of Iupiter, the vestall Nuns, and sacred images, and holy reliques of the citie: and not to abandon the worship and due solemnitie unto them, so long as any were left alive, to do them honor and worship. For thus they conceived, That if the castle and Capitol, being the seat of their gods, if the Senate, which is the head and cheefe of their publicke counsell, if the hardie and fighting young men remained after that imminent ruine and fall of the citie, the lesse would be the losse of the aged folke, a number, (God wor) left behind of purpose in the citie, no otherwise like but to perish. And to the end that the multitude of the common sort might beare this more patiently, the elders that had triumphed aforetime, and been Consuls, openly gave out and said, That they would live and die together with them. Neither would they with those bodies of theirs which were unmeet to beare armour,  and to defend the citie, surcharge and pester the companie of able and armed men, in this their penurie and want of victuals. These and such like were the consolations and comforts of the auncients among themselves, now resolute to end their lives. After which, they turned their exhortations to the companies of the young and lustie men, whome they followed into the castle and Capitoll, recommending unto their manhood and to their youthfull courage, all the estate remaining of that cittie, which for the space of three hundred and threescore yeares, had in all their wars been victorious, and gotten great conquests. Now when they, in whom rested all hope and helpe, were departed, and had taken their leave of them, that resolved fully not to survive the winning and destruction of their citie: as the very thing in it selfe, and the sight thereof was a lamentable and wofull spectacle unto them, so the pitteous weeping of women, and their uncertaine  running up and downe, following nowafter one, and now after another: and asking their husbands and children, to what end, to what fatall destinie they betooke them, was as dolorous a pageant, as could happen to any earthly creature. Neverthelesse, a great sort of them accompanied their friends into the castle, and no man either bad or forbad them. For although it was good and commodious for the besieged, namely, to deminish the number and discharge themselves

of the feeble multitude, yet it seemed unto them an inhumane and unkind part. The rest, of the  common people especially, whom so smal an hil was not able to receive, and could not possibly be kept in so great scarsitie of corne and victuals, departed by heapes out of the citie: and marching as it were in one companie together in a row, tooke their way to Ianiculum. From thence they devided themselves sundrie waies. Some slipt into the fields and countrie, some to the next cities there bordering, without any captaine, without any common consent: every one following his owne hope, his owne head and wit, now that all publicke counsell was in despaire and past remedie. In this meane while, the Flamin of Quirinus, and the religious Vestall virgines leaving the regard of their owne private affaires, consulted with themselves what sacred Images to carrie with them, and (seeing their strength would not serve to rid away and save all) what to leave behind them, and what place was meetest to bestow and lay them up most safely. They agreed at  length and thought it best, to put them in small barrels or rundelets, and within the ground to burie them in a little chappell, standing next to the Flamines house: which place for very devotion unto this day, may not for any thing, be spit upon. Al the rest they parted amongst themselves. And every one carying her owne burden, tooke the way, which over the wodden bridge leadeth to Ianiculum. Vpon the ascent or rise of that hill, when L. Albinus (a Commoner of Rome) saw them going, as he among other companie (which unmeet for warre, departed out of the cittie) caried his wife and children in a waine: he making even then in that hard calamitie, a difference yet between divine and humane things, and thinking it an impious part, and void of all religion, that the publicke priests with the sacred Images of the people of Rome should go on foot, whiles he and his, were seene riding at ease in a wagon, caused his wife and children to alight and come  forth, and set the Nuns with their holy Images in their roome, and brought them to Caere, to which place they minded to goe. All things now being set at Rome (as in such a time could be) in order sufficiently, for the defence of the castle; the aged persons abovesaid being returned to their houses, waited for the comming of the enemie, with hearts prepared and resolved to die. Such of them as had borne offices of the chaire, to the intent, that they might end their daies in the ornaments and robes of their former estate and honour, and according to their vertue and deserts: in their most stately garments and habiliments, which they ware when they caried their sacred chariots upon feastivall daies, or wherein they rode in triumph, now sate upon their yvorie chaires in the very mids and entrie of their houses. There be that write, how they willingly devowed and bequeathed themselves to die for their countrie and cittizens of Rome: and that  M. Fabius the high priest read and pronounced unto them a certaine hymne and prescript forme of praier, to that purpose. The Gaules, both for that now they had rested from fight a whole night, and so their choler was somewhat cooled, and also because they had not in any place fought a bloudie and dangerous battell with them, nor even at that time wan the cittie by any assault or force, entred the morrow after into the citie, without anger and heat of furious rage, by the gate Collina, standing wide open, and so passed forward to the common place of assemblies, casting their eies about them towards the temples of the gods, and to the castle, which onely presented some shew of warre. And there leaving a sufficient guard, least happily from the castle and Capitoll they should be violently assaulted, after they were once asunder parted, they fell to ransacke and rifle: and meeting none at all in the void streeets, some rush by heapes into the houses next  hand, others goe to those that were furthest off, supposing them at leastwise to be untouched, full of riches, and fit for to fill their hands. From thence againe (as frighted by reason of such desolation, and fearing least haply any fraud of the enemie might entrap them as they wandered one from another) they returned round in a ring together, into the market-sted, and the places neere thereto. Where, when they saw the Commoners houses fast shut to and locked, and contrariwise the stately palaces of the Noblemen and cheefe Senators standing wide open, they were at a stand, and doubted more in a manner to enter upon the open places, than the shut. And they beheld as it were with capping and crouching after a reverend manner, certaine ancient personages sitting in the porches and entries of their houses, who besides their ornaments and apparrell, above the ordinarie estate of men, for a certaine majestie which they carried in their countenance and  gravitie of visage, resembled the gods. And when as they turned to them, and stood looking upon them, as if they had beene Idols and sacred Images, M. Papyrius, one of them, when a Gaule began to stroke his beard (which then they used all to weare long) with his yvorie (...) (as they say) gave him a rap on the pate, and mooved his patience. Whereupon hee was the

 first that was murdered, and so the rest were a^l killed as they sate in their chaires of estate. After this massaker of these honourable personages of the Nobilitie, they fell upon all the rest and spared no creature: they ransaked their houses, and when they were emptie set fire on them. But whether it were that they were not all of them desirous to destroy the cittie utterly, or that it was the minde of the leaders and chiefe of the Gaules, that for a terrour there should be seene some scarefires (if happely for the love of their houses, they that were besieged, might be induced to yeeld themselves:) or that all their houses were not burned at once, to the end that the remainder of the cittie might be as a pawne and pledge to mollifie their enemies and make their hearts to relent; howsoever, I say it was, the fire for the first daie (as usually in citties forced and woon) spread not all abroad every where, to make a generall havocke. The Romanes from  their Castle, seeing the cittie full of enemies, and in every streete running up and downe, and in all places fresh calamities and miseries one in the neck of another, were not able to conceive the same in minde and spirit, no nor so much as to have the right use of their eares and eies. For to what place so ever the shoutes and dinne of the enemies, the howling and wailing of women and children, the noise of fire and the ratling and cracking downe-fals of houses turned them aside in exceeding feare, thither they bent their mindes their faces and eies, as men by fortune set up a loft, as upon a stage or scaffold, to behold the fall and ruine of their countrie: reserved to save nothing of al their haviour and substance, but onely their own bodies: by thus much, more miserable and pittifull above all others that ever were besieged, in that being shut out from their native countrie and cittie, they were besieged and beheld it, and all that they had, in the enemies  hands. Neither, as ill as the day was spent, followed there a better night. Yea and when after this troublesome night the like morrow was come, there was no time, but ministred still some heavie object: and one spectacle or other of new and fresh calamities. And albeit they were loaden and overwhelmed with so many miseries, yet they nothing at all let fall or abated their courages, but resolved still, notwithstanding they saw al fired, al ruinate and laid even with the ground, manfully to defend that poore naked little hill which they held, and was their only hope left them to recover their freedome. And now seeing the same desolations daily happen, they were so inured to miserie, that past all sence and feeling of their owne state and privat fortune, they regarded nothing but their armour on their backs and swords in their hands, as the only remnants and reliques of their hope. The Gaules likewise for certaine daies, had made warre with the poore  houses onely of the cittie, and all to no purpose: and when they perceived in all this burning and ruines of the cittie so conquered nothing now left but armed enemies, who were not, for all so many calamities, one jot terrified, nor their mindes once inclined to yeeld without further force and violence were used; they determine to trie the uttermost, and to make an assault upon the fortresse. So on the morrow morning very early at sound of trumpet, all the whole multitude of them, arranged themselves in the market place. From whence with an outcrie and shout, under a fence of targets over their heads, they approch the Castle. Against whome, the Romanes behaved themselves, neither unadvisedly, nor fearefully, strengthning their wards and quarters, with a good Corps de guard against all Advenues: and whereas they sawe the banners displaied, that way they opposed their strongest guardes: and suffered the enemies to climbe up the hill,  supposing that the higher they were got up, so much the easilier they might bee beaten downe. And being come up to the midst of the cliffe, there they staied: and thence from the higher ground, which of it selfe in manner bare out against the enemie, with all their force they charged upon the Gaules, overturned them, and sent them downe headlong: so as never after that, either any part of them, or all together would attempt that kinde of service. Being therfore past hope to get up by force and armes, they make preparation for long siege: wherof untill that time they had no minde: both for that the corne which was within, they had consumed in burning of the cittie, and in the meane space, that which was in the countrie about, was carried and brought to Veij. Wherupon they devided their armie, purposing with one part thereof, to forrey and drive booties all about the nations thereby adjoyning, and with the other to invest the Castle: to the  ende, that the forragers abroad might bring in corne to serve them that lay at the siege. Nowe as those Gaules departed from the cittie, it was their hap and fortune to come to Ardea (where Camillus aboad in exile) there to make triall of the Romanes valour. This Camillus being more pensive in the behalfe of the publike calamitie, than carefull of his owne: spending his spirits and wasting his bodie with crying out, upon gods and men: thus fretting and chasing with himselfe,

and wondering what was become of those valiant and hardie men, who under his conduct  wan Veij and Falerij, and who had fought other warres more valiantly alwaies than fortunately: of a sodaine he heard that the armie of the Gaules approched, and that the Ardeates in great feare, fell to consultation thereabout, what to doe: and even as if he had beene inspired from God above,(...) he put himselfe forward and entred into the midst of the people assembled, who heretofore, had absteined and forborn such publike meetings and consultations.
And thus he said: You my Masters of Ardea, mine olde friends sometime, and now my new neighbours and fellow cittizens, for so it is fallen out by your kindnesse and deserts, and by mine owne fortune and condition: let no man thinke, that I, forgetfull of mine owne estate, am come forth hither into this audience. But the present object and publike danger forceth every man to utter and bring forth in so fearefull a time and businesse as this is, what helpe he can. And when shall I ever bee  thankefull unto you for your favours and demerits, if now I stand still and do nothing? Or where shall I ever stand you in steede, if not in warre? By my skill herein, I flowrished in my countrie, and being in warre invincible, was in peace by unthankefull neighbours and unkinde cittizens banished. And now have yee good occasion offered and opportunitie (o yee Ardeates) both to make recompence, for those so great pleasures and curtesies in times past received of the people of Rome, as your selves doe well remember, (and therefore be it spoken without upbraiding and reproching of any mindfull persons) and also to winne great honour of warre, unto this cittie, by defeating a common enemie unto both. This nation, which thus commeth towards us with a dissolute and disordered armie, are those to whome God and nature hath given bodies more big and corpulent than strong and able, hearts more stout and courageous than constant  and resolute: whereby they bring with them alwaies into the field more shew of terror, than true valour and execution. Whereof, the late foile and discomfiture of the Romanes may be a sufficient proofe and triall. They woon the cittie when the gates stood open unto them: a small power from the Castle and Capitoll was able to withstand and repell them. And wearie alreadie of the tediousnesse of siege, they are faine to depart, stragling up and down, and wandring along the countrie. Their manner is when they have filled their bellies with wine and good victuals, (which they devoure full greedily and hastely whersoever they can come by it:) so soone as night commeth on, without any place of defence, without watch or ward, to lay themselves along like bruit beastes, here and there by the waters sides. And now upon their good successe, are they more secure and retchlesse, than they were wont to be. If ye be disposed to defend your wals, and  not all to turne French, gather your selves together, and at the first watch of the night, Arme, and to your weapons: Follow me to a massaker and not to a skermish: for if I doe not deliver them unto your hands fast a sleep to be hewen in pieces like sheep and oxen, I refuse not to see the same end of mine estate at Ardea, that I have found alreadie at Rome. There was not one there, howsoever affected he was, friend or so to Camillus, but was persuaded that the like warriour was not in those daies to be found againe. The assembly being broken up, they refresh their bodies, readie to fight so soone as ever the Signall should be propounded. Which being put forth, in the beginning and first watch of the night, they were readie with Camillus at the gates. And gone they were not farre from the towne, but they found (as it was foretold them) the Gaules camp without Corps de guard, neglected on every side: and it with a mightie crie they assaile. There  was in no place fight, but killing every where: and their naked bodies (as they lay fast a sleepe) were hacked and cut in pieces. Howbeit, some of those that were furthest off, being scared out of their couches, not knowing what violence or from whence it was, tooke to their heels and fled: othersome stumbled at unawars upon the very enemie. A great part of them being come into the territorie of Ardea, were by the townesmen, who sallied out upon them as they were dispersed, environed and slaine. The like slaughter to this, there was of the Tuscanes in the countrie of Veij: who had so little pittie and compassion, to see a cittie which well neare for foure hundreth yeare space bordering upon them, was now surprised by a strange enemie not heard of afore, that even at that very time, they made rodes into the territorie of Rome, and laden with bootie from thence, purposed to assaile even Veij also and the garrison; being the onely place and meanes of  rescue, and the last hope of the Romane name. The Romane souldiours that lay in garrison there, had espied these Tuscanes raunging about the countrie, and gathered together in a plump to drive booties afore them: and withall they descried their campe pitched not farre from Veij, Where, at first they pittied their owne estate, but after, they fell into an indignation and anger that

 the Tuscanes also, from whom they had diverted the Gaules warre upon themselves, should in their calamities thus scorne them and have them in derision: so as they could scarcely temper themselves and forbeare, but presently set upon them. But beeing staied perforce by captaine Cedittus a Centurion whome they themselves had made their ruler, they put off this exploit untill night. Onely their Commander and leader, was not to be compared with Camillus: els all the service was atchieved in the same order, and with as good speede and happie successe. Over and besides, by the guidance and direction of those prisoners which remained unslaine over night, they went forward as farre as Salinae, to another power of the Tuscanes, and in the night following, upon a suddaine they made a greater havoke and slaughter of them, and so in ioyous manner with double conquest they returne to Veij. At Rome in this meane time, the siege for  the most part was but cold and slack, and all quiet on both sides: whiles the Gaules regarded and looked to this only, That none of their enemies should make an escape through their guards. At what time a certaine valiant yong Romane behaved himselfe so, as his own countrimen and enemies too, had him in great admiration. There was a set sacrifice or solemnitie to be celebrated by the house and linage of Fabij, in the mount Quirinalis. For the accomplishment wherof, Caius Fabius Dorsuo in his holy robes after the Gabines fashion, bearing in his hand the holy complements thereto belonging, came down from the Capitol, passed through the mids of the enemies corps de gard, and nothing moved whatsoever was done or said to terrifie him, went on forth right to the mount Quirinall. And when he had there performed and dispatched all solemnities, returning the same way with like constant countenance and comelie pace, hoping assuredlie, that the  gods would be merciful and gracious unto him, whose worship he had not left undone for any fear of death: he retired againe to his companie into the capitoll: whether it were that the Gaules were astonied at his wonderous boldnes, or rather were touched in conscience with a reverent regard of religion, wherin that nation is verie zealous and devout. At Veij in the meane while, they gathered not onlie heart everie day more than other, but strength and forces also: for that not onelie Romanes thither repaired out of the countrie, such as either in discomfiture of the battaile, or for the calamitie of the citie now taken, had beene scattered: but also out of Latium divers of their owne accord had flocked thither, to have their share in the pillage. Now they thought it high time to returne to their countrie againe, and to deliver it out of the enemies hands. The bodie was strong enough, but without an head it was. The verie place put them in  mind of Camillus, and a great part of the soldiours were such as had atchieved prosperous exploites under his leading and conduct. And Ceditius gave out plainly, that no god or man should make him give over his governement, but would himselfe as mindfull of his own place, call for a Generall.The (...) of Pontius Cominius. So by general consent it was agreed, that Camillus should be sent for from Ardea, but with the advice before of the Senate which was at Rome. So modest were they in all their cariage, and so precisely observed they (even in this their desperate case) the due respect and regard of everie action. Now to passe through the wards of their enemies, was an hard and dangerous adventure. To this exploit therfore, Pontius Cominius, a valerous yong man, promised his service. Who bearing himselfe upon a barke or corke under him, hulled along the Tyber downe the water to the cittie; and so the next way from the strond, over a steepe cliffe (which  was negligently or not at all garded by the enemie) he passeth through the Capitoll, and being brought to the magistrates, declareth there his message from the armie. When he had received the Senats decree to this effect: Imprimis, That Camillus should be called back again out of exile by a Ward-leet, or the suffrages of the Curia: Item, that by the voices of the people he should be created Dictator out of hand: and that the soldiors might have for their Generall whom they desired: the messenger returned the same way backe againe to Veij. And embassadours were sent to Camillus at Ardea,Camillus chose^ Dictatour. who conducted him to Veij. But I would rather beleeve, that he departed not from Ardea, before he had certaine intelligence of the Act of the Senate. And for that neither without the will of the people, he might change the place wherto he was confined, nor unlesse he were named Dictatour, have the conduct of the armie; there passed an Act of all the  wards, and Dictatour was he declared in his absence. Whiles these things were a doing at Veij, the castle of Rome and the capitoll was in verie great danger. For the Gauls, either having found out a mans sooting, that way as the messenger went from Veij, or espied at the cliffe of Carmentis, an easie place to climbe up: in a cleere night sent a man before unarmed to assay the passage, and than gave him up his armour, and where it was steepe, one helped, lifted up, and drew up an

other, as the difficultie of the place required. So as they got-up to the top with such silence, that  not onely the Sentinels were not ware of them, but also the dogs (a watchfull creature at everie noise in the night) were not once awakened therewith. But they could not so escape the geese, which were consecrated unto Iuno, and for all the scarcitie of victuals, were spared and not killed up. And this it was that saved them all. For with their gagling and fluttering of their wings, M. Manlius, who three yeares before had been Consul, a right hardie and noble warriour, was awaked. Who taking weapon in hand, speedily went forth and raised the rest with all to take armes. And whiles all else made hast in a great fright, he strooke the Gaule who now stood upon the top, with the bosse and pike of his buckler, and turned him downe. The fall of whom overturnd them that were next. Then slew he others, (whiles they were in feare) who had laid their weapons out of hand, and tooke hold of thestones wherto they clinged close. By which time, the rest being come  together, some flinging darts, others casting downe stones, tumbled their enemies backe, and the whole power of them lost their sure footing and fell downe headlong. This tumult being appeased, the rest of the night (so farre forth as men might with troubled minds, seeing that even the danger past disquieted them) they gave themselves to sleepe. When day was come, the soldiours by sound of trumpet were summoned to assemble before their Tribunes, and considering there was reward due both to well doing and misdoing: Manlius, first for his valour was commended and rewarded, not only by the Tribunes militarie but also by consent of all the soldiors. Vpon whom, they amongst them all, bestowed and brought home to his house (which stood upon the castle hill) wheat meale by the halfepintes, and wine by the quartes. A matter of small reckoning to be spoken of: but in that scarcitie, this might be an argument of their love and affection, when everie man beguiled his owne belly, pluckt from himselfe and the necessities of his life, and conferred the same to the honour and recompence of that one man. Then were summoned to appeare the sentinels of that place where the enemie climbed up undescried. And when as P. Su^pitius a Tribune Militarie, had pronounced that he would exercise martiall law upon them all, the soldiours cried out with open mouth, and laid all the fault on one watchman: and so for feare of a mutinie he spared all the the rest: and with their generall consent and approuse, he caused that undoubted guiltie person to be throwne downe from the rocke. Whereupon they were more careful and circumspect in their watch, both amongst the Gaules (because it was commonlie noised that there passed messengers too and fro betweene Veij and Rome:) and also amongest the Romanes, for the remembrance of the late danger by night. But above all other miseries  that follow warre and siege, the famine was sore in both the armies. The Gaules were plagued with pestilence besides: for that they had pitched their tentes in a place lying between two hils; exceeding hote by reason of the fires, and full of smoake, carying both dust and ashes, when any wind was stirring: which be things that of all others, that nation can not abide, as being used to wet and cold. Thus being smudred with heat, and therwith stifled and choked againe, they died with contagious diseases like rotten sheepe. And now for idlenes that they would not burie them severally one by one, they laid the dead bodies on heaps one with another, and so burnt them:(...) and made that place famous and notable by the name of Busta Gall^caj. Gaulburie. Hereupon, they grew to make some truce with the Romanes, and emparled together by sufferance of the Generals. In which parlies, whenas the Gaules estsoones alleadged the famine, and upon  that extremitie persuaded them to yeeld: it is said, that the Romanes for to put them by that opinion of them, in many places from the capitoll flong out loaves of bread into the verie stations and corps de guard of the enemies. But at length neither could their hunger be dissembled, nor sustained any longer. Therefore, whiles the Dictatour mustereth a power at Ardea by himselfe, he commaundeth the Generall of horsemen, L. Valerius, to have away the armie from Veij: and maketh so good preparation, and furnisheth himselfe so, as he might be able to match his enemies, and to charge upon them. In the meane season, the armie of the Capitol wearied out with watching and warding, having surmounted all humane miseries besides hunger, which onely of all others, nature would not suffer to be overcome: looking day by day for succour from the Dictatour, now at the last when not onely their food, but their hope also failed them, and were grown  to that weaknesse, that when they went to keepe their gard, they could hardly beare the weight of their armour, they agreed and gave consent either to yeeld or to ransome themselves vpon any condition, they cared not what. Whiles the Gaules also gave forth plainely, and said, they might be entreated for a small consideration to give over siege. Then the Senate went together,

 and gave commission to the Tribunes Militarie, to bargaine and goe through with them. So by a parley or treatie had betweene P. Sulpitius Tribune Militarie, and Brennus the Duke of the Gaules, a conclusion was made, and that people, who within a short time should bee lords of the world, were valued and esteemed at a (...) lib. English.thousand pound weight of gold. This in itselfe was a most odious and shamefull thing, but there was adjoined thereunto a foule indignitie. For the Gaules brought forth false weights and uneven ballance. And when the Tribune refused them, behold, the insolent and prowd Gaule would needs have his sword weighed too for vantage, adding this speech moreover (which was intollerable for the Romanes to heare) We worth men conquered, and downe with them still. But neither God nor man would abide the Romanes to live ransomed. For by good hap, before that shamefull summe of monie by composition  was paied
, before (I say) that upon some wrangling thatfell betweene, all the gold was weighed out, commeth the Dictatour in the manner, and commandeth the gold to be had away, and the Gaules to void. And when as they made resistance and pleaded the capitulation and bargaine, hee againe replieth and saith, That the composition was not good, nor ought to stand, which after hee was made Dictatour, had been by an inferior Magistrate concluded, without his commandement and warrant: and with all warneth the Gaules to prepare themselves to fight: commaunding his owne souldiours, to cast all their bag and baggage downe on a heape, to put on their harneis, to make readie their weapons, and by dint of steele, and not by weight of gold to redeem their countrie, having in sight before their eies, the churches of their gods, their wives and children, and the soile whereon the citie stood (deformed now with miseries of warre) and all  things els which they ought by good reason to defend, recover, and be revenged for
. Here upon he marshalleth his battaile as the ground would give him leave, being the plot onely of a cittie halfe ruinate and lying along, and with all of it selfe naturally uneven. Forecasting and providing for all things with especiall choice and preparation to serve his souldiours turne, as farre as martiall skill could possiblie reach. The Gaules affrighted at this so strange an occurrent, betooke them to their weapons, and in a furious fit of anger, rather than with any considerate discretion, they ran upon the Romanes. Now had fortune turned her wheele: now Gods helpe and mans pollicie assisted the Romanes. Therefore at the first encounter the Gaules were discomsited with as little difficultie, as they themselves had atchieved the victorie at Allia. Afterwards also, in another more set battaile in the way of Gabes, about eight  miles from Rome (to which place they were fled) they were vanquished by the conduct and leading of the same Camillus. For there were they
slaine in every
place, their campe
taken, and not so much as one left to bring newes of their overthrow. The Dictatour having thus delivered his countrie out of the enemies hand, returneth againe with triumph into the citie. And in all the sports and pleasant ditties which the souldiors rudely after their manner devised, he was stiled Romulus the father of the countrie, the second founder of the cittie, which were no vaine titles of commendation.
When he had saved his countrie thus in warre, he preserved it afterwards againe undoubtedly in time of peace, namely, in gain saying their transinigration to Veij: whiles both the Tribunes enforced that matter more earnestly, now after the burning of the citie, and the Commons also  of themselves were more enclined thereunto, than before. Which was one cause, that after his triumph he resigned not up his Dictatorship: being requested also by the Senat not to leave the citie in so doubtfull tearmes of perplexitie. And first and formost (as hee was evermore a most precise devout man and religious) hee proposed those things which concerned the immortall gods: and causeth an act of the Senate to be made. Imprints, that all the temples (for that the enemies had held and possessed them) should bee repaired, bounded out new, and purged. Item, that the manner of cleansing them, should be searched out of the bookes of Sibylla by the Duumvirs. Moreover, that with the inhabitants of Caere, there should be made a league of publicke and mutuall hospitalitie, for receiving the sacred Images and priests of the people of Rome: by the meanes and favour of which people, the honour and service of the immortall gods was not  forelet and discontinued. Item, That there should bee set out the Plaies called Capitolini, for that Iupiter Optimus Maximus had still defended and preserved his owne seat, and the Keepe of the people of Rome, in that fearfull time of trouble. And that M. Furius should ordain a guild, or fraternitie out of those that dwelt in the hil of the capitoll, for the celebration of those plaies. Finally, to the end there should be also some satisfaction and expiation made of that night voice which

being the fore-messenger and warning-giver of their destruction before the comming of the  Gaules, was heard and yet neglected, a motion was made, that a temple should be erected in the new causey to Aius Locutius. The gold which was recovered by force from the Gaules, as also that which out of other temples in that fearefull medley, was brought into the chancell or chappell of Iupiter, because they could not call to mind precisely, into which churches, they were to carrie it againe accordingly, was all judged holie, and sacred to Iupiter; and order taken, that it should be bestowed and laid up under his shrine. And how devout the citie was, appeared before in this, That when there was not gold ynough in the common chest, to make up the full summe of the ransome that was agreed upon betweene them and the Gaules, they tooke that which the matrons and wives of Rome contributed, and all to spare and save the gold appointed to holy uses. The matrons were therfore thanked, and this honour besides done unto them, That after  their death they as well as their husbands, should be openly praised in a solemne funerall Oration. When those things were once accomplished which pertained to the gods, and all done that belonged to the Senate for to doe: then and not afore, upon the stirres that the Tribunes kept with the Commons continually, with their speeches in all their assemblies, solliciting them to leave the ruines of the cittie,The Oration of M. Furius Camillus to the people of Rome. and to remoove with all they had to Veij, a towne readily furnished to their hand: then I say and not before, Camillus accompanied with the whole Senate, came up into the common place of audience, and there before the people spake in this wise.
So grievous to me, o Quirites, is all contention and variance with the Tribunes of the Commons, that while I lived at Ardea, I found no other comfort and solace, in that most heavie and wofull banishment of mine but this, That I was farre ynough off from those debates and jarres. In regard  whereof, I would never have come againe I assure you, but that you called me backe, both by Act of Senate and also by approbation of the people. And it is not in me any change of mind, but your calamitie and distressed estate, that hath forced me to returne againe unto you. For this was the verie point that you stood upon, namely that our countrie might continue still and keepe her ancient place: and not ywis, that I should remaine and dwell therein againe. And even now verily, would I be still and keepe silence willingly, but that this quarrell also is in the behalfe of my foresaid countrie: the which to faile (so long as life doth last) for others might be a shamefull reproach, but for Camillus it were most impious and abhominable. For to what end have we returned to it again? To what purpose, when it was besiged have we delivered it out of the enemies hands, if when we have recovered it, we our selves abandon and leave the same? And when as  the gods and men of Rome kept still, and inhabited the Capitoll and the castle, notwithstanding the Gaules were lords, and possessed of the whole cittie, is it possible that both castle and capitoll, after the cittie is regained, should be forsaken and abandoned of the Romane victors? And shall our prosperous hand over our enemies bring greater desolation to our cittie, than adversity hath? Verilie if it were so, that we made no reckning of that religion and divine solemne service, instituted even with the foundation of our cittie: and that wee counted all vanities that have beene delivered unto us by tradition from our ancestors: yet so evident a power of God hath assisted the Romanes, that I must needs thinke, that men can now no longer neglect the worship of God. For consider with me I pray you, either the prosperitie or the adversitie of these yeares late past, one after another. Ye shall find, that as long as we served God and followed his will, so long we  prospered and went forward: and all the while that we despised the same, we ever went backward and fel to decay. And first and foremost the Veient war (recount I beseech you) how many yeares lasted it? how troublesome and painfull was it? And ended it was not, before that by the direction and advertisement of the gods, the water was let out of the Albane poole? What shall I speake of this late and strange calamitie of our owne cittie? Began it (and say truth) before that voice which came from heaven was made so light off, concerning the comming of the Gaules? before the law of nations was by our Embassadours broken? and before that through the same neglect of the gods, that fact was by us winked at and put up, which indeed should have beene punished and revenged? This was the cause that wee were vanquished, made captive, put to our ransome, and suffered such condigne punishment both at Gods hand and at mans, as that we are  made an example and ensignement to the whole world. Then our adversitie and affliction put us in mind of our religion, and the feare of the gods. We fled into the capitall to the gods, even to the verie seat of Iupiter Optimus Maximus: and when our owne private estate went to havocke, the sacred monuments yet and holy Images, some we hid in the earth, some we conveied

 away into the neighbour townes, and remooved them out of our enemies sight. And albeit we were forlorne and given over both of God and men, yet gave not wee over nor discontinued the service of the gods. And therefore gave they us our countrie againe, they gave us victorie, and the ancient honour of war which we had lost: and upon our enemies heades, who (blinded with covetousnes) in the weighing of gold brake both covenant and fidelitie, they have turned all fearfulnesse, all flight and slaughter. Considering then o Quirites, by these so great and apparent signes and testimonies in the course of this world, what it is to serve God, and what it is to dishonor him: perceive ye not what wickednes we go about to plunge our selves into, being scarcely gotten forth and escaped out of the shipwracke and perill of our former sinne and calamitie? A citie we have founded and built, by the will of God and due observation of Augurie and Auspice^, no corner  therein, but full of religion, full of divine majestie: and for solemne sacrifices, there are sett daies when they shall be celebrated, there are places also appointed wherein they ought to be performed. And are ye about then, o Quirites, to leave all these gods both publike and privat? How sorteth this deed of yours with that, which lately during the time of the siege, was seene with no lesse admiration of our enemies, than our owne selves in that Noble young Gentleman C. Fabius? when through the pikes of the Gaules, he departed out of the Castle, and performed a solemne dutie of the house of Fabius, even upon the mount Quirinall? What? can yee allowe and like that the sacred ceremonies of private families, should not so much as in time of war be intermitted: and suffer now the publike sacrifices and the Romane gods, in time of peace to be neglected, and the cittie abandoned? That our high priests and Flamines should be lesse curious and precise  in the publike service of God: than a private cittiz
en was in the Anniversarie feast of his familie and kindred? But peradventure some one may say, We will do the same at Veij, or we will send from thence our priestes hither, for to execute that ministerie. Neither of which can bee done, saving the due observance of holy ceremonies. For, to say nothing in generall of all other holydaies, and of all the gods besides; In that one high feast and solemne dinner of Iupiter, can a Pulvinar be celebrated, or a sacred Table be spred and furnished in any place, but in the Capitoll? What should I speake of the eternall fires of Vesta? and of that image, which as a paune and securitie of our imperiall state, is kept within the safegard of that Temple? What should I speake of those your Ancilia and Scutcheans? O Mars Gradivus, and thou father Quirinus: are yee well contented that all these festivall and sacred solemnities, which are all of equall time with  the cittie, yea and of more antiquitie (some of them) than the foundation o
f the cittie, should be forsaken in a profane place? But see what ods there is betweene us and our auncestors? They left unto us certaine solemne feasts and sacrifices to be celebrated in the Albane mountaine and in Lavinium. Was it then, a matter of conscience and religion, that some festivall solemnities were brought unto us from our enemies citties to Rome? And shall we translate the same from hence to our enemies cittie Veij, without a great and heinous offence, that would require expiation? Doe but call to minde I pray you, how often our feastes and sacrifices have beene renewed and reformed cleane, for that some one olde accustomed ceremonie, either by chance or for want of taking heede, hath been overslipt and left out. And even of late, what was it els that (after the strange miracle of the Albane Poole) releeved our common-weale so distressed  with the Veient warre, but the reformation of our divine service, and renewing of our Auspices? And more than this, we as it were in remembranc
e of antique religion and devotion, have both brought unto Rome forreine gods, and also have instituted and devised new. What a notable and festivall day was that (in regard of the exceeding zeale and forward affection of the matrons) upon which Queene Iuno late translated from Veij, was dedicated in Aventine? And to Aius Locutius, for a voice from heaven heard in the new causey, we caused a Temple to be erected. The Capitoline plaies have we added to other solemne feasts, and thereto we have ordeined and founded a new Guild or Fraternitie, even by the advise of the Senat. And what need was there, that we should have done any of these thinges, if we meant, together with the Gaules, (...) leave the cittie of Rome? If we abode not in the Capitol (so many moneths whiles we were besi^ged)  willingly and without constreint? And if we were for feare of our enemies, held back from going els whither? Thus much of our festivall daies and Temples. But what shall become now, I pray
 you, of our priests? Never thinke ye once of it, what a sinfull deed you are about? As for th^ Vestall Votaries and Nuns, it is certaine, this is their onely place, forth of which nothing ever could drive them but the winning of the cittie. The Flamine of Iupiter may not lie forth of th^

cittie one night: and will ye make these priests, of Romanes to become Veientians? And shall  thy virgins indeed, o Vesta, leave thee now? and shal the Flamine dwelling in a strange place, for every night he is absent, taint with so great impietie, both himselfe and the common-wealth? As for other matters, which we doe with great solemnitie by the direction of the Augurs (and al well nere within the Pomerie or compasse of the cittie) howe can we forget or neglect them? Namely the wardleet or assembly of the Curiae for matters of warre: also the other of Centuries, wherein ye chuse your Consuls and Militarie Tribunes, where can they be held (if we respect the will of the gods and regard the Auspices) but in the places accustomed? Shall we remove all these to Veij? or shall the people repaire hither from thence with so great trouble and inconvenience, to a desolate cittie, forsaken of God and man, whensoever they would hold those assemblies? But the present necessitie (they will say)forceth us to leave a towne that is wasted with fire  and wholy ruinate, and to go to Veij, where all stands safe and sound, and not to put the poore Commons to the toile and charge of new building. That, this is a pretence and cause rather devised, than meant in earnest, if I should say nothing, I thinke appeareth manifestly unto you alreadie, o Quirites, who remember that before the comming of the French men, whiles your publike buildings and privat houses were whole, and whiles the cittie stood upright on foote, this selfe-same motion was made and debated, as touching the removing to Veij. Consider now yee Tribunes what difference there is betweene mine opinion and yours: ye are of minde, that if it had not then been meet to be done, yet now verely it were good and requisite: I contrariwise (but marveile not I pray you before you heare what I wil say) am of opinion that albeit we might have then gone, whiles our whole cittie flourished, yet now we were not to leave it thus ruinate and decaied. For at that time we had some cause to remove into a conquered cittie, namely Victorie, a glorious thing to our selves and our posteritie: but this removing now, were reprochfull and shamefull to our selves, but glorious and honourable to the Gaules. For we shall not be thought to have left our countrie as conquerors, but to have lost it as conquered. And shall it be said that our running away at Allia, the winning of our cittie, the besieging of the Capitoll, hath imposed this necessitie upon us, as to leave our house and home and to make shifts, to seeke our own exile and departure out of that place which we were not able to defend? And were, indeed, the Gaules able to pull downe and rase that cittie of Rome, which the Romanes shall not be thought able to reedifie and set up again? What remaineth now, in case they should come upon us afresh, with a new power of men, (for certaine it is that their multitude is incredible) and were willing to dwell  here in this cittie by them conquered, and by you abandoned; but that ye gently permit and suffer them? Nay, What and if not the Gaules, but your old enemies the Aequians and the Volscians would remove and come to Rome, would you be willing to have them become Romanes, and your selves Veientians? Would ye not rather, that this desert and wast ground as it lieth, were yours, than to be a cittie peopled by your enemies? For I cannot see, I assure you, whether of the twain, wer more to be detested. And because (forsooth) ye are loth to fall to building, are ye resolved to abide these mischiefs and these shameful reproches? If throughout the whol citie there might not be built a more commodious or starely house, than is that cottage there, of our founder, wer it not better to dwell in cottages like sheepheards and pezants, so it be among your sacred monuments and houshold gods, than all at once generally to go into exile? Our auncestors and forefathers  being a medley of divers countries, and no other than heardmen, finding in these parts nothing but woods and bogs, in a short time built a new cittie out of the ground: and are we loth, having yet our Capitoll, our castle safe, the Temples of our gods standing stil, to reedifie it now, that it is burnt. That which every one of us would have done, if our houses had been fired, refuse we altogether to do in the common skarefire of the citie? Give me leave a little. What and if by some vilanie, or by mischance there should be a skarefire at Veij, and by reason of the wind (as it is often seene) the flame spred and catch, and so consume a great part of the citie, shall wee goe from thence by and by, and seeke to Fidenae or G^bij, or some other citie neere at hand, to remove unto? Is the very native soile of our countrie, and this ground which wee call our mother, of no power at all to keepe us here, but doth the whole love and affection of our countrie, rest in the  superficiall outside, and in the timber and rafters of our houses? Verily, confesse I will unto you (although I take lesse pleasure to remember the wrongs you did mee, than the calamitie which I endured) when I was absent and in exile, so often as I thought of my countrie, all these things ran in my mind: the hils, the plaine, the Tybre, the coasts all about, which was my daily prospect, and

 this aire, under which I was borne and brought up. All which, o Quirites, let them move you rather now with an affection to them for to tarie still in this your habitation, than disquiet you hereafter and torment you for the want and misse of them, when you have once left and forgone them. Not without good cause both God and man chose this place for the building of this cittie: most healthie and holesome hils: a verie convenient and commodious river; to bring in come and other fruits out of the inland parts, to receive provision and other victuals from the sea coasts: the sea itselfe neare enough for commodious, and not exposed and open by too much neerenesse to the dangers of forraine navies: the verie heart and centre of all Italie, a place as a man would say naturally made, and only for that citie to grow and increase in. And that doth the verie largenesse and greatnesse of a cittie so newly founded, plainely prove. It is now three hundred  three score and foure yeares, andnot above, since the foundation thereof, o Quirites. Amongst so many Nations of greatest antiquitie, thus long yee have made warre: and all this while (to say nothing of particular citties) neither the Volscians together with the Aequians, peopling so many townes, and those so strong, nor all Hetruria so mightie by sea aad land, and containing the whole breadth betweene the two seas, are in warre to you comparable. Which being so, what reason have you (in the devils name) when ye have had sufficient proofe alreadie of it, to trie again new experiments? considering now, that albeit your valour and vertue may goe with you els whither, yet certes, the good luck and fortune of this place can never depart and remove from hence? Here is the Capitoll, where somtimes upon the finding of a mans head, answer was made by Diviners and wisards, That in that very place should be the head of all puissance, and the imperiall  seat of the whole world. Here, at what time as the Capitol, by the direction of the Augurs should be voided and cleared of all other chappels, Ladie Iuventus, and God Terminus to the great joy of our forefathers, would not suffer themselves to be stirred out of their place. Here are the fires of Vesta, here be the scutcheons come downe from heaven, here are all the gods, favorable and gracious still unto you, so long as here ye make abode and remain. Camillus in all his Oration throughout moved them much: but that part thereof touching religion (by report) was most effectuall. But that which strucke it dead, and put all out of doubt, was a certain word that fell out to be spoken fitly to the purpose. For at what time as the Senate a while after, was gathered together in the court Hostilia, to debate about these things, and certaine companies of souldiours that returned from their guards, chanced in the meane time to march through the market place, one captaine  happened to speake in the Comitium, and said, Pitch downe thy ensigne standard bearer, here will be our best abode. Which voice was not so soone heard, but both the Senate being come out of the councell house, cried with one accord, That they tooke that osse for good lucke, and happie presage: and also the Commons all gathered ther about, approved the same. After this, when the foresaid Act of transmigration was once cleane dashed and abolished, the cittie began to be built confusedly, and without order. Tile was allowed at the common charges: to dig either stone or hew timber, every man had libertie where hee could, putting in sureties, that within the compasse of that yeare they would finish their buildings. The hast they made, caused them to have no regard of drawing out the streets directlie, whiles everie man built in the void places without any respect of his own or other mens ground. Which is the cause that the  old sinckes and vaultes which first were conveied through the common streets, now run everie where under mens houses, and the forme of the cittie seemeth, as if itwere built at randon (as every man could catch a place for himselfe) rather than distinctly ranged, and set out in good order unto them.



THE SIXTH BOOKE OF  THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the sixth Booke.
IT containeth the fortunate wars against the Aequians, the Volscians, and Tuscanes. Foure Tribes were added to the former, Stellatina, Sabbatina, Promentina, Arniensis. M. Manlius, who bad defended the Capitoll from the Gaules, whiles be dischargeth the debts of those that were in danger of their creditours, and released such as were then emprisoned, was convicted of aspiring to be King, and throwne downe from the cliffe Tarpeia. In whose reproach a decree was made by the Senat, that none of the house of Manlius, should be surnamed Marcus. C. Licinius and L. Sextius, Tribunes of the Commons, prop^sed a law, that Consuls also might be chosen out of the Commons, who were created before from among the Nobles onely. And albeit the Senatours withstood them with earnest endevour, yet by reason that for five yeares space, the same Tribunes continued the onely magistrates of the cittie, they went through with that law and gat it enacted. And L. Sextius was created, the first Consull that ever was, of Commoners. A second law there passed likewise, That no man might possesse above five hundreth acres of land.

WHAT actes from the building of the cittie of Rome unto the taking of the same,(...) the Romanes have atchieved, first under the government of Kings, afterwards of Consuls and Dictatours, Decemvirs, and Tribunes Consular, as wel in the wars abroad as seditions at home; I have in five books declared. Matters obscure, both in regard of exceeding antiquitie  (as things that a fatre off hardly be discerned:) and also for that in those daies there were very few writings and monuments, the only faithfull safegard, and true remembrances of deeds past: and besides, whatsoever was registred in the Commentaries of the Priests, and in other publike or privat records, the same for the most part, when the cittie was burned perished withal. But now from henceforward, their civile affaires of pollicie, and martiall exploits in warre, ensuing after a second beginning of the cittie (as springing againe with more fresh shoots and fruitfull sprouts from the root of the old stocke) shall bee delivered in more plaine and certaine manner.
And to begin withall, looke by whom the state first was underpropped and set upright, upon  him (as chiefe and principall) it still bare and rested, and that was M. Furius: whome the Romanes would not suffer to give up his Dictatourship before one yeare was fully expired.(...) As for those Tribunes (Consular) in time of whose government the citie was lost, they liked not that they should call and hold an assembly for Election of Magistrates, the yeare following. So the matter came to an Interreigne. Now whiles the cittie was busie in continuall worke and labour, about reedifying and repairing their buildings, Q. Fabius so soone as he was out of his office, was by C. Martius a Tribune of the Commons, arrested to make his answere at a day appointed. Who laid to his charge,Q. Fabius (...). That he contrarie to the law of nations, had fought against the Gaules, unto whom he was sent in embassage, and as an Orator only. But he avoided his judiciall triall, by his death: and died so just against the time, that many men thought it was voluntarie and wrought  by his owne hands. Then P. Cornelius Scipio first entred upon the Interreigne: and after him M. Furius Camillus the second time. Hee created Tribune Militarie in Consuls authoritie, A. Valerius Publicola the second time, L. Virginius, P. Cornelius, A. Manlius, L. Aemylius, and L. Posthumius. These men presently after the Interreigne, were not so soone entred into office,

 but before all other things, they consulted with the Senate in matters concerning religion and conscience. And first of all they commaunded, that all the instruments of leagues and confederacies, the ordinances and laws also (and those were the twelve tables, and certaine statutes made by the kings) should be sought up as many as could be found extant. Whereof some were published abroad, even amongst the Common people: but such as pertained properly to holy rites, and divine service, were by the Priests and Prelates suppressed; especially, of purpose to hold the minds of the people in a reverent awe of religion and devotion.(...) Then began they to reason and debate about the dismall daies. And the fifteenth day before the 1^ (...).Kalends of August, so notorious for a twofold losse and overthrow; upon which day at Cremera the Fabij were all slaine, and after at Allia an unfortunate field was sought, even to the utter ruine and desolation of the cittie,  they named of the later misfortune, Alliensis: and set this unluckie mark upon it, That it should be reputed unmeet and unconvenient for any businesse, as well publicke as private. Some thinke, because upon the next day following the 16 day of ^^ly.Ides of Iulie, Sulpitius the Tribune Militarie could not by sacrifice find any tokens of happie speed, nor obtaine the grace and favor of the gods; whereupon three daies after, the Romane hoast fell shamefully into the hands of the enemies: therefore, the morrow also after the Ides was interdicted, and men were commaunded to forbeare and abstaine from doing sacrifice: and thereupon likewise, the day next following the Kalends and the Nones, were by tradition held as ominous and dismall as the other.
But long they might not quietly sit about the devising of meanes to reforme the Commonweale, and let it upright againe after so greevous and daungerous a fall. For of the one side, the  Volscians, their old enemies, took armes, intending the finall destruction of the Romane name. On the other side, the Marchants brought newes, That the Princes and cheefe of all the nations of Hetruria were banded and confedered together in a Diet held at the temple of Voltumna, to make warre upon them. Besides, a fresh and new feare came upon them by reason of the rebellion of the Latines and Hernickes, who after the battell at the poole Regillus, for the space almost of a hundred years, had continued fast in loyall league and amitie with the people of Rome. Therfore being thus greatlie affrighted on everie side, that all the world might see apparantly that the state of Rome was not onelie hated of her enemies, but despised also of her allies: it was thought good and resolved upon, that by his direction and rule, the Commonwealth should now be maintained and defended, by whose conduct and guidance it was relieued and recovered:  and that M. Furius Camillus should be created Dictatour. He being declared Dictatour, named Q. Servilius Hala for Generall of the horsemen. And having proclaimed a law-steed (or vacation from courts of law) hee tooke muster of all the younger sort and serviceable men: but so, as the elder people were not left out, as many as were of strength sufficient for service. Vnto whom hee likewise ministred the militarie oth of alleageance, and enrolled them by hundreds in the multer booke. When hee had thus levied a power of men, and furnished them with armour, he devided them into three parts. The one he opposed against Hetruria in the countrie of Veij: another he commaunded to lie encamped before the cittie. Over these A. Manlius a Tribune Militarie was made captain: those which were sent against the Tuscanes had L. Aemylius for their commaunder. A third part he himselfe led against the Volscians: and not  farre from Lanuvium (the place is called Ad-Metium) he began to assault their campe. The enemies had put themselves on this their journey, with a kind of scornfull contempt, as thinking the whole manhood in a manner of Rome, was by the French cleane spent and wasted. But when they heard once, that Camillus was the Lord Generall, it stroke such a feare and terrour among them, that they were glad to defend themselves by the strength of their trench and rampier, yea and to fence it round about with huge-piled heapes of wood and trees, that their enemies might have no passage to enter in upon their munitions. Which when Camillus perceived, he gave order to set on fire that Barricado which stood in his way. And as good hap was, the wind was big and high, and blew full upon the enemie. So that not onely he made way by fire, but also with the flames thereof that went toward the campe, with the vapor likewise and smoke, and the crackling  noise of the greene wood, he so mated and astonied the enemies, that the Romans had lesse ado to passe the trench and pallisado, into the campe of the Volscians, than in getting over the mound and enclosure consumed with fire. Having thus defeated and slaine his enemies, and won withall the campe in the same brunt, the Dictatour gave the whole spoile unto the souldiours: which to them was so much the more welcome, as they lesse hoped for it at their General his hand: who

was never knowne to be lavish of gift, and over liberall in dealing rewards. After this he followed  them that fied, in chase, wasted and haried their whole countrie, and at length (in the seventieth yeare of the warre) he wholly subdued the Volscians, and forced them to yeeld subjection. After this conquest, he departed from thence into the Aequians, who likewise made preparations for warre. Their forces he surprised and defaited at Bol^, and assailed not onely their campe, but also forced the cittie, and at the first assault wan both.
But whiles fortune smiled thus, what way soever Camillus went, as being the onelie staie of the Romane state: so on another side the feare of perill greatlie encreased. For Hetruria well neere all up in armes, lay before Satrium, and besieged it being in league with the people of Rome. Whose Embassadours came unto the Senate to intreat for succour in their distresse, and had a decree granted unto them, that the Dictatour with all speed should rescue the Sutrines. But being  so streightly beleagured, that they might not abide the delay of this their hope, for that the townsmen, who were but few in number were overwearied with working, watching and bloodie fighting, (all which lay still upon the same men without intermission) they were driven by composition to surrender up the cittie to the enemies: and being disarmed and sent away with a single suit of apparrell (after a piteous sort all arow) departed the towne and left their dwelling places. But see, it fortuned that Camillus at the same time came in the verie manner with the Romane armie and met them. At whose feete the multitude all sorrowfull lay prostrate: their Nobles and chiefe men in this extremitie full to beseech him to be good unto them: the women and children which went along with them, as partakers and companions of their exile, seconded them with wofull teares and lamentations. But he willed the Sutrines to forbeare their mourning plaints, and give over their doleful mone: saying, that he brought the Tuscans heavie and weeping cheere. Then caused he his soldiours to lay downe their packs and load, the Sutrines likewise there to abide with a meane guard, and his men to follow him with armour and weapons onely. Thus marched he forward with his armie lightlie appointed for readie expedition, and advanced before Sutrium. Where, according to his expectation, he found the enemies all carelesse and secure (as commonly it falleth out upon a prosperous successe.) No warders, no corps de gard quartered before the wals, the gates wide open, the conquerours heere and there sacking, rifling and flinging the goods out of their enemies housen.(...) So was Sutrium in one day twise woon. The Tuscanes (for all their former victorie) were hewen in peeces on everie side, by a new come enemie. They had no time to cast themselves round, nor gather together into one place, no nor to  take weapon in hand: whiles everie man for life, made in all hast to the gates, if haply any way they might escape into the fields. But when they came thither, the gates they found fast shut, for so the Dictator had given order aforehand. Here upon some betooke themselves to their weapons: others (namelie such as happened to be armed when this suddaine tumult surprised them) fell to call their fellowes together for to begin a skirmish: which no doubt in that desperate case of the enemies had been hotclie fought, had not the criers and trumpets which were sent into all partsof the cittie, made proclamation to lay downe their weapons, to spare them which were unarmed, and that none should have anie harme but those that were found in armes. Vpon this, euen they who in that extremitie and dispaire were fullie bent to fight it out, for hope of life on all hands flong away their weapons: and thus disarmed as they were (for as the case stood, it was the  safer course) presented themselves to the enemie. A great number of them were bestowed in severall places, and were attended upon with good guards. And before night the towne was delivered againe unto the Sutrines, safe and sound without any hurt at all done unto it, as being not woon by force, but surrendred upon composition. Camillus then, returned with triumph into the cittie of Rome, victour at one voiage in three sundrie warres. The greatest number by farre, of prisoners, whom he led before his chariot in triumph, were Tuscanes: whom he sold in port sale at the speare, ^nd raised such a summe of mony, that when he had out of it repaied the dames [of Rome] to the worth of their gold, there were of the surplusage therof three bolles made of massie gold: which with the title and inscription of Camillus his name, were for certainty, before the Capitol was burnt, to be seene in the chappel of Iupiter set up and bestowed at the feet of Iuno.
The same yeare, there were enfranchised and made citizens of Rome, such Veientians, Capenates and Faliscians, as in the time of those warres were fled to the Romanes: and for these new citizens were certain lands set out. Those also, who for idlenes loth to build at Rome, were gone to Veij, there to inhabit the vacant houses, were by an Act of the Senat recalled home from thence.

 And they at the first, grumbled and refused to obey: but after that a day was set them, and they threatned upon paine of death to return again to Rome; as stout as they were, and obstinate all of them together, now for feare every one became obedient. As Rome now increased in number of inhabitants, and became well peopled: so on all hands in everie place they fell to building new edifices: whiles the Commonwealth somewhat eased them of charges, and the Aediles by vertue of their office called hard upon them, hastening them forward as to a publike worke; yea and every man privately made all speed possible,(...) according as ech ones need required, to make an end and finish his owne house. So as within the yeere the cittie was new built and stood on foot againe.
At the yeares end was the great Election held for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie. Wherein were created T. Quintius Cincinnatus, Q. Servilius Fidenas the fifth time, Iulius Tullus, L. Aquilius Corvus, L. Lucretius Tricipitinus, Ser. Sulpitius Ruffus. One armie they set out and led against the Aequians, not to warre with them (for they granted themselves conquered) but upon meerspight and deadly hatred, to wast all their borders utterly, and to leave them no power and strength to enterprise any new rebellion. The other, into the territorie of Tarquinij. Where, two townes of the Tuscanes, Cortuosa and Contenebra, were by assault wonne and rased. At Cortuosa was no resistance m^de. For the Romanes surprised them on a suddaine, and at the first shout and impression they were masters of it: The towne was sacked and burned. As for Contenebra, it endured the assault for some few daies: but the continuall labour, slacking neither day nornight, overcharged them: wheras the Romane armie devided into six parts, fought six houres in their severall turnes, round one after the other. And the townsmen being but few, and those  overtoiled, were faine without anie supply, still to maintaine fresh skirmishes. Whereupon, at last they reculed backe and yeelded, giving the Romanes leave to enter the cittie. The Tribunes were of mind and thought good, that the spoile should be confiscate and go to the common treasurie: but the commaundement and proclamation, was more slacke than their purpose in that behalfe. For whiles they lingered and protracted time, the soldiours alreadie had seased in their prises: and taken from them againe without much offence and hatred, the bootie could not be. In the same yeare, because the cittie should not flourish in private buildings onely, the Capitoll was also built of squared ashler stone: A peece of worke even in this so glorious estate, and magnificence of the cittie,The Capitall built of square stone. to be had in price and esteemed excellent. And now before this time, the Tribunes of the Commons, whiles the cittie was busied about their buildings, began often  to moove for the lawes Agrariae (about the division of the lands) in all their assemblies and speeches before the people. For to draw them on and to set forward their hope, they presented unto them eftsoones the Pomptine territorie, which then aboue all others, so presentlie upon the subduing and subversion of the Volscians by Camillus, was, no doubt, the rightfull possession of the people of Rome. Complaints were made, that those grounds sustained much more detriment and dammage by the Nobilitie, than they had received before from the Volscians. For they, so long onelie as they were able to beare armes and maintaine warre, made inrodes thither: but the Noblemen forciblie entred and made havocke in the possessions of the common lands: and unlesse (before they had set sure footing there, and got all into their hands) a division were made, the Commons should never enjoie one foote of ground there. These Remonstrances of  the Tribnnes little mooved the Commons, both because few of them resorted to the common place of assemblies, whiles they plied their building: and also for that monie was away, and their purses so emptied in the charges of workemen, they had little mind of holding those landes, which to store and stocke they were not able.
The cittie was now given much to their devotions aad religions, and the rulers also somewhat superstitious, upon their late calamitie: In so much as they minded to renew the Auspicia [or the solemnitie of presages taken by birdflight] for some error supposed therein: and therfore they agreeed that the government should returne to an Interreigne. So there were Interregents one after another, M. Manlius Capitolinus, Ser. Sulpitius Camerinus, L. Valerius Potitus. Valerius at length held the assemblie for to elect Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authritie,The Temple of Mars dedicated. and created L. Papyrius, Cn. Sergius, L. Aemylius the second time, L. Licinius, T. Valerius Publicola the third time. These presently after the Interreigne, began their government. That yeare, the Temple of Mars vowed in the Gauls war was dedicated by T. Quintius,Fouve n^w Tribes adioyned to Rome: a Duumvir deputed for the executing of holy duties. Foure Tribes of new citizens were now adjoined, Stellalina, Pomatina, Sabbatina, Arniensis: and these made up the number of the 35 Tribes. And now L. Sicinius a Tribune of the Commons

was in hand with the people in greater number assembled together, about the Pomptine  lands: and more enclined they were and forward to hearken after grounds, than they had beene asore. And whereas it was mooved in the Senate house, to make warre upon the Latines and the Hernicks, that matter was not followed, but put off to a further time: by reason of preparation for a greater warre, because Hetruria was alreadie up in armes. And all was laid againe upon Caemillus his shoulders, who was made Tribune Militarie with Consuls authority, and had five other brethren in office joined unto him S^r.Cornelius Maluginensis, Q. Servilius Fidenas the sixt time, L. Quintius Cincinnatus, L. Horatius Pulvillus, P. Valerius. In the beginning of the yeare, the minds of men were turned cleane away from the carefull regard they had of the Tuscane warre, by reason that a number of people that fled out of the Pomptine countrie, came all of a suddaine in great hast to the cittie, and brought word, that the Antiates were up in armes, that the nations  of the Latines had sent their able youth to that warre closelie under hand, thereby disavowing it to be any action of the State, and standing upon this point, that by the covenant there was no proviso, but that voluntarie soldiours might serve in what warres soever they would. Now had the Romanes beene well taught, and learned, to set light no more by any warres. The Senate therefore thanked the gods, that Camillus was in place of government, who if he had beene a private person, was no doubt to have beene nominated and created Dictatour: yea and his companions in office confessed frankely that he was the onlie man to have the soveraigne and absolute regiment of all, in case there were any fearfull and dangerous warre toward: and were fully resolved, to yeeld up all their interest in government unto him, thinking it no disparagement at all unto them, nor any losse of their owne honour and reputation, in conferring the same upon the  majestie of so worthie a person. The Senate highly commended the Tribunes, and Camillus was much abashed in his mind, howbeit he gave them heartie thanks, and spake in this wife.
A waightie burthen (quoth he) I see is imposed upon me by the people of Rome,(...) in that they have elected and nominated me Dictatour now the fourth time: a greater charge is enjoined me by the Senate, the whole state and bodie of which order, hath delivered so singular good opinion and judgement of me: but the heaviest lode of all is laid upon me by the exceeding kindnesse and obsequious benignitie of these my honourable brethren and colleagues. If any painfull travaile of mine therefore, and watchfull care may be redoubled, I will earnestlie endeavour, I will straine and strive to answere therunto: that the opinion which the cittie with so great consent hath conceived of me, right as it is exceeding great, so it may continue still and be perpetuall. As to that warre of the Antiates, there are more brags and threats than any danger and perill from thence. But as I would counsaile and advise you to be affraid of no warre, so I would not have you to be carelesse and secure of any. The cittie of Rome is beset on everie side: partlie envied, and partlie hated of her neighbour borderers. Need there is both of more captaines, and also of more armies, to manage the affaires of the Commonweale. I thinke it good therfore (quoth hee) o Valerius, that you assist me in government and counsell, and have the leading togither with me of certaine legions against the Antiate enemies. That you Q. Servilius, with an other armie well appointed, and in readines, lie encamped hard by the cittie side, having an eie and good regard, least either Hetruria in the meane while, (as of late daies) or the Latines and Hernicks (who trouble vs now a fresh) breake out and make some rising. Assured I am, that  you will behave your selte, and quit you in this service so worthilie, as may answere the famous memorie of such a father and grandsire as you have had, may beseeme your owne honourable person, and those six Tribune^hips which you have alreadie performed. As for L. Quintius let him leavie a third power of men, consisting of those that are by reason of sicklinesse or other wife excused for warfare, and are above the ordinarie age for militarie service, to be in stead of a garison for defence of the cittie and the walles. Let L. Horatius provide harnesse, weapons, come and other necessaries for warre, at all occasions whatsoever. Finally, o Sergius Cornelius, wee your fellow Tribunes, ordaine you president of this publicke Counsell, the Custos and keeper of religion and Church matters, of generall assemblies, of the lawes and all other civill affaires of pollicie whatsoever. Now when they had all made promise, and that most willingly to do their  endeavour in performing their severall charges, Valerius whom he had joined with himselfe in commission, added moreover and said, That as he would take M. Furius to bee Dictatour, so would he be unto him againe in steed of his Coronell of horsemen. And turning to the Lords of the Senate, exhorted them that what opinion they had of one onelic

 soveraigne Generall, the same hope they would conceive of the whole warre. The Senatours hereat tooke great joy and contentment, giving out willingly with one accord, that they hoped exceeding well of war, of peace, and generally of the State. Neither shall the common-weale (say they) ever stand in need of Dictatour, so long as such magistrates be in place, so jointly agreeing in one mind together, so indifferent and readie as well to obey as to rule, and rather yeelding their proper praise to the honour of the common-weale, than dismembring and plucking from it to their privat glorie and reputation.
After a Vacation or Law-steed proclaimed, and the Musters taken and past: Furius and Valerius set forward to Satricum: whither the Antiates had not onely sent the floure of all the Volsci, the choise youth out of a fresh frie and new generation; but also had raised a mightie power of  Latines and Hernicks, out of those nations that by long peace were most frimme and lustic. These new enemies and old thus combined together, troubled the minde of the Romane souldiour, and made him to startle. Which when the Centurians reported to Camillus, as he was marshalling and setting his battailes in array; and that in these termes, to wit, that the hearts of his souldiors were disquieted and dismaied; that they rooke themselves but slowly to their weapons, made staying and hasting when they should come forth of their tents, yea and that there were some of them overheard to say, that, They must fight one to an hundred, and that so great a multitude of their enemies (if theywere unarmed) might hardly be encountred, much lesse, being so well armed and appointed: he mounted presently upon horsbacke, and rode before the ensignes, and then turning himselfe a front his armie,The Oration of M. Fluvius Camillus to his souldiours. traversing betweene the rankes and arraies; What heavinesse  is this my souldiors (quoth he) what meanes this strange and unwonted lagging behind? Why? Know ye not your enemie? Know ye not me? Or know ye not your owne selves? The enemie, what is he els but the perpetuall matter and subject of your valour and glorie?
And yee againe are the men, who under my conduct (to say nothing of the winning of Falerij and Veij, and of the slaughter of the Gaules Legions, put to the sword by us, even when our native cittie was by them taken, and they masters thereof) of late, and but the other day, made a threefold triumph, upon a triple victorie, over the same Volscians Aequians and people of Hetruria. What, Doe ye not agnize and accept me for your Generall, because not as Dictatour, but as Tribune, I gave you the watchword, and put out the banner of battaile? For mine owne part, I stand not much upon absolute and soveraigne commaund over you: no more likewise should yee regard  oughtels in me, but mine owne selfe. For never yet did my Dictatourship make me hautie and set me up aloft, no more than my banishment abated my courage and cast me downe. We are the same men still all of us: and since we are come to this war, furnished with the same meanes that we carried with us unto the former, let us looke for the same event of our service, and no worse. So soone as ye shall encounter and joine battaile with them, performe each one that which he hath been taught and wonted to* the journey surely will be ours, and they (no doubt) shall run away. Then after he had founded the battaile, he alighteth from his horse, and caught the ensigne-bearer that stood next him, with his hand, haled him forward against the face of the enemie, crying estsoones alowd, On afore with thy banner, Port-ensigne, and advance forward, souldiour. When they saw that Camillus in person, a man well stept in yeares, and thereby weake to  performe the parts of bodily strength, putting himselfe forth against the enemie: all at once they pressed forward, set up an outcrie and shouted, every man calling upon his next fellow, to follow their Generall for shame. Over and besides, some say that by the commandement of Camillus, there was an ensigne flung into the very battaile among the enemies. Whereupon they of the forefront, bestirred themselves lustely to recover it againe. And thereby were the Antiates first discomfited, and the feare not onely came upon them in the vaward, but entered also and reached as farre as the rereward, that stood readie for supply. And as the violent force of the souldiors, provoked by the presence of their Captaine, much troubled the enemie: so nothing more daunted the hearts of the Volscians, than the very sight of Camillus himselfe, when they chanced to espie him. So surely carried he the victorie with him, which way soever he went! And  that appeared most evidently in this, That when he saw the left wing at the point to give backe and run away, he took himselfe in all hast to his horse, rode thither with his light footmans buckler, and with his onely presence renewed the fight; shewing unto them how the rest of the battell had the better. Now were the enemies put to the worst, and the victorie enclined to a side. But their multitude both hindred themselves in their flight: and also a long peece of worke the wearied soldiours

of the Romanes had to put so great a number, all to the sword. But behold, there fell  a great tempest of raine all of a sodaine, which powred down with so mightie windes and storms, that it rather put them by the execution of assured victorie, than parred any battaile or staied the fight. Whereupon the retreat was sounded: and the night ensuing, whiles the Romanes were at rest, made an end of the warre. For the Latines and Hernicks forsooke the Volscians and departed home, with as illspeed, as their enterprise was bad. The Volscians seeing themselves abandoned and left in the church by them, (upon whose trust and confidence they had rebelled) quit the campe and field and put themselves within the wals of Satricum.(...) Whom Camillus at first began to besiege, casting a trench and rampier about them, raising bastillions and platforms against the towne. And seeing his munitions and fabricks by no sallying forth of the enemies impeached, he supposed there was no such courage inthem, that he should neede to stand so  long about the hope of victorie: and thereupon, encouraged his men not to weare themselves out in a tedious and toilfull piece of service, as if they lay at the siege of Veij: assuring them that the victorie was in their hands alreadie: and so with exceeding cheerefulnesse of his souldiours, he set ladders upon everie side, scaled the wals, and entred the towne. Then the Volcians flung away their weapons and yeelded themselves.
But the Generall his mind was bent upon a greater exploit, and that was the winning of Antium, being the seat towne of the Volscians, and from whence the beginning of the last warre arose. Howbeit, because so strong a cittie might not be woon without great preparation of artillerie, ordinance and engins of batterie, leaving his colleague behind him with the armie, he went himselfe to Rome, to persuade with the Senate, for to destroy and rase Antium utterly. And  whiles he was emparling with them (such was the will of God I beleeve, that Antium should stand still and continue longer) there came embassadours from Nepet and Sutrium, craving aid against the Tuscanes, saying: That it was more than high time, that they were succoured and rel^e^ed. Vpon which occasion it fell out, that Camillus was withdrawne thither from Antium. For seeing that those two townes stood even against Hetruria, as it were the very keies and bar-gates from thence: both the enemies laboured to gaine them afore hand, against the time that they went about to make new wars; and the Romanes also held it a matter of great consequence, to rescue and defend those frontier townes. The Senat therfore thought good to be in hand with Camillus, for to leave Antium, and to undertake the war with the Tuscanes. The cittie-legions under Generall Quintius, were appointed unto him. And albeit, he rather would have had the  leading of that armie, which laie now in the Volscians countrie, and which he had good triall of, and were acquainted better with his government, yet refused he nothing: onely he required to have Valerius his associate still, and joyned with him in commission. So Quintius and Horatius were sent to succeed Valerius in the Volscian war. Furius and Valerius tooke their voiage from the cittie to Sutrium, and found the one side of the town possessed alreadie by the Tuscanes. On the other side, the townesmen, for that the enemie had stopped all passages betweene, hardly able to repell the force of the assailants. But the comming of the Romane aides, and the name besides of Camillas, (so highly renowmed as well amongst the enemies as Allies) both for the present gave them heart to abide the brunt, and sticke to it still that were before at the point to give over: and also gained time and respite, to come in with fresh supplies and succours. Camillus therfore devided his forces, and gave direction to his colleague, for to bring about his power, to that side which the enemies held, and there to make an assault: not so much for any hope he had by sealing the wals to win the cittie; as by withdrawing the enemies thither, not onely to ease the townesmen of their toile, and give them a breathing time (who were now wearied with assaults) but also to get himselfe some opportunitie and vantage, to enter the cittie without skirmish and resistance.(...) Which being put in execution on both hands accordingly, and performed at once: the Tuscanes beset with a two fold feare round about, seeing the wals assailed most fiercely one waie: and the enemie gotten within the towne another way: flung out at one gate (which as it hapned was not bese^) and in great hast all together sought to escape away. But as they fled, they were slaine by heapes both within the towne and abroad all over the fields. The greater number  were killed within the wals by Furius his souldiors. Valerius his men were more readie and nimble in the chase, and gave not over the execution untill the night came, that they could not see and d^^cerne them.
When Satrium was thus recovered and restored againe to their allies, they led forward the

 armie to Nepet: which towne the Tuscanes held wholly, as surrendered alreadie into their hands. Every man thought it would be a busier peece of worke to win that cittie againe: not in this regard onely, that it was fully in the enemies possession, but also because some of the Nepesins, by treason had yeelded it up. Howbeit, they resolved to send unto the heads and principall citizens; that they should sever themselves from the Tuscanes, and performe on their behalfe trustie and faithfull loialtie, like as they had craved and besought at the Romans hands their friendly helpe and protection. From whom they received this answere againe, That it lay not now in them to doe any thing at all, for that the Tuscanes kept the wals, and warded the gates. Whereupon they first terrified and skared the townesmen with harrying and spoiling their territorie: after that, seeing they made more reckoning of keeping their faithfull loialtie to their enemies unto whome they  had lately surrendred, than observing the league with their friends, which they had long before concluded; they provided themselves out of the fields of a number of faggots, of brushwood, and such like trousse, and so approched the cittie with the armie, filled up the ditches close to the wals,Nep^^ (...) set ladders to, and at the first shout and assault given, the towne was taken. Then proclamation was made, that all the Nepesines should part with their armour and weapons, and so many as were found unarmed, should be spared. But the Tuscanes, as well armed as unarmed, were put to the sword every one. As for the cheese authours that persuaded the Nepesines to deliver the towne to the enemies, they were beheaded. The harmelesse multitude had their goods restored, and to the towne was left with a garrison. Thus the two Tribunes (Consular) having regained out of the enemies hands two confederate cities, returned in great glorie to Rome with their victorious  armie.
The same yeare the Latines and Hernickes were required to make amends for harmes done, and restitution of goods wrongfully detained: and the cause demanded why of late years, according to a covenant in that behalfe provided, they had set forth no souldiors to the Romans wars.
Answere from both Nations in their solemne counsels was returned:The excuse of the Latines and Hernickes. That neither the fault was generall, nor proceeding from counsell of the State, in case some of their youth served under the Volscians: and yet themselves had well paied alreadie for their leaud and rash projects, in that not one of them was come home alive. And as to the not sending forth of souldiours, the cause was, for that they were in continuall feare and danger of the Volscians: which noisome plague (as it were) sticking so close unto their sides, unneath they could bee rid off, notwithstanding so  many warres one in the necke of another. When relation hereof was made unto the Lords of the Senate, they thought so well of their answere and excuses, that they deemed they had quarrell and occasion good ynough to warre upon them, if they might have had while and time as well to follow it.
In the yeare following, when A. Manlius, P. Cornelius, Titus and Lucius Quintius, both Capitolini, and L. Papyrius Cursor the second time, were Tribunes Consular, there arose a greevous war abroad, and a more dangerous sedition brake forth at home. The warre, from the Volscians, banded with the Latines and Hernickes, that were fallen away and revolted. The sedition (where it was least feared) from a personage of noble linage descended, of great name and reputation, M. Manlius Capitolinus. Who being a man of too lostie and hautie a minde, despised all other  of the Nobilitie, and envied one above the rest, M.Furius, so singular, as well in regard of his honourable dignities,The discontentments of Ma^cus Manlius, m^nding sedition. as his worthie parts and commendable vertues. Hee could not brooke and endure, that hee onely should ever bee Lord Generall in the field: who now was exalted so high above others, that even those who were created with him in egall authoritie, he accounted not as his peeres and fellowes, but emploied as his ministers and servitours.
Whereas (quoth he) if men would weigh aright, and duly consider everything, M. Furius could never have delivered his countrie from the siege of the enemies, had not the Capitoll and castle cliffe been saved by mee afore. Camillus set upon the Gaules, when they were amused in receiving their gold, when they were upon tearmes of peace, and their hearts quiet and secure: whereas my selfe chased them away, whiles they were in armes, and at the point to win the castle hill. In that exploit of Camillus  the soldiours, had each one his share proportionably of the glorie, who together with him did their parts: but in the service performed by me, no earthly creature was fellow and partener with me. With these conceits he fed his owne humour, and pussed up his prowd spirit, being withall by corrupt disposition of nature, hote and hastie, arrogant and insolent. Discontented besides, that of the Nobilitie, his gifts and qualities were not esteemed of that worth, as in his own judgement

they deserved: first, of a Senatour he became popular, and began to breake his mind, and  impart his designes unto the Magistrates of the Commons: finding fault with the Nobilitie, and complaining of them: solliciting and inveagling the Commons, to cast a liking and favour toward himselfe: carried away with the vaine gale of the peoples opinion: not guided by sage counsell and discretion: and in one word, chusing rather to be of great name, than of good and honest report. And not contenting himselfe to deale in the lawes Agrariae, about the division of lands, which had alwaies ministred to the Tribunes of the Commons matter ynough of mutinies and seditions; hee began to intermeddle betweene the debters and their creditours, and to overthrow all keeping of credite. And indeed, deepe debts are sharpe goads, and prick shreawdly: threatening not onely povertie and shame, but also terrifying the bodies of free men with hard imprisonment, little ease, and yrons. Now there were exceeding many farre indebt (a thing  most daungerous and hurtfull to mens state) even of the richer sort, by reason of their great expenses destraied in building. The warre therefore of the Volscians, which was itselfe of great importance, but much more, in regard of the Latines and Hernickes rebellion withall, was in shew pretended, as a cause to seeke for to have a more soveraigne and absolute power to governe the State: but in truth, these new dessignements and plots of Manlius, rather than the warre, forced the Senate to create a Dictatour. And A. Cornelius Cossus being created, nominated for his Generall of horse, T. Quintius Capitolinus. The Dictatour, albeit he saw a greater bickering toward, at home than abroad, yet (were it that the warre required some speedie expedition, or because by victorie and triumph, hee thought to make his Dictatourship more mightie and powerfull) hee tooke musters, and set forward into the Pomptine land, into which parts hee had intelligence, that the Volscians had proclaimed their forces, to repaire.
I doubt not,A (...) of the author. but they that read in so many bookes alreadie, of these continuall warresfought with the Volscians, besides their tedious satietie of reading, will muse also at this (which to my selfe was likewise a wonder, when I perused the writers that lived neere about the times of these acts) how these Volscians and Aequians, so often vanquished and diffeited, were furnished with supplie of souldiours to maintaine their warres. But seeing by the auncient Chroniclers it hath been overpassed with silence, what should I alleadge, but only mine owne opinion and bare conjecture, which every man hath libertie to put in for himselfe? Likely it is, that either between the times of warres (as now we see in the Romane musters) they used to breed up one supplie under another, of the younger sort, to the maintenance and renuing so oftentimes of their war: or that  their armies were not alwaies levied out of the same States, albeit the warres go under thename of one and the selfesame nation: or that those countries yeelded in those daies an infinit number of freemen, which now are well neare wast and defart, but for some Romane slaves, which keepe those parts yet from being void and dispeopled, as having but a very small feminarie, or none at all, left, of serviceable souldiours.
Certes, the Volscians armie, as all authors agree, was very great at this time: albeit of late daies by the leading and conduct of Camillus they were fore weakened, and their strength much abated. Besides, there were with them in field, the Latines and Hernickes, some of the Circeians, and other Coloners from Velitrae. The Romane Dictatour having that day pitched his campe, and the next morrow come abroad with happie tokens of good speed from the Birds: having also  slaine a sacrifice, and procured thereby the favour and grace of the gods, in joyous manner shewed himselfe unto his souldiors: who according as they were commaunded, were readie early in the morning,The Creation of A. Cornelius Cossus Dictator, to his souldiors. by breake of day in armes, attending the sound of trumpet for battaile. The day is ours (quoth hee) my valorous souldiours, if either the gods or their Prophets can foretell future events.
Therefore as resolute men of assured hope, and such as shall encounter with far meaner than ourselves, pitch we our javelins downe at our feet, and draw our swords only. Neither would I have you to run out of the maine battell, and to give the charge, but to keepe your ground, to stand stedfast, and abide the first shocke of the enemie. And when they have spent their volie of shot in vaine, and shall with full feese come upon you as you stand, then brandish your swords, and let them glitter in their eies, and thinke everie man of the gods, that they will helpe the Romanes. The gods I say, which in happie houre, by the luckie approbation of their Birds, have sent us into the field to fight. And as for you, o Quintius, keepe your horsemen close together, marking advisedly the first beginning of the skirmish: and when you see the battailes buckle together pell mell, and come to handstrokes, whiles they are busied and occupied one

 way, fright them another way with your horsemen, ride among their ranks as they fight, and breake their arraies. Thus fought both horse and foot according to his direction. And as the legions wanted not a worthie captaine, no more missed the captaine of happie speed. The multitude of the enemies trusting upon nothing but their owne number, which they measured and compared together onely by their eie, intervewing both the one armie and the other, rashy gave battaile, and as rashly gave over againe. In shout onely and shot shewing themselves hot and eger at the first encounter: but were not able to abide the sword fight, the closing together foot to foote, and the firie countenance of their enemies, which for the verie heat of their courage, shined and glistered fully in their eies. So the forefront being put backe, a seare came upon them likewise, that stood behind for supply, and withall, the horsemen for their parts set to,  and fought most terriblie. Wherupon the ranks ofthe enemies in sundrie places were broken, and all set out of order, so as their battailons seemed to flote and wave up and down to and fro, in suspence whether to fight or flie. Afterwards, when they saw the formost smitten downe and slaine, and everie one thought no other but his own turne was next to be killed, they turned their backs and fled. The Romans came forward still and chased them. And so long as they went their way armed and thick hudled together, it was the footmens work to pursue them: but when it was perceived once, that they flong away their weapons on all hands, and that the enemies armie fled dispersed all abroad in the fields: then were the troupes of horsmen set out after them, with this caveat and charge, to make no stay and forlet the time, by killing them one by one, and so to give the maine multitude of them in the meane while sufficient respite to escape: but that they should  content themselves, only to let flie some shot amongst them, and by scaring them to hinder their running: and when they were ridden beyond, to crosse upon them and stay them, untill the footmen might overtake them, sley them down right and make an hand of them clean. Thus fled they, and thus were they followed in chace untill night.The Volscians desai^ed. The verie same day was the Volscians campe taken and ransaked, and the whole pillage, besids the bodies of free men, was given unto the soldiours. The greatest part of the prisoners were Hernicks and Latines: and those not of the common sort, and such as might be thought to have served for pay: but there were found among them certaine yoong gentlemen of good marke, a plaine proofe and evidence, that the Volscian enemies had aid from thence by the publike and generall warrant of the State. There were knowne also to be among them some of the Circeians, yea and certain of the Veliterne colonie  likewise. All of them were sent to Rome. Where being examined before the chiefeof the Senatours, they confessed everie one in plame termes, the revolting of their owne nation, like as they had before bewraied it unto the Dictatour. The Dictator still kept his forces together within the standing campe, making no doubt, but that the rulers and Senatours of Rome would determine to warre upon those countries.
But even at that time a greater heape of troubles which arose at home, caused him to be sent for to Rome, by occasion of a sedition which grew daily more and more: and by reason of the author therof (a man of qualitie and note) was more feared than any usually had been afore time. For now by this, had M. Manlius not by speeches onely, but by plaine deeds also, (which in outward shew seemed popular and plausible) shewed evidently upon what troublesome and tumultuous  spirit all proceeded. For seeing upon a time a Centurion, of good worth for his service in warre, condemned in an action of debt, and upon an execution of judgement caried to prison: he in the mids of the Forum, came running unto him with a rout and crew of his followers and retinue, laid hand on him, and tooke him perforce from the officers: and after he had given our some words alowd touching the pride of the Senators, the crueltie of the usurers, the calamities of the Commons, the valour and present distresse of the partie; Marrie then (quoth hee) have I done a great deed, to no purpose, in saving the Capitoll and the Keepe with this right hand of mine, if I could abide to see my fellow soldiour (as if he were taken prisoner of the Gaules by way of conquest) had away into bondage and captivitie, and laid up fast in gives and fetters. And therwith openlie in sight of all the people paid the whole debt downe right on the naile, unto the  creditour:The mutinous speeches of a Centurion* and so after the usuall and solemne ceremonie by a brasen peece of coine and the ballance, he set him at libertie out of the creditour his hands, and let him go at large.
Who praied heartily to God and man, for to requite accordingly M. Manlius his onely deliverer, and the verie patron and protectour of the Commons of Rome. And when he was once gotten into that unrulie and seditious throng, hee presently himselfe set all on a hurrie, shewing the scarres

of his wounds received in the Veientians and Gaules warres, and in other services one after another  saying, that whiles he thus followed solderie, and rebuilded his house that was destroied, he became indebted, and that so deeply (by reason that the interest alwaies overgrew the principall which he by that meanes had paid and paid againe) that he was notable to creepe out of the usuters booke, but was plunged therin over head and eares. And now behold (quoth hee) by the onelie goodnesse of M. Manlius, I have the libertie againe to see the light of the funne, to behold the Common place, to looke my neighbours and fellow citizens in the face: at his hands I acknowledge to have received all the benefits that mine owne parents could give me: unto him I vow whatsoever in me is left, and in his quarrell to spend that little life and blood which remaineth in my bodie: and in one word looke what priviledge I may injoy in right of my countrie, and in the  communion of the gods, publike orprivate, the same do I impart and communicate with that one man. By these speeches the Commons were set on, and pricked forward mightily, as wholly devoted unto one person; and who but Manlius now in everie mans mouth? And presently in the nick he entred into another action that tended more effectually to marre all quite, and to set everie thing out of order. His land in the territorie of Veij, which was the chiese and capitall Manour of his inheritance, even the fairest flower of his garland, he set upon sale, causing it openly to be cried; and said withall, I will not o Quirites, so long as I have one foot of ground, or any thing else left, see one of you condemned and upon execution caried to prison. This set them so a flote, that they were readie, as it seemed, to follow him as the onely protectour of their liberties, in any action, were it right or wrong, they cared not which way, all was one with them. Besides at home in his owne house, he spared not to cast out slaunderous speeches against the Senatours  as if he had beene at the open Crosse, making Orations.
Amongst which, without all regard whether he spake true or false, he let fall these words, That the Senatours kept in hucker mucker certaine hidden treasures of the Gaules gold, and were not now contented to hold in possession the common grounds, but they would also embezle the treasure publicke, which if it came abroad, the Commons might soone be acquit and discharged of their debts. This gap being once laid o^en, and this light given the people, they thought (ye may be sure) an unworthie indignitie, that when there was gold to be levied for redemption of the cittie out of the Gaules hands, it then should be gathered by a generall contribution of all: and the same gold, now recovered from the enemies, should be as a prey in the clutches of a few. Therfore they followed instantly upon him and were verie earnest to know, where so great a masse of mony and stollen good was hidden. But  when he posted them off, and said he would in due time disclose all: they were not content, but setting all other matters apart, their whole care was emploied about this busines, and nothing else. So as it plainly appeared that neither he should reape a meane thanke if he reported a truth, nor incurre a small offence and displeasure, in case he told a false tale.
Things hanging thus in these doubtfull termes, the Dictatour who was sent for, returned from the armie into the cittie. The next day he assembled the Senate: and after he had throughly founded and felt the minds of them, that were there met, he commaunded the Senatours not to depart from him: and assisted as he was with that companie, he caused the yvorie chaire of estare to be set in the Comitium or common hall, and sent a serjeant for M. Manlius. Who being thus  peremptori^y summoned by the Dictatours expresse commaundement, gave warning by a token to his complices and favourites, that there was a broile and fraie toward: and with a mightie retinue of his followers, he presented himselfe before the Tribunal. On the one side, stood the Senatour, on the other the Commons: either part beholding their captaine, as it were in a pight field ready to joine battaile.The speech of (...) M. (...).
Then after silence made, Would to God (quoth the Dictatour unto Manlius) I ^ the Senators of Rome, might in all other things forr as well with the Commons, as I am assured, we shall agree all together about thee, and the matter which I shal aske and demand of thee. I see thou hast put the citie in some good hope, that by the Gauls treasure which the principall and chiefe of the Senators detain with them secretly hidden, all men may keepe their credit, and fully pay and discharge their debts. Which I for my part, so God me helpe, am so farre from h^ndering, that contraiwise I would exhort thee o M. Manlius, to ease the Commons of Rome  of the ^^^ers booke: to discover these fellowes and make them knowne, that gape so greedily after the common treasure, and to disappoint them, and turne them out of this their privie bootie. Which if thou doe not effect, either for that thy selfe wouldest have a sliece with them, or els because it is but a forged tale that thou hast made of thine own fingers ends, I will not faile, but

 commit thee toward, and suffer no longer the multitude upon a vaine and deceiptfull hope, thus by thee to be abused and disquieted.The answere of Manlius to the Dictatour. To this, Manlius made answere and said. I was nothing deceived but wist well enough, that a Dictatour was created not against the Volscians, who are enemies (forsooth) so oft as our great Masters thinke it for their purpose: nor against the Latines and Hernicks, whom they drive and provoke to rebellion by false and forged surmises: but against my selfe and the Commons of Rome. For now I see well, that the Dictator professeth to maintaine and beare out the Vsurers against the Commons: and that against my selfe, for the favour that the multitude beareth unto me, there is matter devised to charge me withall, and to procure my utter ruine and overthrow. Doth it offend and grieve you. in deed, o A. Cornelius, and you my Lords of the Senat, that the people thus stand about me on every side? Why doe not ye  every man for his part, by your good deserts devide asunder this companie, and draw them away with you from me? Namely, by your mediation and intercession, by giving your word for them, by ridding out of gives and prison your fellow cittizens, by saving them that are condemned, from being awarded to the thraldome of their creditours, and out of the overplus and superfluitie of your own living and goods, by relieving their present neede, and supplying their necessities? But what meane I to persuade you to forgo anything of your owne, and bestowe it upon them? Take another course with them, and make them another offer. Doe but deduct our of the principall debt, that which hath been paied, for consideration of the loane. You shall soone see that my retinue will make no greater shew, than any other mans els. But why am I the onely man so carefull of the cittizens and people? Certes, I can make no better answere hereunto, than  if one should aske me, wherfore I alone saved the Capitoll and the Cliffe? As I then yeelded my helping hand to all in generall, so will I now to my power relieve each one in particular. For as touching the treasure of the Gaules: the thing in it selfe being easie, this demaund of yours maketh hard and difficult. For what neede you aske me that which you know alreadie your selves? Why lay you not that open which is in your secret bosome, rather than to have it sifted and boulted out? but that there is some privie juggling, some cunning practise and packing therein? The more ye would seeme to have your leigerdemaine to be sought into and detected: so much the more, I feare me, ye will hide it even from the eies of those that are watchfull and quickfighted. And therfore am not I to be forced to reveale and shew where your stollen goods are: but you would be made, if you were well served, to bring them abroad into the view of the world. At  these words, the Dictatour commanded him to leave off these foolish flimflams and trifling shifts: urging him either to go through with his challenge and prove it true: or if he could not justifie it, to confesse that he had falsely slandered and wrongfully charged the Senat, and sought to bring upon them the ill will and hatred of men, for a vaine surmise and suspition of theeverie. But as he stoutly inferred and replied againe, that he would not speake at the pleasure of his enemies, not owed them any such service: he commanded him to be had away to prison and kept in bonds.
And as he was apprehended by the Officer,M. Manlius apprehended* o Iupiter (qd.he) Optimus Maximus, o Iuno Queene of heaven, o Minerva, with other gods and goddesses, that inhabit the Capitoll and the Castle; Suffer ye your Knight and Defender, to be thus tugged, misused, and evill entreated by his adversaries? And shall this right hand wherwith I defeated the Gaules, and drave them from your  chappels and shrines, be now pinnioned and manacled? There was no one man there, that saw and heard him, who could indure this indignitie. But this cittie, as most patient of all other citties to abide any just, righteous and lawfull commandement of the magistrate, contained her selfe and was content in some cases to be overruled: so far forth, that against the authoritie and absolute power of the Dictatour, neither the Tribunes of the Commons, nor the Commons themselves, durst either cast up their eies to looke awry, or once open their mouthes. But after Manlius was committed, it was for certaine knowne, that a great sort of the Commoners, changed their weede and put on their worst apparell and mourning array: many a man let his head and beard grow long, yea and a number of them with sad and heavie cheere, kept commonly about the Goale dore.
 Now when the Dictator triumphed over the Volscians, his triumph bred him more hatred and displeasure than honour and glorie: for it is commonly spoken, that he got it at home and not abroad, and triumphed over a cittizen not over an enemie: and this only wanted, (say they) to make up his pride to the ful, that Manlius was not led before his chariot. Wherupon ther was like to grow much scandale, and very sedition. For the appeasing and mitigation whereof, the Senate

upon a sodaine, without any motion made, of themselves became bountifull, and assigned  2000.Satricum made a (...) and (...). citizens of Rome to be sent to Satricum to inhabit as a Colonie. And to every man was set out two acres and an halfe of land a peice. Which the Commoners construed to be a matter of nothing, a smal boon bestowed upon a few, the very hire and reward for betraying Manlius. So that this proved a mischiefe for a remedie: and by this salve, the sore rather festered and rankled, than healed up, and the sedition thereby fretted more and more. For now the crewe of Manlius his followers made shew of greater mourning and heavinesse, in their vile clothes and sad countenance, after the guise of persons accused during the time of their troubles. And when the feare and terrour was once overblowne, by reason that the Dictatour after his triumph resigned up his authoritie,The seditious speeches of the (...) in the (...) of M. Manlius. then folks hearts were set at libertie and their tongues walked at will. Some were heard in open audience to upbraid the multitude and cast in their teeth, That it was their fashions  alwaies to lift up and advance their Protectours and Defenders into high places, and afterwards, in the very pitch of danger and point of downfall, to forsake and leave them destitute.
Thus was Sp. Cassius served, that sollicited the Commons to the division of lands: thus was Sp. Melius overthrowne, that put his hand to his purse, and at his own proper charges and expense, kept extreame famine from the hungrie chawes of the poore cittizens. Semblably, M. Manlius endevouring to deliver a great part of the cittie (drowned as it were and overwhelmed in debt) and to enlarge them and set them abroad at libertie, now for his paines is betraied unto his deadly enemies: so that the Commons doe feed and franke up, even for the shambles and butchers knife the fautors and maintainers of their weale and libertie. And ought in deed (say they) a Noble man, that sometimes had been Consull, thus to be misused, if he answered not to the good liking  and pleasure of the Dictatour? Suppose, he had overreached and made a lie afore, and so had not a present and readie answere at the time: was there ever any servant and slave, for leasing cast in prison and laid up in yrons? And how could they forget that night, which was like to have been the last night that ever the Romanes should have seene: that fatall night of their finall destruction for ever? Or how could they chuse, but have still in their eie the armie of the Gaules, clambring up the Cliffe Tarpeia? and how M. Manlius in person, so bravely beseene in his armour, all sweating, all bleeding, rescued and saved Iupiter himselfe in a manner out of the enemies hands? What? Did they thinke that with halfe-pound measures of wheat meale, they had su^^iciently recompensed the Saviour of their countrie? And whom they had well neare canonized amongst the holie hallowes of heaven, or at leastwise by his newe addition of (...)surname  made equal to Iupiter Capitolinus, was it well done to suffer him, imprisoned in chaines, lying in a darke dungeon, to draw his lively breath at the pleasure of the hangman? Was he alone able to succour you all, and are ye all not able to helpe him alone? Thus ceased not the multitude to exclaime and make their plaints, and would not depart from that place, no not all the night long, but threatned to breake the prison by force. Vntill such time as they got that remitted, which otherwise they would have wrested, and Manlius by an act of the Senate was released out of prison and enlarged. Whereby the mutinie was never the more ended, but rather a Captaine given them to maintaine the Sedition.
About the same time the Latines and Hernicks, the inhabitants also of the Colonie Circeia, and they of Velitre, who came to excuse themselves for the Volscian war, wherin they were charged  to have had their hands, and required to have the captives delivered, for to proceed against them, according to their owne lawes, had a heavie answere. But the Coloners received the sharper check and rebuke, because they being Romane citizens, were entred into that wicked plot and abominable action, to combine against their native countrie. And they were not only denied their prisoners, but also (wherin the Rom. dealt more favourably with the rest that were their Allies) were warned and commanded in the name of the Senat, to avoid and that with speede out of the cittie, from the sight and presence of the people of Rome; for feare least the priviledge of Embassage, provided for the securitie and safe conduct of forrainers and not of cittizens, should not serve to protect them. Now when the Sedition of Manlius was set on foote againe, somewhat before the end of the yeare the great assembly was holden for the Election  of Magistrates: wherein there were created Tribunes in Consuls authoritie Serg. Cornelius Maluginensis the second time. P. Valerius Potitas the second time. M. Furius Camillus the fifth time. Ser. Sulpitius Rufsus the second time, C. Papyrius Crassus, T. Quintius Cincinnatus the second time, all of Senatours calling.
 In the beginning of this year, peace they had with forrain nations; a matter very commodious both for the Senat and the Com. For the Com. in this regard, that being not called away by any musters, they had some good hope (especially having so mighty a champion) to be rid at once for ever of usurie. For the Senators again, because their minds being not distracted by any fear from abroad, might attend about curing and healing the intestine maladies at home. When both parts therfore were now more sharp set, and eagerly bent, they thoght out of hand to trie what would be done, and to make either a shaft or a bolt of it. Manlius calling the Com. to his house, devised with the principal heads of them both day and night, to bring in a change and alteration of the State: and fuller of stomacke, anger and gaule he was now a good deale than aforetime. Netled he was, the rather by his late disgrace and shame, who never before had ben touched in credit, nor tasted  of any reproch etcontumelie. Heart he took unto him, for that the Dict. durst not execute that rigor against him, which Cincinnatus Quintius had extended upon Sp. Melius: and it seemed unto him, that not only the Dict. sought to wind himself out, and in resigning up his room, to avoid the offence given by his imprisonment; but also that the very Senat was not able to endure the maner of proceeding. With these imaginations being pussed up and galled too, he failed not withall to prick forward and exasperat the minds of the Com. who of themselves alreadie, were kindled and set on fire.The seditious Oration of Mar^ Manlius to the Commons of Rome. And with these and such like speeches he entertained them. How long (quoth he) I pray you; wil ye be ignorant, and not know what ye may do, and what power ye have? A thing that nature it selfe would not have so much as the very dumbe beasts, but to understand. Doe but count how many you are in number your selves, and how few adversaries ye have against you.
If ye were but  one to one, yet (I would thinke) you should more eagerly strive for to maintain your libertie, than they, to set up their lordship. For, look how many favourites ye have ben, following and courting one patrone, so many shall ye now be opposed to one enemie. Make but shew only of war, ye shall have peace. Let them see you once readie to make head and offer violence, soone will they yeeld and part with their right. Either yee must adventure, all jointly together to doe somewhat, or else make account each one, to abide and suffer all. How long will yee stand looking from every side upon me? I for my part, surely, wil not faile any one of you. Look yee then to it, that fortune faile not me. I, even I, that was your redeemer and deliverer, was all at once (when it pleased mine enemies) taken downe and made no bodie. And yee, all of you, saw him led to prison, who saved every one of you from prison. If happily those mine enemies should attempt to do me more spight,  Where am I then? and what were I best to trust unto? Should I looke for that end that Cassius and Melius came unto? Yee doe well to signifie how you dread the osse, and wish the contrarie. And the gods forfend it should so come to passe. But look not that ever they should come down from heaven to protect mee. That mind they must give you, to preserve mee from so hard a hap, like as they gave me a resolute heart, both in mine armour to save you from barbarous enemies, and in my gowne to defend you from prowd cittizens. Is there so little courage in you (so mightie a people otherwise) as to thinke it sufficient, and to stand contented, if you may bee backed onely, and meet with some helpe against your enemies; and to know no other skusting with your adversaries (the Senators) but wherein you suffer your selves to be commanded in the end? This basenesse commeth not to you by kind. By use and custome onely, you are become their vassals  and subjects. For what is the cause yee are so courageous against your enemies abroad, that yee think it meet and reason to rule and govern them? No other in truth but this, because with them you have beene ever wont to strive for soveraignetie, whereas against these, yee have beene used rather, to make some slight prouse and triall what you may doe by your libertie, than to doe your best and to put your selves forth for to maintaine it and extend it to the most. And yet what manner of chiefetaines soever ye have met withall to lead you, and how soever affected ye have beene your selves, obtained yee have hitherto all things that yee shot at, were they never so great: Such was your might, or such was your felicitie. Wherefore now it is high time to give the adventure of greater matters also. Make but triall onelie of your owne good fortune, and of my selfe, whom I hope he have had happie experience of alreadie: with lesse adoe shall ye be provided of one  to overrule and commaund the Senatours, than ye have beene hitherto of those, that were to resist onely their imperious government. Downe we must with these Dictatorships and Consulships both, and lay them levell with the ground: that the comminaltie of Rome may once be aloft, and beare up the head. Bestirre your selves therefore, and play the men. Hinder processe and course of law for actions of debt. I professe my selfe a Patrone of the Commons, which name

my care over you, my faithfulnesse to you, hath indued me with. And if you please to entitle your  leader and captaine, with a more glorious (...) king.stile of honour and majestie, ye shall find it more potent and availeable to effect that which you long for and desire.(...) And so from that time forward, began some practise to set up the governement of a king: But neither who were the agents in this action, nor to what tearmes these plots proceeded, is it plainely ynough recorded. But on the other side, the Senatours sat in counsell, and debated about the Secession and secret meeting of the Commons in the privat house of Manlius, and that house, which stood (as it fell out) upon the castle hill: likewise of that imminent engine and fabricke, devised for the overthrow of the present libertie. Many were of opinion, and spake it alowd, That there was need of a Sirvilius H^l^, who not by commaunding a publicke enemie of the State to prison, would provoke him and make him more eager; but by dispatching of one wicked member out of the way, and cutting  him oft, might end this intestine and civile warre. But they came downe at length, and grew to a resolution, in words milder, yet in deed and effect all one, THAT THE MAGISTRATS SHOULD HAVE A CAREFULL EIE,A ^^me from (...) granted in great (...) of the State. THAT BY THESE MISCHEEVOUS PLOTS AND PRACTISES OF MAR. MANLIUS, THE COMMONVVEALE INCURRED NO DAMMAGE AND HURT. Then the Tribunes in Consuls authoritie, and the other Tribunes of the Commons (for even they also seeing, that in the losse of the publicke libertie of all, their power likewise should come to an end, had yeelded to be advised and ruled by the Senate) laid all their heads together, and consulted what course was best to bee taken. When as no man could be thinke of any way, but plaine violence and bloudshead (a peece of worke in all appearance, of great adventure and doubtfull hazard) then M. Menenuss, and Q. Publius, two Tribunes of the Commons stepped forth  and said:(...) What meane we to make that, a quarrell between the Senators and Commons, which the whole bodie united of the cittie, indeed should undertake against so dangerous and pestilent a member?
Why trouble wee our selves to set upon him and the Commons with him, whome by the meanes of the very Commons themselves, it were the safer course, and lesse offensive to a^i^ile? that being surcharged and overweighed with his owne power whereupon he presumeth, he may fall down^ and take his overthrow. Wee are fully minded to arrest him, to convent him judicially, and call him to his answere. Nothing is lesse popular, and more odious to the people, than to heare of kings government againe. The multitude shall not so soon see and perceive, that our quarrell is not with them, but that they shall become his competent Iudges, and passe upon him, who now are his advocates: also, that his accusers from out of the Commons, shall behold  one of the Nobilitie to hold up his hand at the barre, and the enditement framed, upon the crime of usurping the kingdome: but (be yee sure of it) they will tender and favour the faire looks and person of no man, before the cause of their owne free estate. When all the house liked well, and allowed of this advise and ouverture, they made no more ado but served Manlius with processe to answere at a day appointed. Which was not so soone done, but the Commons at the very first, began to storme and be enraged, especially when they saw the accused man, during his trouble so rufully arra^ed, accompanied with none of the Senators, nor so much as one of his kindred and affinitie, no nor his very brethren Au and T. Manlius. A thing before that day never seene nor knowne, but that in so great a danger as this was, the neerest kinsfolke in bloud, did change their weed. For even when Ap. Claudius was committed and imprisoned, C. Claudius his adversarie, yea, and the whole linage and name of the Claudij, were mournefully clad, and poorely apparelled. Now surely (say they) it is a very compact amongst them all, that this popular man, so gracious and welbeloved, should be confounded and overthrowne, because hee was the first that ever fell away from the Senatours to the Commons. When the day was come of his arraignement, I can find in no author, what was objected against the prisoner by his accusers, directly tending to prove the crime of aspiring to a kingdome, but onely the conventicles of the multitude, certain seditious words, his overmuch largesse, and his forged surmise and false information of the gold. I doubt not but there was matter of great importance, urged and enforced against him, seeing that the Commons delay in proceeding to his condemnation, was not long of his cause, but occasioned by the place onely.M. Marisus arrai^^ed, and ans^^^h for (...). This one thing seemeth worthie to be noted, and for all mens learning, that how notable and how great soever his honor, worship, and commendable parts were; the soule and cursed desire of tyrannicall rule, made not onely unpleasant and without grace, but also odious and detestable in the eies of the people. He brought forth, as it is reported, welneere foure hundred men, whome hee had laid out monte for gratts, and without any interest or consideration:

 those whose goods he saved from port sale, and kept from the bondage of their creditours, after they were condemned. O^er and besides; he not onely reckoned up, but shewed also in open sight, the honourable testimonies of his service in the warres: as the spoiles of his enemies by him slaine and disarmed, to the number of 30: giftes bestowed upon him by Generals in way of reward 40: amongst which were two goodly ^^shi^red in forme of the (...) of ^^^imurall garlands for scaling and entering upon the wals first: eight (...) the branches.civick coronets for saving the lives of citizens in danger. Moreover he presented there in place, the parties themselves in person, whom he had rescued out of the enemies hands: and amongst them he nomiminated C. Serviltus at that instant Generall of the horsemen, and now absent. And when he had rehearsed his noble feats of armes; and amplified them according to the height of their worthin a most glorious and eloquent Oration, as one  whose words were sutable and answerable to his deeds: at the last he stript his breast bare, and shewed the scarres there remaining of wounds received in the warres: and ever and anone looking to the Capitoll, eftsoones he called aloud upon Iupiter and the other gods, to helpe him now in this extremitie and peril of his state: and praied that the same mind which they had given him to defend the Capitoll cliffe, and even to the safegard of the people of Rome, they would vouchsafe the same people, in this distresse of his wofull calamitie: beseeching them both all and some, to looke up to the cliffe, and to the Capitoll, to turne themselves toward the gods there, an^so to proceed to judgement of him. All the whiles the people were cited and called by their Centuries, and the prisoner stretched forth his hands, and converted his praiers from men to the Gods; the Tribunes evidently saw, that unlesse they freed the eies of the people from  beholding the memoriall of so great a desart, it would never be that so long as their mindes were this forestalled and possessed with that benefit of his, they would find the enditement, were it never so true. So the matter being put off and deferred to another day the people were summoned to assemble in the grove Petelinus, without the gate Flumentana, from whence they might not have a sight of the Capitoll. There the accusation prevailed more than compassion, and the matter went against him: and so with hard and obdurat hearts, they pronounced a heavie and dolorous sentence, and which the verie judges themselves had in horror. Some there be that say there were Duumvirs ordained for the purpose, to make inquisition and sit upon this treason against the State. Thus being condemned, the Tribunes caused him to be throwne headlong downe the rocke Tarpeia. Which place was the selfe same that yeelded to that one man a monument and  memoriall both of singular glorie, and also of extreame punishment and ignominious death. After his death there remained two infamous markes behind him of shame: the one publicke, occasioned by his dwelling house. For wheras it was situate, where now the chappell and workhouse, or mint-house of Moneta standeth, an Act was proposed unto the people, That none of the Senatours linage should dwell on the cliffe or Capitoll mount. The other proceeding more properly from his owne line and kinred: For that by a generall decree of the house of Manlij it was provided, That none of that familie and race should ever after beare the name of M. Manlius. This was the end of him, who, but that he was borne in a free cittie, had beene a right worthie and renowned man.
But the people being now past all danger from him, calling to mind and considering without  all affection, his vertues as they were, found a misse of him shorly after. Yea and for the pestilence also which ensued soone upon, for that there could be no causes knowne of so great mortalitie, was imagined of many a man, to have growne upon the execution of Manlius: arguing thus, That the Capitoll was polluted with the blood of the saviour therof: and the gods tooke no delight and pleasure to have (as it were) presented unto their eies, the punishment of that man, by whose meanes their temples had beene delivered out of the hands of the enemies. Vpon this plague and scarcitie of corne withall, and the common brute that spread abroad both of the one and the other, there ensued the yeare following many warres, whenas L. Valerius the fourth time, A. Manlius the third time, Ser. Sulpitius the third time, L. Lucretius, L. Atmylius the third time, and M. Trebonius were Tribunes Militarie in Consuls authoritie. For besides the Volscians, who  by destinie were appointed for ever in a manner to busie and keepe occupied the Romane soldiours; besides the Colonies Circcia and Velitre, which a long time were about to rebell; besides Latium, that stood in doubtfull termes and was suspected, the Lanuvines also, who had beene a most fast and Ioiall cittie, all of a suddaine rose and became new enemies. The LL. of the Senate supposing all this grew upon contempt, for that the revolting of the Veliternes, who were

their naturall citizens, had so long time escaped punishment, decreed with all speed to move the  people to denounce and proclaime open warre against them. And to the end that the Commons might be more forward in this Militarie service, they created certaine Quinqueviri for the division of the Pomptine lands:(...) and Triumvir^ for the planting of a colonie at Nepet. Then they propounded unto the people, that they would appoint and determine of the warre to be (...). And notwithstanding the Tribunes of the Com.labored earnestly, but all in vaine, to dissi^^de, yet the tribes throughout generally grantedit, and gave their voices for warre. All that yeare passed in preparations onely, but no armie set forth by reason of the plague: which protracting of time and long delay, gave the inhabitants of the Colonies respite to sue unto the Senate for peace. Many of them were inclined and stood thus affected, to send a solemne embassage  with humble supplication to Rome: but that (as commonly it falleth out) the publicke perill was entangled and interessed with the jeoperdie of some private persons: and the authors of the backsliding and revolt from the Romans, fearing least they alone should beare all the blame and be delivered up as a sacrifice to satisfie the wrath of the Romanes, turned away cleane and alienated the Colonies from all consultation of seeking for peace. And not onely in their counsell house was this Embassage then crossed, but many of the Commons also they excited to invade the territories of Rome, to drive booties, and make spoile. This new wrong by them offered, cleane put them by all hope of peace. In that yeare was the first rumour raised, concerning the rebellion also of the Prenestines. And when the Tusculans, Gabines, and Lavicanes, into whose marches they had made inrodes, complained unto the Senate, and laid much matter against them, they received at their hands so calme and cold an answere, that it seemed they gave lesse  credit to their complaints, because these were not willing they should proove true.
The yeare following, Sp. and L. Papyrius, new Tribunes Militarie with Consuls authoritie, led the legions to Vei^^re, whose foure Colleagues, Ser. Cornelius Maluginensis the fourth ti^e, (...), C. Sulpitius, L. Aemylius the fourth time, were left Tribunes behind for defence (...); and for feare least they should heare some intelligence of new and fresh stirres out of (...), where they suspected all would be nought. At Velitre they had the better hand of (...) enemies: there they found more Prenestines well neere, that came to succour, than the (...) Coloners themselves. For the cittie was so neere at hand, that it both gave the enemies (...) to the (...) sooner, and yeelded them the onely place of safe refuge, after they were fled. (...) forbare to assault the towne, as well in regard of the dangerous enterprise, as also  (...) they thought it not good to hold fight to the utter destruction of that Colonie. Letters (...) to Rome with tidings of victorie, emplying more sharpe informations against (...) than the Veliternes. So by an Act of the Senate and assent of the people, there (...) warre against the Prenestines. Who in the yeare following joined with the Vol(...) by force wa^ Sa^^icum a Colonie of the people of Rome,(...) notwithstanding it was (...) defended by the townsmen even to the last. Where most beastly and cru^^ (...) their victorie upon those that they tooke prisoners, and put them to the sword. (...) tooke this in a verie ill part: and elected M. Furius Camillus Tribune Militarie the (...) time: who had for his companions in office, A. and Lucius Posthumius Regillensis, L. (...) and L. Lucrcius, and M. Fabius Ambustus.
The (...) warre was appointed to Camillus extraordinarily: and to assist him therein, it sell (...) L. Fari^^ his lot, one of the State-Tribunes, not so much for the good of the Commonweale, as to minister unto his fellow all matter of honour and renowne: as well in publike, ((...) that he set all upright ag^ine, which by the rashnesse of Lucius was fallen downe) as also in private, for that out of his errour and misdoing, Marcus Furius, rather sought for thanks and love at his hands, than aimed at any vaine glorie to himselfe. Camillus was now farre growne and (...) yeares and verie aged, and when in the assembly for Election, he was about to take the (...) os o^h, for to excuse his feeble and crasie bodie, the people with one consent would not permit him. Howbeit for all his age, he caried a lively spirit and lustie courage with him full: his senses were all fresh and sound: and the late civill affaires had stirred him up and gave him  anedge, who now had no great mind to manage martial exploits. So he gathered a power of four legions, consisting of 4000 a peece, and made proclamation that all his forces should be ready the next day, at the gate Esquilina, and then he put himself in his journy to Satricum. The enemie who had woon the Colony, nothing dismaid therat, and trusting in the number of his soldiors, wherein

 he had the better by ods, expected and staied his comming there: And so soone as he understood that the Romanes approched, forthwith came into the field, minding without delay to put it to an hazard and trie it out: presuming, that the skill of the Romanes general, were hee never so singular (in whom their enemies only trusted) would litle or naught availe, in regard they were so few in number. The Romane armie was as hote as they, and one of their Generals as forward every way. And presently without any stay, had they tried the fortune of a battaile, but for the pollicie and rule of one man; who by holding off, and protracting time of fight, fought so to help himself through good order and skill. But so much the more the enemie urged still, and was more sharp set: so as now he not onely raunged his men before his owne campe in battell array, but also set forward into the mids of the field: and advancing himselfe with ensignes displaied, neer unto the  trench and rampier of his enemies, made a prowd bravado and shew of his strength, whereupon he bare himselfe so confidently. This could the Romane souldiors hardly endure: and L. Furius one of the Tribunes Militarie, had more adoe by farre to digest and put up that at the enemies hand. And a venturous knight he was, both by reason of his youthfull yeares and naturall disposition: and also puffed up with hope of the multitude, which commonly taketh heart, and presumeth upon smallest grounds, and buildeth upon greatest uncertaine ties.
And the souldiours being of themselves alreadie hot ynough, he inflamed and set them more on fire, by elevating and making light of his fellowes reputation,L. Furius to hit souldiours. in regard of his old age, the onely thing that hee could alleage: giving out ever and among, that wars were for young men, that mens hearts flourished and faded as their bodies did; which was seene in Camillus, who of a most valourous and forward  warrior, was now become a draw-back and a temporiser, and one that would take his leasure: and he that was wont, so soon as he came to a place, with the first assault to win forts and strong towns, now within his mures and rampier sat stil and trifled out the time. And what hopes had he? Dreameth he, that either his owne power should encrease, or his enemies strength decrease? What occasion, what oportunitie of time, what place of vantage for ambush laid hee for? Tush, these policies and inventions of the good old man, are cold and clumsie, God wot. In faith, Camillus, as he hath lived long ynough, so hath he gained glorie ynough. To what purpose then (quoth hee) should we suffer the whole puissance of a cittie, which ought indeed to be immortall, for to age and waxe old with the bodie of one man, whom all men see to bee but mortall. With these and such like words he had drawne away the whole campe after him: and when from all parts thereof,  they called hard,L. Furius to M. Furius. and cried for battell; We are not able (quoth he) o M. Furius, to keepe in and represse any longer the violence of our soldiours: and as for the pride of the enemie, whose courage by our delaies wee have encreased, and who insulteth over us, it is intollerable. Giveplace then, you that are but one man, and yeeld unto us al. Suffer your selfe to be overcome with reason and counsell, that you may sooner overcome by force and armes. Hereunto Camillus made answere againe: What warres soever (quoth hee) unto this present day have by mine owne entire conduct,M. Furius his answere to L. Furius, and the soldiors: and sole direction been managed, neither can you nor the people of Rome denie, but that in them you never repented, either of my policie or happie successe. Now I know full well, that I have a companion joined with mee, in governement and rule of egall commission; for the prime and lustinesse of youth, much above me, and my better. And as to the armie, I have indeed  been used ever to commaund, and not to be commaunded: but yet my fellows authoritie, I cannot be against. Let him doe in gods name, what he thinketh good for the Commonweale, and Godspeed his hand. Onely in regard of mine old age I crave this favour, that I may not be set in the forefront: but for other devoirs, looke what an old man may or ought to doe in warre, therein surely I shall not faile. And this one thing would I crave at the hands of the immortall gods, that some notable mishap be fall not, to make my former counsell good and praiseworthie. But neither would men be ruled by his advise so profitable and wholesome, nor the gods vouchsafe to heare his praiers so holy aud devout. Then Lucius Furius, the author and principall persuader of battell, setteth the vauntgard in array. Camillus hee fortifieth the regiments and squadrons for supplie in the rereward: but above all, he placeth a strong guard before the camp. Himselfe took  up his standing on a higher place, to behold and marke the issue of another mans counsell. So soone as at the first brunt and encounter, they rustled and made a noise with their armour, the enemies for the nones (of policie, and not for fear) gave footing and lost ground. Now, there was behind them on their backe a pretie rising of an hill, betweene their campe and the battell: and by reason that they were well stored of men, they had left behind them in the campe certaine

strong companies armed and well appointed: with this instruction, that whiles both armies were  hard in fight, and when their enemies should come neere their trench and rampier, they might ^allie out on a suddaine upon them. The Romanes following out of measure upon the enemies as they reculed, were drawne upon the disadvantage of the ground, and gave occasion and fit opportunitie unto the enemie to issue out of the camp upon them. So the terror returned upon the supposed victorers, by reason both of the newsupplies of the enemies, and also of the fall and descent of the hill: and forced the battaile of the Romanes to give back. The Volscians that charged them from out of the campe, and were fresh and lustie, pressed hard upon them: they also that made as though they fled, began now to fight againe. The Romane souldiours forgetting now both their late lustinesse, and their auncient honour, retired not easily and softly in good order, but plaine turned their backes on all sides, fled amaine by heapes, and ran avie toward  their owne campe.M. Fu^^ Cas (...) to his soldio^^ ^^ying ^^ay.
Whereat Camillus being by them that attended about his person, mounted upon a good courser, and with all the speed he could make, opposing the squadrons of the rereward against the enemie: Is this (quoth he) the fight, you souldiours, that yee so called for? what God, what man can yee lay the weight on now? It was your rashnesse and foolehardinesse afore: and it is your dastardly cowardise now, and nothing els, that is the cause of all this. Followed yee have alreadie one Generall. Follow Camillus now a while: and as yee have beene alwaies wont by my leading, once more win the victorie. What looke you toward the hold and the campe? there is no comming thether, there is no being there for any of you without victorie. At the first they were ashamed, and staied themselves from farther flight: but after that they saw once the ensigns wheele about, and the squadrons turne againe, they made head, and charged the enemie amain. And the Generall himselfe, a man renowmedfor so many triumphs, and besides, for his venerable age so reverend, even amongst the formost ensignes, amid the greatest perils, and most distresses, advanced forth in person. Hereupon every one for his part, set the better leg forward, provoked his fellow withall, and encouraged one another, so as with a cheerefull and lively shout, the whole field rang againe. Neither was the other Tribune behind hand for his part: but being sent by his Colleague unto the horsemen (whiles he in the meane time marshalled againe the footemen in order) not by way of chiding (for what might he availe thereby, so long as hee was himselfe in fault as well as the rest?) but laying aside all lordly commaund, fell wholly to entreating, and besought them both all and some to quit themselves like men, and acquit him of the guilt and blame of that unluckie daies worke.^. Furius to his (...).
Indeed (quoth hee) when my brother Camillus would  not agree thereto, but expres^ely forbad, yet I chose rather to be partaker of the folly and rashnes of all, than the wisdome and sage advise of one. Camillus (come what will of it, speed you well, or speed you ill) ^eeth the glorie will be his: but I, unlesse the battell bee revived, shall take such part as you all, (a most miserable and pitious case) but the shame wil redound and light upon my head and none els. Well, at length they agreed, and thought it best to abandon their horses to bestow them among the waving and disordered companies, and on foot to make head upon the enemies. Thus they goe both together, as bravely minded with resolution, as they were richly and gorgeously armed. And in what part soever they saw the footmen most distressed, there wanted neither in the Generals nor in the souldiours, courage in the highest degree to fight it out lustily. Well was it seene by the happie event, that valourous endevors speed ever well. For the Volscians  the same way that erewhile they made semblance of giving ground upon a counterfeit fear, now fled in good sadnesse as hard as they could.The Volscians defeated. A great number both in the conflict, and after in the chase were slaine. As for the rest that remained in the campe, which presently at one brunt was woon, more of them were taken prisoners than killed. In the view and account taken of the captives, there were some of them knowne to be Tusculanes, who were shed apart from the rest, and brought before the State-Tribunes. And upon examination, confessed fla^ly, that they served by the publicke warrant of the cittie. Camillus herewith disquieted, for feare of warre from so neere neighbours, said hee would forthwith have those prisoners with him to Rome, that the Lords of the Senate might not be ignorant how the Tusculanes were revolted from their societie. In the meane while, his brother Tribune might, if he so pleased, have the regiment of the leaguer and  the host. That daies worke had taught him now, not to preferre his own waies before the better counsell of another. And yet neither he himselfe, nor any man els in the armie, thought that Camillus would quietly digest this fault of his, whereby the State of the Commonwealth was driven upon so dangerous a point of downefall. And as well in the hoast, as also at Rome, it was rise

 and currant in everie mans mouth: that wheras the fight with the Volscians was variable, and the service doubtfull: For the ill speed, the discomfiture, and the running away, L. Furius was all in fault: but for the good successe, Camillus onely had all the honour.
When the captives were brought into the counsell house, and the Lords of the Senat were of opinion and determined warre against the Tusculans, and had laid the charge thereof upon Camillus, he requested to have an assistant joyned with him in commission: and being left to his own choise to take whom he would of all his companions in office, contrarie to all mens expectation, he chose L. Furius. By which moderation of his affections, and good carriage of himselfe, he both delaied the infamie of his colleague, and wan himselfe great glorie and commendation. Yet for all this,The prudent dis^simulation of the Tusculans. proceeded not they to any warre with the Tusculans. For they by their  constant observation of peace, kept off the violence of the Romanes, which by force of armes they had not been able. When the Romanes entred and invaded their territorie, they went not so much as out of those places that lay neare the high way, whereas the enemie marched: they forlet not the tilling of their grounds, but kept the gates of their cittie wide open, came forth solemnly in their long gownes to meete with the LL. Generals in the waie, and brought victuals right courteously to serve the armie, as well out of the cittie as countrie. Camillus having pitched down his tents before the gates, and desirous to know, whether there were the same appearance of peace within the wals, as bare shew abroad in the countrie, entred the cittie: and seeing the dores standing open, the shop windowes up, all kinde of wares set out to sale upon the bulkes: the Crafts-men and Artisans busily every one occupied at his worke: the Gram^^er-schooles  ringing againe with a chirme of schollers, learning and saying their lessons: the streetes full of women and children amongst the other common people going too and fro about their busines: he could perceive no where about him any thing that carried a resemblance of fearefull men no nor so much as of those that made any wonder at their comming in that warlike order. Thus cast he his eies into every corner, seeking where this warre should be. For there was not so much as any token to be seene, either of ought removed out of the way, or brought in place, upon this present occasion: but all in so setled quietnesse and peace, as if they had scarcely heard any inkling or rumour of hostilitie.Camillus to th^ Senat of Tusculum.
Being therfore overcome with this patience and sufferance of the enemies, he caused their Senat to assemble, unto whom he spake in this wise: ye alone to this daie of all that I know, o??? Tusculanes, have found the only armour of proofe, and the forcible sense  indeed, to save your selves and all ye have from the Romanes yre. Go your waies to Rome unto the Senat there. The Lords of the counsell will weigh and consider, whither ye deserved more punishment before, than pardon now. I will not forestall and pick my selfe a privat thanke for a publike benefit. At my hands ye shall have this favour and libertie, to speake for your selves and plead your own cause: as the Senat shall thinke good, so shall your speede of your suit. After that the Tusculans were come to Rome, and their Senat (who but a while afore had been faithfull Allies and kept their allegeance) seene to stand waiting with heavie cheere and giving their attendance at the entrie of the court and counsell chamber: the Lords of the Romane Senate, were presently moved thereat, and caused them forthwith to be called in, and received by way of hospitalitie, more like than hostilitie. Then the Dictatour of Tusculum made this speech and said:  Right honourable Senatours,The Dictator of T^sculum to the Senat of Rome. we against to encounter your Generals and Legions, armed and appointed as ye see us at this present standing in the porch of your counsell house.
This was our array, this was the habit of our Commons, and alwaies shall be, unlesse at any time we shall put on armes for you and in your quarel. Thankes we yeeld to your captaines and to your armies, that they have beleeved rather their eies than their cares: and where they saw no hostilitie at all, there they offered none themselves. That peace which we have shewed and observed, the same crave we humbly still at the hands of your clemencie. Turne we beseech you from us your forces thither, where warre is to be found. And if we must needs make triall (by suffering ought) of your puissance and power bent against us, we will trie it surely without armour. This is our full resolution, God grant it prove as fortunate,  as it is well meant and proceeding from a single heart. As for the trespasses, whereupon ye were moved to denounce warre against us: although it be bootlesse and to no purpose to disprove that by words, which by deed is alreadie proved: yet surely, were they never so true, we thinke verely, that without prejudice to our selves, we may safely confesse the same; since that we have so evidently repented thereof. And for you, so long as you be worthie to have so full satisfaction made,

it skilleth not, what default or transgression be committed against you. Thus much in effect  spake the Tusculans. At the very instant they obtained peace: and not long after, the right of free burgeosie, to be made cittizens of Rome. So the Legions were withdrawen backe againe from Tusculum. Thus Camillus having won great honour by his pollicie and valour both, in the Volscian warre: by his happy successe in the journey of Tusculum: by his singular patience and cariage of himselfe, toward his companion in government, as well in the one place as the other, went out of his Magistracie: there being created Tribunes Militarie for the next yeare, L. Valerius the fifth time, and Pub. Valerius the third time. C. Servilius the third time. Licinius Menenius the second time. P. Papyrius, Serg. Cornelius Maluginensis.
There was this yeare neede of Censors also, by reason especially of the doubtfull rumors that ran concerning debts: whiles of the one side the Tribunes of the Commons did aggravate the  greatnesse therof, and made it seeme an odious matter: and they againe of the other side, did elevate and made little of the same, for whom it was good and beneficiall, that the lent mony should be thought abroad, in danger of being lost: for that (say they) the debtours cautelously rather would not, than for abilitie could not, keepe their credite and make paiment. So there were created Censors, C. Sulpitius Camerinus, Sp. Pohstumius Regillensis. And this matter now alreadie commensed, was broken off by the death of Posthumius, because it would have bred a scruple to chuse another Censor in the roome of him disceased. When Sulpitius therefore had resigned up his place, it fell out so that other new Censors upon some errour committed in their creation, exercised not their office: and to chuse a third time they made a scruple, so spice conscienced were they,The Tribun^e of the (...) the Senat. as if the Gods were not well pleased with that office for that yeare.
But the Tribunes  would not endure this deluding of the Commons, but gave it forth that it was intollerable: saying, That the Senat sought to avoid the exhibiting of publike records and bookes, which gave testimonie of the valuation of every mans substance to the worth: because they would not have the sums of debts to be seen and knowen; which might bewray and plainly shew, that one part of the cittie was even eaten up and devoured of the other: and in the meane time the poore Commons so deeply engaged, were packed away, and sent forth against these enemies and those: and now without all regard and discretion, they fought occasions to quarrell and make warre in every place. From Antium to Satricum, from Satricum to Velitre, from thence to Tusculum have your Legions been posted. And now forsooth, there is warre intended against the Latines, Hernicks and Prenestines: for hatred rather of the cittizens here at home, than of the enemies  abroad: and all to weare out the Commons with continuall wars, and to affoord them no breathing while within the cittie: that in time of rest, they might remember and thinke upon their freedome, keepe their roomes in common assembly, where they might yet at the length heare their Tribunes voice, pleading for the easement of usurie, and for a finall end of all injuries. But and if the Commons had the heart, and carried that mind with them, as to call to remembrance their auncestors libertie, they would suffer neither any cittizen of Rome to be awarded to bondage for debt, nor any musters to be taken, untill a view were made and just accompt had, of every man his debts, and some course taken for abating the same: that each man might know, what he had of other mens goods, what remained of his owne: whether his bodie were left free, or at the mercie of his creditour, to lie in cold yron and balefull prison. This hire and salarie of sedition, this reward once propounded aforehand, stirred up (you may be sure) a mutinie soon after. For whereas there were many adjudged to be bound unto their creditors, and the Senators had decreed new Legions to be levied, for the bruit and rumour that went of the Prenestine warres: both matters began to be hindred fortaking any effect, as wel by the Tribunes helpe as the Commons accord. For neither would the Tribunes suffer those that were comdemned to bee led to prison: nor yet the younger sort of the Commons, enter their names in the Muster master his booke. And the Senatours for the present, lesse minded the execution of judgment for the creditours behoufe, than the mustering. For why? Newes came alreadie, that the enemies had put themselves in their journey from Preneste, and were encamped in the Sabines countrie. And all this while, the very tidings hereof rather quickned and provoked the Tribunes  of the Commons to the broile that was begun, than frighted them any jote from it. Neither would any thing serve to quench the sedition in the cittie, untill the warre was come in manner to the verie walles. For the Prenestines had intelligence given them, that in Rome there was no armie gathered, no Generall certainly knowne: the Senators and Commons at jarre and

 together by the eares.The Pr^^^stine^ (...) of Rome. Their captaines hereupon, taking this vantage and opportunitie, with a running campe invaded, spoiled and wasted the fields all afore them as they went, and came with banners displaid before the gate Collina. Great feare was in the cittie, everie man cried Alarm, ran up to the wals to man them, and to the gates to ward them. And at the last they left their mutinies, turned to the wars, and created T. Quintius Cintinnatus Dictatour. He appointed for his Generall of horsemen, A. Sempronius A^atinu^. This was not so soone voiced abroad (so great a terrour went alwaies with that magistrate) but the enemies withall dislodged and departed from the wals: and the yonger sort of the Romanes, without any hasting and drawing backe, upon the proclamation, gathered together. Whiles forces were thus a raising at Rome, the enemies pitched their camp not farre from the river Allia: and as they harried the country allabout,  they bragged and vanted among themselves, that they had gotten that very plot of ground, which was ever fatall to the destruction of the cittie of Rome.
Here will be (say they) the like fight, from hence will they flie, no doubt, as sometimes they did before in the Gaules warre. For if the Romanes feared that dismall and unluckie day, noted with the infamous name of this place; how much more will they dread the river Allia it selfe, in memoriall of their so great overthrow, than the onely bare day Alliensis? Certes, when they are come hither, they will thinke they see againe the grimme lookes, and heare the hideous voices of those savage Gaules. Thus rolling and tossing with themselves these toyish conceits, rising of as vaine and foolish presumptions, they tested wholly and reposed their full hope in the luckie persuasion only of the place. The Romanes contrariewise knew full well, that their enemies the Latin^s, were (wheresoever they were) the verie  same men still, and no other, whom for the space of one hundred yeares, they held peaceably and quietly as their devoted vassals in subjection. And as for the place noted in deed, for the memoriall of that late diffeature and losse sustained, it might rather stirre them up and set an edge upon them to abolish and cancile the remembrance of that shamefull disgrace, than put them in feare, that anie ground should be so unfortunate, as to be a barre unto their victorie. Nay if the verie Gaules themselves came now in their way, they would so fight with them even in that ground, as they did at Rome, in the recoverie of their countrie: as they did the morrow after at Gabij: when they bare themselves so valiantly, that no one enemie that entred within the wals of Rome, wen^ever home againe to tell newes how they sped, well or ill. Thus on both sides being resolute, and couragiously bent, they met at Allia. The Romane Dictatour discovering  the enemies arranged in battaile array,T. Quintius (...) to A. (...). within sight. See you not (quoth he) o??? A. Sempronius, how they have staied at Allia, presuming upon the luckines of the place? No surer confidence no greater helpe may they have, I pray God.
But you, with trustie armour, keene weapons, and doubtie courage, set spurres to horse, gallop amongst the thickest of their maine battaile with your horsemen. I, with the legions on foot, will advance mine ensignes, and display them, in their faces, and charge them hotely when they are disbanded ones, and put in fear. Assist us now, and aid us, o ye gods (the witnesses of our league) and punish them duly for their deserts, both in dishonoring your divine majestie, and deceiving us in your name, whom they called solemnly to witnesse. Neither horsemen nor footmen, could the Prenestines abide, but at the very first shout and shock were the rankes broken. And seeing their battaillons in no place whole and kept together, they  fled: and amased as they were in that confused feare, and carried away beyond their owne camp, they staied not running for life, untill by good footmanship they were come within the fight of Preneste. There, all such as had beene scattered in the flight, met together, and chose a plot of ground to fortifie in that hast as well as they could: least peradventure, if they had put themselves within the towne, forthwith their villages should have been fired, and after all consumed and spoiled, the towne also might fortune to be besieged. But when the Romane Conqueror after the rifling of their campe at Allia, was once come toward them and discovered, they abandoned that fortalso, and gat within the towne Preneste, thinking themselves scarce safe ynough within the wals thereof. Eight townes besides there were under the seignorie of the Prenestines, against which the Dictatour warred round: and having woon them all, one after another without  much ado, he brought his armie against Velitre, and got that towne also by assault. Then came hee to the principall head and very seat town of the warre, Preneste* which was not by force woon, but by surrender yeelded up into his hands. And T. Quintius thus having obtained one victorie i
n a pight field, woon two campes and holds of the enemies, conquered by force nine townes, and regained Preneste surrendred unto him, returned home again to Rome. In his

triumph he carried aloft the Image of Iupiter,Iupiter Imper^tor. surnamed Emperour, which he brought from Preneste, and set it up in the Capitoll, where it was placed and dedicated betweene the shrines of Iupiter and Minerva: and in a table of brasse fixed under it, was the monument of this noble exploit recorded and engraven in these or such like words: T. QUINTIUS DICTATOUR, BY THE GRACIOUS HELPE OF IUPITER, AND ALL THE REST OF THE GODS, VVAN NINE TOVVNES. So on the 20 day after his creation, he resigned up his Dictatorship.
Then was the assemblie holden for electing of Tribunes Militarie with Coff. authoritie, who were equally chosen from out of the Nobilitie and the Com. Of Nobles were created, P. and C. Manlius, with L. Iulius. The Commons yeelded C. Sextilius, M. Albinus, and L. Antislius. Vpon the two Manlij, for that in bloud and degree they were above the Commoners, and for favour  more gracious than Iulius, the province of the Volscians was bestowed extraordinarily, without casting lots, or parting together by agreement of the Colleagues amongst themselves. Which both they themselves rued, and the Senators also (that would have it so) repented afterwards. For without any espials, sent out aforehand to scoure the coasts, they had set forth certain cohorts or companies (of footmen) a forraging, and when upon a false al'arme that those were beset and intrapped, they marched themselves apace after, to their rescue and convoy, and kept not with them still, the reporter of these tidings (who being indeed a Latine and an enemie, but disguised in the habit of a Roman souldier, had deceived them) they fel headlong into a traine and ambushment laid of purpose for them. And whiles they made resistance with main force onely, in a ground of great disadvantage (giving and taking the like measure) they were killed and slaine on either side. But in the meane time their enemies from another quarter, entred the campe of the Romans, lying  open in the plain. Thus in both places, things went but badly and untowardly, and all through the rashnes and unskilfulnes of the leaders. And what remained unfoiled for the fortune of the people of Rome, that, was preserved by the hardie and resolute valor of the Roman souldiers only, without the helpe of generall and commander. Vpon which news reported at Rome, at the first it was thought good to chuse a Dictator: but afterwards when tidings came, that all was whole, and the Volscians quiet, and that it was well seene they knew not how to use a victorie when they had it, nor to take the oportunitie of the time, whiles it offered it selfe; both the Generals and the armie were sent for home from thence, and so, for the Volscians they were at rest afterwards. Onely in the very end of the yeare, there arose some new stir and suddain tumult, by reason that the Prenestines having sollicited the people of the Latines, entred into rebellion againe. In the same year  the men of Setia made mone of themselves for want of people, and thither new Coloners were assigned to inhabite there.
Albeit the Romanes sped but badly in warres, yet the quietnesse at home was some comfort: which the Tribunes Militarie chosen from out of the Commons had procured, by reason that they were so gracious and reverenced among those of their owne coat and faction. All the beginning of the yeare following, was at the first on a light fire with hore discord and mutinie, when Sp. Farius, Q. Servilius the second time, Licinius Menenius the third time, P. Cloelius, M. Horatius and L. Geganius were Tribunes Militarie with Consuls authoritie. The matter and cause of which seditious broiles, were the debts above specified. For the due inquisition whereof, and to know  to what sums they amounted. Sp. Servilius Priscus, and Q. Cloelius Siculus were made Censors, but stopped they were for doing any thing, by occasion of warres. For first fearefull messengers in all hast brought word, and after, the flight of the countrie people confirmed it, that the legions of the Volscians were entred into the confines, and fell to spoiling everie where the territorie about Rome. Notwithstanding which feare and forraine terror, so little were the civill discords appeased, that contrariwise the Tribunes of the Commons extended their power with more violence to hinder the levie of soldiours, untill they had indented and capitulated with the Senatours, that so long as the warres lasted, no man should either contribute and be charged with any impost, or be sued in any action of debt. When the Com. took hold once of this easement and libertie, the musters were delaied no longer. And after they had levied and enrolled two new legions, it was thought convenient that the legions should be devided, and two armies sent forth into  the Volscians countrie. So Furius and M. Horatius, went on the right hand along the sea coast to Antium. Q. Servilius and L. Geganius on the left hand, by the way of the mountains to Ecerra. But on neither side met they with the enemie. Whereupon they fell to harrying the countrey, not here and there in scattering wise, as the Volscians had done, after the maner of robbers, at starts

 upon advantage taken of their enemies discord, and by stealth for feare of their valour: but being a ful power and armie of men, and justly provoked to anger, the longer they continued there, the fouler worke they made. For the Volscians standing in feare, least in the meane while they should be encountred with a power from Rome, had made rodes only into the utmost frontiers. But contrariwise, the Romanes made stay in the enemies land, the rather to traine them forth, and draw them to a field-fight. Having therefore burned up, in a manner, all the uplandish houses and graunges, and some villages also, and left behind them no fruitfull tree standing, nor the sowne corne for hope of graine, and driven away whole booties of men, women, and cartell, which they could light on without the wals; they reduced their armies of both sides home again to Rome. In this meane while the debtors had some little respit to breath themselves in. But so  soone as all was quiet from enemies abroad, they began afresh to be sued and troubled by their creditours at home. And so small hope they had to bee released of their old usurie, that they fell into a new, by reason of a contribution collected toward a well, which the Censors had set out to bee made of square Ashler stone. To yeeld unto this imposition and burden, the Commons were driven, because there was no muster for the Tribunes of the Commons to hinder. Forced they were likewise through the might and power of the great men, to admit for Tribunes militarie, all of the Nobilitie, to wit, L. Aemylius, P. Valerius the fourth time, C. Veturius, Servius Sulpitius, L. and C. Quintiij Cincinnatij.
By the same strong hand also they prevailed so much, that without impeachment of any man; all the younger sort tooke the militarie oath, so that they levied three armies against the Latines  and Volscians: who joining their legions together, had encamped themselves at Satricum. One armie was gathered for the defence of the cittie: another to be set out against all suddaine wars, if happily elswhere some tumult should arise: and a third, of all other the strongest, was under the conduct of P. Valerius, and L. Aemylius, led to Satricum. Where, finding the enemies embattelled in good array upon a plaine and even ground, they charged upon them presently. But ere that they had gotten the victorie evidently in sight, and were but only in some good hope of having a fair day of their enemies, the raine so poured down with huge storms and tempests, that it parted both hosts asunder. The morrow after began a fresh conflict. And for a good while, the legions of the Latines especially, which by long alliance with the Romanes had learned their manner of warfare, stood to it as valiantly, and sped as fortunately as the Romanes. At length, the Romane  horsemen that rode in amongst them, brake their ranckes; and when they were once disarraied, the footmen displaied their ensignes, and advaunced upon them: and looke how much the Romanes battaile set forward, so much the enemies gave backward. But when they began once to faint in their fight, than the violence of the Romanes was intollerable. Thus the enemies were discomfited and scattered: and flying not toward their campe, but to Satricum, which was two miles off, they were by the horsemen especially beaten downe, trode underfoot and slaine. Their tents were taken and rifled. From Satricum they dislodged, the next night after the battaile was fought, and marched in great hast (as if they fled) to Antium. And albeit the Roman armie followed them by the trackes hard at heeles, yet their footmanship served them better in their feare, than it did the Romanes, for all their anger. So the enemies put themselves within the town wals,  before the Romanes could overtake them, and either cut off the taile of their rereward, or force them to stay. After this, some daies were spent in wasting the countrie. For neither were the Romanes sufficiently provided with warlicke engines of batterie and artillerie to assaile their wals, nor they well appointed to abide battaile in plaine field. Then arose some discord within the towne, betweene the Latines and the Antiates. The Antiates, of one side wearied with calamities that follow long warres, wherewith all their life time they had been exercised even to their old age, were of mind to yeeld. The Latines, by reason of their late revolt and rebellion (whiles after so long peace, their courages continued yet fresh) were more forward and earnest to maintaine warres stil. But when they saw on both sides that they might do as they purposed, and follow their owne designements, without being hindred one of another, their strife was soon ended. So the  Latines leaving their fellowship and societie of peace, so unhonest and dishonourable (as they thought it) departed from them, and stood out still to revenge their owne quarrels. But the Antiates being well rid of these Counsellors of theirs, so crosse unto all wholesome courses, tending to their good and safetie, yeelded up their towne and countrie to the Romanes. But the anger and furiours rage of the Latines, for that they could neither annoy the Romanes by

warres, not keepe the Volscians still in armes, brake out thus farre, that they fired the cittie  Satricum, which had been the first place of refuge, after their defeature and unhappie fight. Neither left they any house in that cittie standing, but set fire upon all indifferently, as well profane as holy aedifices: onely the Church of Dame Matuta they spared. From which, it was neither any religion and conscience of their own, nor feare of the gods that kept them, but (as men report) a fearfull voice heard out of the Temple with heavie threates, unlesse they held their hands, and kept them farre enough from burning the sacred habitations so impiously. In this rage and mad fit of theirs, to Tusculum they go: for very spight that they forsaking the generall counsell of the Latines, had not onely yeelded themselves to be in league with the Romans, but also became incorporate citizens with them. And comming upon them on a sodaine, while their gates were open, at the first shout the whole towne, all but the Castle, was surprised. The  townesmen with their wives and children were thither fled: and sent messengers to Rome with certificat to the Senat of this sodaine and unlooked for accident. And with all speed (as appertained to the fidelitie of the people of Rome) an armie was led to Tusculum: wherof L. Quintius and Servius Sulpitius, had the conduct. At Tusculum they found the gates fast shut against them, and the Latines, as men both besieging and besieged. And whiles of the one side they intended the defence of the wals, on the other side assaulted the castle, at one time they were affraid themselves, and put others in fear likewise. But the comming of the Romans wrought a great change and alteration in the hearts of both parties. For it caused the Tusculanes of fearfull men to become exceeding cheerefull: and the Latines who made full reckoning to win the fortresse out of hand, as being masters alreadie of the towne, had but small hope now to helpe and save themselves. The Tusculans they set up a great shout from the Keepe: and answered it was againe with a greater from the Romane armie. The Latines were put to it hard on both sides: For neither were they able to abide the violence of the Tusculans running downe the hill upon them, not to put by and keepe off the Romans, comming hard under the wals, and assaying to breake the bars of the gates. First they scaled the walles and gat upon them: after, they brake the port-cullies downe. Thus the Latines environed with enemies both before and behind, that pressed fore upon them, having neither strength enough left to fight, nor roome of ground to make an escape, were slaine in the midst between the enemies, every mothers sonne. So when Tusculum was recovered out of the enemies hands, the armie was brought backe againe to Rome.
But the more quietnesse there was that yeare without the cittie by reason of prosperous wars, the more encreased the violence and hard dealing of the Senatours within: and the calamities of the Commons grew every day more than other. For they wanted meanes and were not able to paie for the interest that needs must be paid. When nothing therfore was to be had, to make paiment out of their goods, they were adjudged and awarded to satisfie their creditours in their bodie and name: and so their punishment served in steed of keeping their credit and discharging the consideration. Wherupon, not only the meanest of the Commons, but also the very chiefe, began now to let fall their hearts and to stoupe so low, that there was not a wittie and nimble headed man and of experience amongst them, that would put himselfe forth to stand to be a Tribune Militarie, in concurrence with the Nobles, (which they had so earnestly shot at and laboured for) no nor so much as to beare and sue for any offices of the Commons. So as the Senators  now, seemed to have recovered againe for ever to themselves, the possession of that dignitie, which the Commons of late, for some few yeares, had usurped and occupied over their heads. But that this other side might not joy too much hereat, a finall occurrent hapned betweene which (as it falleth out most commonly) gave the occasion and first footing to an enterprise of much importance.
M. Fabius Ambustus a great and mightie man, as well amongst those of his owne calling, as also with the Commons, (whom he was reputed never to despise, as other did of his condition and estate) had two daughters married forth: the elder unto Servius Sulpitius: the younger unto C. Licinius Stolo, a man verily of good worth and reckoning, but yet a Commoner. And Fabius disdaining not this alliance and affinitie, wan himselfe much love and favor among the Commons. Now it fell out so, that these sisters were upon a time together in the house of Servius Sulpitius, then, Tribune Militarie: and as they passed the time away (as the manner is) in much good talke, discoursing one with another of many matters, it chanced that a Sergeant or verger of Sulpitius, at what time as he was comming home from the Forum or common hall, rapped as

 the order was, with his rod at the dore. When the younger Fabia not acquainted with those fashions, was thereat somewhat amazed, her sister making a wonder at her ignorance, laught her to scorne. But that laughter (as womans mindes, god wot, are soone kindled with a little) set her a worke and hammered in her head. Besides, the traine of many that came about her, weighting and giving attendance, readie to know her pleasure and what she would, mended the matter much. I suppose she thought her sister happily wedded, and repented her owne marriage; upon an ill and s^ister judgment, whereby every man repineth that his neighbour and nearest of kin especially, should go beyond him and doe better then he. Vpon this discontentment and fresh heartburning of hers, her father haply seeing her dismaid, asked her whether all were well at home? But when she would have turned the cause of her griefe another way, (for that it stood  neither with her love and kindnesse towards her sister, to envie her estate; nor yet with the reverent honour that she was to yeeld unto her husband, to finde fault with her owne) he with milde questioning came about her so, that he drew from her the truth: so as the confessed her griefe to arise upon this, that she was disparaged; and namely married not according to her qualitie, but into an house uncapable both of worship and favour. Then Ambastus, comforting his daughter, willed her to be of good cheere, and said, That ere it were long, she should see the same state, the same advancement and dignitie at home, which she had seene alreadie in her sisters house. Hereupon began he to plot with his sonne in law, joyning also unto them L. Sextius, a stout young man, and one that was like enough to come to preferment, but that he was not of noble race. Good occasion and opportunitie they seemed to have of compassing some alteration in the  State, by reason of the excessive debts that men were grown into: for the redressing and easing of which maladie, the Com. had no other hope, but in advancing some of themselves into the soveraign room of government. They thoght it needful therfore, presently to addresse themselves to the execution of these designments, considering that by endevour and industrie, the Commoners were climbed to that degree alreadie, from whence if they would enforce and put themselves forward, they had but one step more unto the highest, and might be equall with the Nobles, as well in honour as in vertue and prowesse. And for the present, it was thought good to make them, two Trib. of the Com. in which office they might open a way unto themselves, for other dignities. So C. Licinius and L. Sex. proposed laws, all tending to abate the power and might of the Nobles, and wholy for the good and benefit of the Com.The lawes of Licinius and Sextius. One, as touching taking order for debts: That when  so much was defaulked and deducted out of the princip
al, as had been paied for the use and interest, the residue should be discharged by even portions in 3. years. A second, concerning a proportion and quantitie of lands, That no man might hold in possession above 500.acres. The third, That from thenceforth there should be no Election of Trib. Militarie, but of Coss. provided alwaies, that one of them be chosen out of the Com. Matters all of right great weight and consequence, and such as without exceeding strife and contention, could not possibly be carried and obtained. Thus when all those things at once lay a bleeding, and were in hazard to be lost, which the whole world unmeasurably coveteth and longeth after, to wit, land, money, and promotions: the Senatours were put in a bodily feare, and began to startle. And laying their heads together both in publike consultation and private conference, they could devise no other remedie, but that  which in many bickerments alreadie they had tried, namely, the stepping betweene and negative voice of
 some of the Tribunes. And so, to crosse those bils aforesaid put up by these two Tribunes, they had wrought and made to their purpose certaine of their own brotherhood. Who so soone as they saw the wardes or tribes called forth by Licinius and Sextius, to give their suffrages, being well backed and garded with the assistance of the Senators, would suffer neither those lawes to be read, not any other besides (as yearely they used) to passe by the voices of the Commons.
Thus the two Tribunes aforesaid, having oftentimes (but ever in vaine) assembled the people together, and seeing their lawes still nipped, as it were, in the head for ever going forward; It is very well (quoth Sextius) and since yee like so well that these Inhibitions may prevaile so much: we will likewise defend the Commons with the same weapon and no other. Go to now  my masters of the Nobilitie, proclaime an Election for the creation of Tribunes Militarie: I will make I trow, that this word [I forbid. It was the negative voice of the Tribunes.Vcto] shall doe your selves no good at all: howsoever now yee take so great pleasure to heare our brethren keepe that note still, and evermore sing that sweete concert of musicke. And surely, those threats proved in deed to good earnest and tooke effect. For there was no Election at all but of Aediles and Tribunes, and those both of the Commons.

For Licinius and Sextius being chosen Tribunes againe, suffered no Magistrates of the Chaire  or of State, to be created. Which defect and desolation of soveraigne Magistracie continued in the cittie for the space of five yeares: whiles the Commons for their part chose the same two Tribunes still, and they againe ever laid a barre and put in a caveat, against the Election of Tribunes Militarie.
All other wars, as good hap was, were a sleepe for the time. The Coloners onely of Velitre, upon so long rest and quietnesse began to be lustie and wax wanton: and for that there was no armic of the Romanes stirring abroad, they not onely made inrodes sundrie times into the territorie of Rome, but also assailed the towne Tusculum. And when the Tusculanes, the ancient Allies and new enfranchised citizens of Rome craved helpe, the Senatours and Commons both, were moved especially for very shame to succor them. And the Tribunes of the Commons yeelded  at length, and permitted an assembly for Election, to be holden by an Interegent: and Trib. Military there were created L. Furius, A. Manlius, Ser. Sulpitius, Ser. Cornelius, A. and C. Valerij. Who found not the Commons so tractable in the mustering, as they were pliable in giving their voices at the Election. Yet, after much adoe and great contention they levied an armie, and set forward on their journey: drave the enemies not from Tusculum onely, but forced them within their own wals: besiedged Velitre more streightly a great deale, and in more forcible manner, than Tusculum had been by them. Howbeit, they that began the siege were not able to win the towne. For before that time, were new Tribunes Militarie chosen, Q. Servilius, C. Veturius, A. and M. Cornelius, Q. Quintius, M. Fabius. Neither performed these Tribunes any notable exploit at Velitre. But the State at home stood in more dangerous termes than before. For besides that Sextius and Licinius, the publishers of those lawes aforesaid, were now the eighth time made Trib. of the Commons againe, Fabius also a Tribune Militarie, Stolo his wives father, was seene openly in the action, to set forward and persuade for the same lawes, which in verie deed himselfe had devised. And whereas at the first, eight of the Colledge or companie of the Tribunes of the Commons, had crossed the proceeding of them: now there were but five left that shewed themselves, and those (as commonly they vse to doe that disband from their owne faction) like men bestraught of their wits and amased, being indeed the tongues and trunkes that others spake by, pretended and made allegations in their prohibition, onely as they were schooled and taught their lessons at home: (to wit) That a great sort of the Commons were in the army at Velitre and absent, and that the solemne session or assembly for enacting laws, ought to be adjourned untill the returne  home of the soldiours: to the end that all the Commons generally, might give their voices concerning their owne commoditie and benefit.(...) Li (...) against (...).
Sextius and Licinius with part of their brethren Tribunes, and M. Fabius one of the Tribunes Militarie, being their owne craftsmasters, knew well enough by so many years experience, how to mannage and handle the mindes of the Commons: and plied the chiefe of the Senatours (produced forth before the people) so hard, with intergatories of everie particular that was proposed, that they wearied and tired them out. Demaunding, how they could require to be allowed themselves top ossesse more than 500 acres a man; whereas the Commons had but two a peece devided amongst them? Whether that everie one of them might in equitie hold the lands, well neere, of three hundred citizens: and a commoner to have hardly ground enough for to build him a necessarie house upon, and to  serve for a place to burie his dead? Also, whether their will and pleasure was that the Commons oppressed with usurie, should yeeld their bodies to beare yrons and suffer torment, unlesse they paid theinterest before the principall? And that daily by whole companies they should be had away from the barre, condemned to thraldome; and Noble mens houses to become goales, filled and pestered with prisoners? And wheresoever a Patritian dwelt, there should be a private prison? These indignities and piteous matters to be heard, when they had with a loud voice charged upon them, even before those that were affraid of the like measure themselves; with more indignation and disdaine of all that heard them, than they themselves shewed in the uttering and deliverie: But these Senators say they (and that they redoubled) will never make an end either of getting more land still into their hands, or spoiling and undoing the Commons with usurie, untill the Commons make once out of their bodie one Consull, for to be the maintainer and protectour of their libertie. As for the Tribunes of the Commons, they were now just nothing set by: as who by their priviledge of Inhibitions and negative voices, spoiled themselves and overthrew their owne power. And never will there be any indifferent and equall course taken,

 so long as the Nobles keepe the soveraigne place of commaund, and the sword to strike whiles the poore Commons have onely the buckler hand to ward all venues. For unlesse the government be parted betweene both alike, the Commons shall never have their due and equall portion, in the Commonweale. Neither is it reason that any man should stand contented with this onely, that in the Election of Consuls, the Commons are eligible and capable of the dignitie: for in case, it be not concluded absolutely, that one Consull at the least shall be of necessitie a Commoner, there will never be any at all. Have yee forgotten alreadie (say they) that notwithstanding an Act made, That there should be Tribunes Militarie created rather than Consuls, for this intent, that Commoners might aspire and reach unto the chiefe place of honour; yet for all that in 44 years space, there was not so much as one of the Commoners chosen Tribune  Militarie? And will any man beleeve that they will of their own accord conferre upon the Commons (when otherwise they may chuse) that dignitie in the disposing onely of two places, who were ever wont in the making of Tribune Militarie, to take up eight roomes all wholly to themselves? And will they allow them a way unto the Consulship, who thus long have held the (Consular) Tribuneship so guarded, as no man might have accesse thither but themselves? Nay it must be gotten by a positive law, which in their assemblies for Election, by favour and grace might not be obtained. One of the Consuls roumes must be set aside, past all peradventure and question, and that for a Commoner, to enter into. For as much as if it stand still upon a choise, the mightier man will ever go away with the game cleere. And whereas heretofore they have been wont to alledge and say, That the Commons affourded not sufficient and able men to beare  the offices of the chaire and of state: that, now can not be truely objected. Forwas the Commonweale, I pray, you more slackly and negligently governed upon the (Consular) Tribuneship of P. Licinius, Calvus (who was the first Commoner that ever was made Tribune Militarie) than it was ruled for those yeares space, in which there was not a Tribune Militarie but of the Nobilitie? Nay, on the contrarie side, it will be justified that some of the Nobles were condemned after they were out of their Tribuneship, and not one of the Commoners. And whereas not many yeares past, we began to make Questors or Treasurers out of the Commons, like as we did Tribunes Militarie, the people of Rome repented never of the choise of any one of them. It remaineth now, that the Commoners beare the office of Consuls too. That were a fortresse of their libertie, that were a strength and sure hold to trust unto. If they were once come and slept  to that degree, then may the people of Rome thinke assuredly and be persuaded, that the KK. are banished indeed out of the cittie, and their freedome fully established for ever to endure. For, from that day forward shall the Commons be partakers of all those things, wherein the Nobles now surpasse them: namely, soveraigne rule and authoritie, martiall renowne, parentage and Nobilitie: great ornaments doubtlesse, unto themselves to enjoie heere in this life: but farre greater to leave behind them unto their children and posteritie. These and such like Orations when they saw to be plausible, and willingly accepted, they preferred a new Statute, That in steed of the two Duumvirs for holy ceremonies and matters of the Church, there might be chosen 10 Decemvirs, Provided alwaies, that one part of them should be created forth of the Commons, and another from among the Nobles. The Session for enacting of  all those lawes, they deferred untill the armie was returned, which lay then at the siege before Velitre.
But the yeare was come about and fully expired, before the legions were reduced home from thence: and by that meanes the whole businesse about these new lawes, hung still in suspence, and was put off unto the entrance of the new Tribes Militarie. As for the Tribunes of the Commons, the Communaltie chose the same againe, even those twaine who had beene the proposers of those lawes. And the Tribunes Militarie were these, T. Quintius, Ser. Cornelius, Ser. Sulpitius, Sp. Servilius, L. Papyrius, L. Veturius. Presently in the beginning of the yeare, they put it to the verie jumpe and finall triall what should become of those lawes. And when as the Tribes were called, and none of the Tribunes collegues stepped betweene to stop the proceeding of the lawgivers:  the Nobles were affraid, and ran unto their two last helpes, to wit, the highest and absosolute office, and the greatest man among them. They thought it good therfore to create a Dictatour. And M. Furius Camillus was nominated, who Elected unto him L. Aemylius for Generall of the horse. The lawmakers likewise for their part, against so great preparation of their adversaries, armed at all parts the cause of the Commons, with stout stomacke and couragious

heart. And having assembled an Hall of the Commons, they called forth the wards to give their  voices. At what time the Dictatour accompanied with a great traine of Nobles, full of wrath and menacing frownes, tooke his place and set him downe. And after the matter was canvassed first, by the ordinarie conflict of the Tribunes among themselves, whiles some propounded, and others gainsaid the law with their negatives forces; and that by how much in right the prohibition was the stronger, so much it was overweighed in favour and affection both of the lawes and lawgivers: and when the first Tribes had given their voice ([(...) propound] The (...).Viirogatis) affirmatively: then Camillus, for as much as, (quoth hee) o Qutrites, yee are ruled now by the will and pleasure, and not by the authoritie of the Tribunes, and as in times past ye obtained the priviledge of a negative voice and (...) Intercession by your departure and Sesession, so now ye make it void and nothing worth, even by the same force that ye got it by. I, chosen Dictatour as well for your sake as for the whole Commonwealth, will assist your priviledge of Intercession, and by mine absolute authoritie maintaine this your helpe and succour, now renversed and overthrowne. If therfore C. Licinius and L. Sextius, give place unto the negative voice and intereeding of their fellowes in office, I will not in a meeting and assemblie of the Commons, once intermedle, nor bring in the authoritie, of a magistrate of the Nobles: but if they shall go forward still (notwithstanding all Prohibition) to impose and give lawes unto the cittie, as if it were woon by conquest of the enemie, I will not suffer the Tribunes power by their owne selves to be defaced and come to nothing. But (all these big words notwithstanding) when the Tribunes of the Commons made but a tush therat, and went never the latter forward with their enterprise, the
n Camillus throughly angred in deed, sent his Lictours and sergeants to commaund the Commons to avoid the place and  depart: Threatning with all, that if they proceeded thus, he would take a Militarie oth of all the yoonger people, and lead an armie presently forth of the cittie. This put the Commons in a verie great fright, but it set their captaines and ringleaders, rather in a greater heat of contention, than abated their courages one jot. And when he saw no relenting on either side, he gave up his office: Whether it were that there was some errour in his creation, (as some have written) or because the Tribunes of the Commons had put up a bill to the Commons, and they graunted it: that if M. Furius (as Dictatour) had proceeded to any action, he should have a round fine set on his head of 500000 (...)Asses, I know not certainly. But I beleeve that he was terrified upon some unluckie signes of the birds, rather than with any such strange Act never heard
of before, and without precedent. And hereunto am I induced, both in regard of the disposition of  the man, so well given and of so good conscience, and also for that M. Manlius was immediatly named Dictatour in his steed. For to what end should Manlius have beene created Dictatour for that broile and sturre, wherin M. Furius had taken the foile before? Againe, seeing the same M. Furius was Dictatour the next yeare following, doubtlesse, he would never for shame have resumed that office, wherin the yeare before he had received the foile and disgrace, to be so over ruled. Over and besides, at the same time when as this bill was supposed to have beene preferred, concerning his fine, either he might have withstood it too, (wherby he saw himselfe to be bridled) or else he had not beene able to have hindred so much as those, for which this also was proposed. Finally it was never seene to this day wherin we live, so long as the Tribunes and Consuls with their fact
ions and parts taking have beeneat variance and debate with all their might  and maine, but evermore the authoritie of the Dictatour controlled them all, and put them downe.
Betweene the former Dictatorship of Camillus now resigned up, and the new by Manlius accepted and begun, there was an assembly of the Commons summoned by the Tribunes, in time as it were of a vacancie or Interreigne: wherin the overture was made and evidently it was seen, which of the lawes proposed the Commons liked better, and which the lawgivers. For those that concerned usurie and land, they granted to passe, but that other of.a Commoner to be Consull, they denied and dashed quite. And surely both matters had beene dispatched fully and established at once, but that the Tribunes said directly, that they required the Commons, to give their voices and speake to all three, directly together. After this, P. Manlius the Dictatour  favored somewhat, and helped the cause of the Commons, by nominating out of the Commons for his Generall of horsemen, C. Licinius, who had beene a Tribune Militarie before time. The Senatours stormed hereat, as I find in records. And the Dictatour was wont to excuse the matter unto them, alledging for himselfe the neere affinitie and kindred that was betweene him

 and Licinius: saying also, that the dignitie of the Generall of horsemen was no greater than of a Tribune Consular. Now when the Election day was published for the Tribunes of the Commons, Licinius and Sextius so demeaned themselves, that by pretending that they would not any longer now continue in the office, they set the Commons on to be most earnest and hotely bent for that, which they under colour of refusall, desired and sought for.
They seemed, forsooth, to alleadge and say, That for these nine yeares they had stood as it were in battaile array, and affronted the States and Nobles of the cittie, to the right great perill of themselves in privat, and to no good effect at all in publicke: and now together with them, both the lawes proposed, and the whole strength of the Tribunes authoritie, were waxed old and decaied. At the first their laws were crossed by the interceding of their brethren Tribunes: afterwards, by packing away the  youth of the citie to the Veliterne warre: and last of all, the Dictators lightening flashed in their faces, and their thunderbolts shot against them. Now (say they) neither their fellow Tribunes withstood them, nor foraine warres hindered them, ne yet the Dictatour himselfe, as who for his part hath given a good foretokening and presage of a Consull Commoner, in electing his Generall of horsemen from out of the Commons. The very Commons and none els, are they that hurt themselves, and delay their owne goods. Who might presently if they would, have their citie, their common hall, and place of assemblies freed from these creditors: yea, and their grounds recovered againe from the unjust Landlords. Which benefites and liberties, when are they like to weigh and esteeme with thankefull minds accordingly, if in the very time that they are to accept the lawes devised for their owne wealth and good, they cut off all hope of promotion and  honour, from the publishers and proposers thereof? For it standeth not with the modestie of the people of Rome, to require to be eased themselves of Vsurie, and to be set in posiession again of the land, wrongfully withheld from them by the mightie men: and then to leave those old Trib. by whose meanes they have come by those good commodities, to shift for themselves, not only without honor, but also without all hope of honor. Let them first therfore set downe with themselves, and resolve, what they are minded to do: and afterwards in the election of Trib. declare the same openly. If they would be willing to speake affirmatively to those laws, all jointly as they were propounded, then there were some reason to chuse the same Trib. againe: and then would they enact and establish finally that which they had published. But in case their wil was to accept of that and no more than which served each private mans turne, then there was small need or none at  all to have them still in office, with the envie and grudging of so many. And to bee short, neither would they accept of the Tribuneship any longer, neither should the Commons have those laws ratified, which were alreadie graunted. When as all the rest of the Senatours were strucken into their dumpes and blanke, for the very indignitie to see things thus goe. At the last, one Appius Claudius Crassus (the nephew or sonnes sonne of that notorious Appius the Decemvir) upon a malicious mind and fell stomacke,The Oration of Appius Claudius, against the Tribunes of the Commons. as it is reported, rather than for any hope hee had to dissuade the matter, stood up, and to this effect answered that so stout and peremptorie speech of the Tribunes, in this manner.
It can be no strange matter to me, nor unlooked for, o Quirites, if that which hath been the onely thing at all times objected by seditions Tribunes against our house, I  also should hear at this present: to wit, that the whole name and linage of Claudij, have ever from the first beginning, regarded nothing more in the Commonweale, than the majestie and honor of the Senatours and the Nobles, and alwaies set and opposed themselves against the good and welfare of the Commons. Of which two chalenges, the one I neither can, nor will denie and disavow: namely that wee, since the first time that wee were enfranchised cittizens, and therewith at once taken into the number of Senators, have endevoured and strained our selves, that it might be said, and that truly, that the honor and dignitie of that state and degree, into which it was your good pleasure we should be incorporate, and graced with, was by us augmented, rather than impaired. And as for the other challenges, this I darebe bold, in mine owne behalfe, and in the name of mine auncestors and progenitors, to averre, o Quitites: that (unlesse a man would thinke whatsoever is done for the weale publicke generally, is directly against the Commons, as if they were  meere aliens of another cittie) we to our knowledge have practised nothing, witting and willing, either whiles we lived private, or during the time we bare office, prejudiciall to the Communaltie: and that neither in deed nor word, wee can be justly charged to have wrought and contrived any thing contrarie to your good: although peradventure somewhat hath fallen out crosse against your will and mind. But were I not a Claudius, and of that familie, nor descended of noble

bloud, but some one of the Burgeoises or cittizens: and knew my selfe to be but free borne, both by father and mother, and to live in a free cittie: could I (thinke yee) hold my tongue? but franckely speake and say, that these perpetuall Tribunes (God save all) L. Sextius, and C. Licinius I meane, have for nine yeares (for so long they have plaied Rex) taken so much upon them, and ben so bold as to say they will not permit you to have free voices, neither in solemne assemblies for elections, not in Sessions and Parliaments for allowing and ordaining lawes? Vpon condition (quoth one of them) you shall make us Tribunes againe the tenth time. What is this els but to say? That, which other sue for, we so scorne and disdaine, that accept of it wee will not, without good hire and recompence. And what reward and consideration is this, good Sirs, for which we may have your Worships, our ever-Tribunes? Marrie (quoth hee) that yee will accept jointly together and at once, all our lawes, whether they like you or dislike you: whether they bee good  and holesome, or bad and noisome. Now I beseech you good Tarquines (Tribunes of the Commons I would have said) imagine I were one of the ordinarie citizens, and should from out of the multitude assembled, speak out and say: Pleaseth it your good grace, Sir, that out of these laws propounded, wee may chuse those that wee thinke good and holesome for us, and refuse and disanull the rest.Appius speaks in to the person of Sextius or Licicinius, within these markes [] [Oh (quoth he) that may not be. Thou maiest allow, belike, and ordain, concerning Vsurie, concerning lands, which tend to the commoditie of you all. But now beware of bugs. This monstrous and portenteous wonder must in no case be permitted in Rome, that thou shouldest see L.Sextius, and this perrillous fellow C. Licinius to bee Consuls, which thy heart riseth at, and which goeth against thy stomacke. Nay, nay, either accept of all, or I will propound none at all.]Now speaketh (...) in his (...). This is all one, as if a man should give him that is hunger-bitten, and readie to starve, poison  and meat together: and bid him either forbeare the wholesome food to preserve his life, or else to take the deadly bane to hasten his death. But if this were a free State indeed, would not many a one have cried out and said, Avant you and your Tribuneships, out upon you with yours lawes. What Sir? How if your Mastership wil not put up and prefer that which is commodious and profitable for the people to accept as there none, think you besides, that wil propound it? If any Nobleman, or if any Claudius (which they take to be more odious) should thus say, Either take all, or I wil propose none at all. Which of you, Quirites, would endure it? why? wil ye never regard the substance more than the person; the matter rather than the man? But all is wel taken and heard quickly, which that magistrat shal say. And wil ye alwaies hear with the wrong or dease care, whatsoever any of us shal happen to speak? Well, the words are naught, and the speech (without question) very  uncivile and rude. Now let us see what maner of law it is, that they storme so at, because by you it is rejected. In good faith o Quirites, much like unto their language. This I require (qd.he) that it might not be lawfull for you to make Coss. whom ye will. For what els demandeth he, who would have it enacted by expresse tearms, that one atleast of the Coss. must be a Commoner of necessitie, and leaveth it not unto your choise to make two Noblemen Coss. If we had wars at this day, such as somtime the Tuscane war was, when Porsens was master of the Ianicle and kept that piece against us; or such as the Gaules war of late daies was, when the enemies were LL. and possessed of all the citie here, but the Capitoll and forresse onely; set case, that L. Sextius should be prickt and propounded either with this M. Furius here in place or with any one other of the Nobles, and stand to be Cos. would ye abide that Sextius should be undoubtedly Cos. and Camillus at devotion and  in hazard to take repulse? Is this indeed to bestow your dignities indifferently with even and equall hand? That two of the Commons, forsooth, may be elected Consuls, and not two likewise of the Nobles? And that one of them must needs perforce be created out of the Commons: and in the electing of both, the Nobles may be overhipt? What societie is this, what communitie and participation? Will not this serve thy turne and content thee, that wherein thou hadst no title nor interest afore, thou shouldst now have thy part: unlesse in seeking to have a portion, thoupluck all unto thy selfe? I feare me (quoth he) if both Consuls might be made of the Nobilitie, ye would chuse none at all of the comminaltie. What is this els but to say? Because willingly of yourselves, ye would not chuse unworthy persons and unmeere, I will bind you therfore of necessitie, to elect those whom otherwise ye would passe by. And what followeth hereupon but this, that the Commoner who standeth with two Patricij, may plainly say, and that truely, he is not by voices chosen, but by vertue of a law, and so acknowledge no benefit received of the people, nor be beholden at all to them, for their grace and favour? Thus seeke they meanes to wring your dignities from you, and not the way to sue for them: and would so obtaine the greatest, as that

 they mought not be obliged and bound unto you for the least: and had rather get honours and offices by advantage taking and cunning sleights, than by their owne vertue, defart and worthinesse. But there is some one that scorneth to be pried and looked into, and to be considered as he deserveth: who thinkes it meet, that he alone among the other Competitors, that contest and stand in suit, should be sure of offices and promotions, and will not submit himselfe to your censure who would have your suffrages, of voluntarie, to be constrained: of free, to be thrall and servile. I speake not of Licinius and Sextius: whose yeares of their continuall government ye reckon upon, and marke up in the Capitoll, as they used sometime, to count the yeares of the Kings raigne. But what is he this day in the cittie, of so base, so abject and low condition, that by the advantage and benefit of this law, hath not easier accesse to a Consulship, than we and our children  have? As for us truly, ye may sometime misse of chusing us, would you never so faine: but for them ye must needs, yea though full against your mind. And thus much concerning the indignitie and unworthinesse of the thing, For, dignitie and worthinesse, I take, to be matters properly to men pertaining. What shall I speake now of Religions, and of the solemnitie of the Auspices, which emply a meere contempt and injurie done to the immortall gods? Who knoweth not, that by the approbation of the gods, testified by flight of birds, this cittie was first founded? that by the same Auspices, all hath been ordered and directed, as well in war abroad, as in peace at home? And who be they that have to doe with these tokens and presages, by auncient custome and tradition from our forefathers? Forsooth even the Nobles and none els. As for the Magistrates of the Commons, none are chosen with regard of slight, sight, and feeding of the birdes.  But to us, they doe so properly belong, that not onely those Magistrates of the Nobles, which the people create, they doe not otherwise elect but by observation of the birds; but we also our selves, without the assent and voice of the people; doe nominate an Interrex by meanes of the birdes: yea and in the private actions of our life, we are guided by them at home, which these Commons use not in their very offices. What then meaneth he els, but to take these Auspicia out of the cittie, who by creating Commoners to be Consuls, depriveth the Nobles therof, who onely may have and use them? Now let them mocke on and scoffe at our religions. Let them deride our ceremonies. What makes matter (say they) if those pullets pecke or eat not? What if they come somewhat late out of their coupe or cage? What if a bird sing auke or crowe crosse and contrarie? How then? A great piece of matter surely. Small things but, I confesse, they be:  but as small as they are, our auncestours by not concerning them, have brought this C.W. to a flourishing state. And we now a daies, as if we stood not in neede of the grace and favour of God, pollute all holie rites and ceremonies. And therfore let our prelats and high priests, our Augurs, and King at Sacrifices bee created (it skilleth not how) even out of the common multitude: Let us set upon any mans head (it matters not whose, so he come in likenesse of a man) the miter of Iupiter his Flamine. Let us commit the keeping of the Anciles or heavenly shields, and the secret Sanctuaries; let us commit the gods themselves and the charge of their holy service to those, unto whom we may not lawfully nor without impietie. Let no lawes be published nor Magistrates created solemnly, with regard of birds at all, and of the will of the gods. Nor in the Centuriate assemblies holden by degrees, and Curiat-meetings by the wardes and parishes,  let not the Senatours be presidents and have their authoritie and toiall assent. Let Sextius and Licinius, like Romulus and Tatius raigne togither, as fellow KK, in the cittie of Rome, because they give away so freely, the monies, lands, and territories from others. So sweete and favorie it is to prey upon other mens goods. Never consider they, not looke so farre into the matter, that by one of these goodly lawes, our fieldes will be desert and wast, by ejecting and dispossessing the rightfull land-lords: and by the other, all credit in borrowing and lending, in taking and putting forth of mony shal be abolished. And then farewel all human societie, commerce, and intercourse whatsoever. In these respects therfore, thus I conclude, and would counsell you, in any wise to stop, frustrate and disanull the overture and proceeding of these lawes: and in so doing, I praie God blesse and speed you well. This Oration of Appius thus farre onely prevailed, that the time  of publication of these Actes, was cut off and differed. But the same Tribunes Sextius and Licinius, being chosen againe thetenth time,The Ascemuiti creased. propounded this law and had it enacted, That of the Decemvirs for divine service and church matters, some should be created of the Commons. So, five of them were of the Nobles, and five of Commoners: whereby they seemed to have gained alreadie one good step onward unto the Consulship.
The Commons contenting themselves with this victorie, yeelded unto the Senatours, that  for the present without any mentioning of Consuls, there should be elected Tribunes Militarie. So there were created A. and M. Cornelij the second time, M. Geganius, P. Manlius, L. Veturius and P. Valerius the sixth time. At what time, when as (but for the siege of Velitre, which was like to be for service a long piece of worke, rather than for issue, doubtfull in the end) the Romanes were at rest for any forreine troubles, the sodaine and unlooked-for newes of the Gaules war, drave the cittie to chuse M. Furius Dictatour the fisth time: who tooke unto him for his Generall of the horsmen, T. Quintius Penus. Claudius writeth, that this yeare the Gauls were fought with, about the river Anio: and that there was that noble combat upon the bridge, in which, T. Manlius, in the sight of both armies slew in single fight a Gaule that had challenged him andgiven defiance, and despoiled him of his coller of gold. But there be more writers that induce  me to beleeve, that this exploit was performed ten yeares after: and that in this yeare the Gauls had a battaile given them by M. Furius Dictator, in the Albanes land: where the Romanes had neither doubtfull nor dangerous victorie, although the French made them afraid at first in remembrance of their former overthrow. Many thousands of this barbarous nation were slaine in field, many also fell upon the sword in their campe after it was won. Some were scattered and fled, and those most (who tooke the way to Apulia) saved themselves from the enemie, both by flying so farre, and also for that upon feare they were so distracted and parted one from another. The Senatours and Commons agreed and made a decree, that the Dictatour should triumph. Who scarcely had made an end of that war, but he was welcomed home with a more hotter and more dangerous Sedition within the cittie. For after many sharp bickerings and contentions, the Dictatour  and Senat both, were overmatched and overcome, yea and forced to accept the Tribunes lawes aforesaid. And also malgree the Nobilitie and doe what they could, there was an assembly holden for Election of Consuls:Q.Sextius, the first Comm^ner that was chosen Consul. in which L. Sextius was created Consull, the first Commoner that ever fate in Consuls chaire. But the broiles staied not there. For, by reason that the Nobles denied to approve and give assent thereto, the matter was like to grow unto a Secession and generall departure of the Commons, yea to other fearfull tearmes and perilous threats of civile wars and intestine troubles. Howbeit, by meanes of the Dictatour, the flames were quenched and the discords appeased, upon these capitulations. Imprimis, that the Nobilitie should accord unto the Commons, to have one Consull from among themselves. Item, that the common people should be content that the Nobles might out of the Patritij creat a Pretor or Lord chiefe  Iustice for oyer and determiner in causes within the cittie. Thus when after long anger the two states of the cittie were growen to unitie and concord, the Senate thinking it a worthie matter (and good cause they had verely as ever any time before) willingly to determin, for the honour of the immortall Gods, to set out those most stately [Roman] plaies. And whereas before, they had continued but three daies, to ad one more, and to celebrate them full foure. And when the Aediles of the Commons refused that charge and excused themselves, the younger Gentlemen of the Nobilitie cried all with one voice, That they would most gladly doe that service and honour to the immortall Gods, so as they might be made Aediles for that purpose. Thanked they were generally of all hands; and the Senate made a decree, That the Dictator should propose unto the people, that two men of the Nobilitie might be Aediles and that in  all the Assemblies and Elections for that yeare, whatsoever passed, should be ratified by the soveraigne assent of the Senators.




THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS  of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the seventh Booke.
TWO new officers of State, to wit, the Pretorship and Aediliship of the Chaire, were adioined to the rest. The cittie was sore visited with the pestilence: which was more noted by reason of Eurius Camillus who died therein. The remedie and end wheres, whiles they sought to procure by bringing in new and strange religions, at length they devised stageplaies, which then first were set forth. M. Pomponius a Tribune of the Commons, arrested L. Manlius  for his exceeding vigour in taking muster of soldiours: and for confining and hardly intreating his owne sonne T. Manlius, for no crime or hainous offence. And the yoong man himselfe, whose confining and misusage was laid unto his fathers charge, entred the bed-chamber of the said Tribune, drew his skeane and forced him to sweare unto him, that he wouldlet fall his: suite and proceed no further. Then all mischiefes entended, were laid apart and had an end. Curtius armed at all pieces, mounted upon a courser, vode headlong into the wide gaping chinke or gulfe within the cittie of Rome, and so it presently filled up againe. The same yoong Manlius, who had freed his father from the troubles of the Tribune, entred into comb at with a French man, that chalenged any one of the Romane soldiours to single fight: flew him, tooke from him his colar of gold, which he ware about his necke afterwards himselfe, and therof was called Torquatus. Two Tribes more were added, Pontina and Publicia. Licinius Stolo was condemned by a law of his owne making, because he held in possession more than 500 acres of ground. M. Valerius a Colonell of 1000 foot, killed a Gaule, who chalenged him to fight: and that, by the means and helpe of araven that setled upon his morion, and with tallons and bill annoied his enemie, and there upon was he named  Corvinus. For which vertue and valourous Act, he was the yeare next following created Consull, being not full three and twentie years old. Amitie was concluded with the Carthaginians. The Campaines being warred upon by the Sammites, craved aid of the Senate against them: and when they could not speed, yeelded their cittie and territorie to the people of Rome. Whereupon it was thought good, seeing both they and theirs, were now become proprietarie to the people of Rome, that they should be defended by force of armes against the Samnites. When A. Cornelius the Consull, had led his hast into a place of disvantage and was in great perill, he was by the industrious service of P. Decius a Coronell saved: Who having gained the hill top, which commanded the ridge, whereon the Samnites lay encamped, gave the Consull opportunitie to escape and passe into a plaine ground: and himselfe, notwithstanding he was environed by the enemie, brake through them, and gat away. The Romane soldiours left in garison at Capua, having conspired to keepe the cittie to their owne behoofe, were detected and their plot disclosed: and for feare of punishment, revolted from the people of Rome contrarie to their alleageance: but by the pollicie and wisedome of M. Corvinus, they were reclaimed from their outrage, and restored  againe to their countrie. Moreover, this booke containeth the fortunate wares against Hernicks, Gaviles, Tyburts, Privernates, Tarquinians, Samnites, and Volscians.

HEERE ensueth a yeare of especiall note and marke, for the Consulship of a man newly risen: also for two new offices, the Pretorship and Aedileship of the Chaire. Both which dignities, they of the Nobilitie purchased to themselves in lieu of granting to the Commons one place of the two Consuls. The Commons bestowed the Consulship upon L. Sextius for his good service, in propounding the law, wherby that promotion was first obtained. The Nobles conferred the Pretorship upon Sp. Furius Camillus the sonne of Marcus: and the Aedileship  upon Cn. Quintius Capitolinus, and P. Cornelius Scipio, personages of their owne order and degree: So gratious were they with the people in Mars filed. L. Sextius had companion with him in government, L. Aemilius Mamercus one of the Senatours. In the beginning of the yeare, much debate there was and hard hold, both as well about the Gaules, who at the first ranged abroad over all PugsiaApulia, and were now (as the report went) gathered together: as also concerning the

rebellion of the Hernickes. But all matters being put off for the nonce, untill a further time, because  nothing should be done by this new Consull a Commoner: all things were still and quiet, as if it had beene vacation or Non terme: this onely excepted, that the Tribunes muttered and could not endure with patience, that for one Consull of the Commons, the Nobilitie had gotten to themselves three magistrates, all of the Patritij, sitting like Consuls, with their purfled and pourpled long robes in yvorie chaires of estate, And as for the Pretour besides, as L. chiefe Iustice to heare and decide causes, he was fellow with the Consuls, and with the same Auspices and authoritie created. Hereupon the Senat was abashed to be instant and to enforce that Aediles of the chaire should be chosen out of the Nobilitie. And first it was agreed amongst them, that everie second yeare they should be elected forth of the Commons: Afterwards, indifferently one  with another in common, withoutthat regard. Now when L. Genutius and Q. Servilius were Coss. and all at good rest for any home sedition or forraine warre: behold, least they should at anytime be void of care and danger, there began a great plague. In which died, as men say, one Censor, one Aedible Curule, three Tribunes of the Commons: besides, many a dead corps from among the multitude, was caried forth, proportionable to the rest. But above all, the bitter death of Camilius and much lamented (notwithstanding the long and goodly time he had in this life) caused this pestilence to be much spoken of and remembred.The de^th of M.F^ (...) Cam^llus. For the was (in truth) the onely person in all fortune both of prosperitie and adversitie, as well in peace as war: a rare and singular man before his banishment, and during the same more famous and renowned: either in regard that the cittie had a misle of him, and being taken by the enemie in his absence sought unto him for his helpe; or in respect of his happinesse, in that together with his owne restitution home, he  therwith restored his naturall countrie. And after this, for 25 yeares space (for so long he lived afterwards) he bare himselfe answerable to the title of so great glorie: accounted worthie to be surnamed and reputed a second founder after Romulus, of the cittie of Rome. All this yeare long and the next which followed, when T. Sulpitius Peticus, and C. Licinius Stolo were Consuls, the sicknes continued. By reason wherof, nothing was done worth remembrance, but that for to obtaine the mercie and grace of the gods, there was a Lectisterne solemnised, which was the third since the cittie was first founded. But when by no device of man, nor helpe of the gods, the violence of the sickness assuaged; their minds and consciences were so possessed with superstition, that among other pacifications and appeasings of the heavenly yre, the stage-plaies (a strange and new device for a warlike and martiall people, who afore time used onely to behold the solemne  games and f^ates of strength and activitie, in the great Listes or Race called Circus) were (as men say) first begun and ordained.Stage (...) at R^me (...). But (as all beginnings lightly are) a small thing (God wot) it was at first: without song and meetre, without gesture and action sutable unto song and verse, and the same also meere outlandish. For the plaiers, who were sent for out of Hetruria, as they daunced the measures to the minstrell and sound of flute, gestured not undecently withall, after the Tuscane fashion. But in processe of time the youth began to imitate and counterfeit them, jesting pleasantly besides one with another, and singing in rude rimes and disordered meetre: and their gesture was sorting with their jestes and ditties. Thus was this thing first taken up, and thus with much use and often exercise, practised. And heereupon our owne countrie Actors and artificiall professours of this feate, were called Histriones, of Hister a Tuscane  word, which signifieth a pl^ier or dauncer. But these uttered not (as they used afore time) in their turnes one after another, disordred, confused, and rude verses, like to the loose and baudie Fescenine rimes: but went through and rehearsed out, whole Satyres, full of musicall measures, with a set consert of song also, to the instrument of the minstrell, and with gesture agreeable therunto. Certaine yeares after,[(...)] Livius, who was the first that after the use of Satyres, ventured to set forth an En^erlude, of some one argument and uniforme matter, is reported to have beene himselfe (as they were all no doubt in those daies) the author and actor both, of his owne verses and songs: But being so often called on by the people to play, that he became hoarse againe, lost his voice, he gat leave to set a boy to sing before the minstrels. And so being silent himselfe, he acted the song with more agilitie and nimblenes of motion a good deale: for, not employing his  voice, he had no hindrance of libertie in gesture. Then began the plaiers to have others at hand to sing, and they themselves used their voices onely in acting their parts in Comedies dialogue-wise. After that, by this order taken and law of plaies, they came from laughter and pleasant conceited mirth, and that this pastime and sport turned by little and little to a methodicall Art

 and profession: Then the youth leaving to Comoedians, the acting of parts in Enterludes, began after the old manner to let flie, one at another, merrie scoffes and jestes, interlaced within their rime and meeter, which thereupon were afterwards called Exodia, and were inserted commonly in the Atellane Comedies. Which kind of sport, the youth learned first of the Osci: and having once taken it up, they held it still, and would not suffer it to bee distained and dishonested by common plaiers. And hereof commeth it, that the Actours in the Atellane Interludes were neither displaced out of their own tribe, nor made Aerarij, but served in the wars, and have the citties pay, as if they were not base Comoedians, and professors of infamous players craft. Thus have I thought good, among the small beginnings of other things, to set downe  the Originall of Stage-plaies also: that it may appeare, that the thing arising from a considerate entrance, is growne now to this foolerie andexcessive sumptuousnesse, as hardly can be defraied by most rich and wealthie kingdomes. And yet these plaies at first, emploied about a religious businesse, neither rid mens minds of scruple and superstition, nor eased their bodies one jot of sickenesse. But rather, when by occasion of an overflow and inundation of the Tyber, the Circus or Theatre was drowned, and their plaies in the very midst hindred and interrupted, this occurrent mightily troubled and affrighted them, as if the gods had turned away their face and countenance, and rejected all their devoir in these appeasings of their wrath and indignation. Therefore in the time that Cn. Genutius, and L. Aemylius Mamercus were Consuls the second time, when mens minds were busied and troubled more in seeking meanes to pacifie the wrath of the gods,  than their bodies vexed with diseases; the elder sort and grand siegnours called to mind, that in old time there was a plague assuaged and gave over, by the driving and fastening of a spike or great naile by the Dictator.The superstitious driving of a naile. The Senate upon a religious devotion persuaded herewith, caused a Dictatour to be created, for to fasten the naile aforesaid. And there being chosen L. Manlius Imperiosus, he nominated for his Generall of horsemen, L. Pinarius. There is an old law written with auncient letters, and in antique words, THAT THE CHEEFE PRETOR FOR THE TIME BEING, SHOULD IN THE 13 of September.IDES OF SEPTEMBER DRIVE A SPIKE OR NAILE. Well, a naile was driven, and stucke fast on the right side of the temple of Iupiter Optimus Maximus, on that hand where as Minervaes chappell standeth. That naile, because in those daies there was but little writing, shewed as they say, the number of the yeares. And thereupon that law was set  up in Minervaes church, for that Minerva was the inventresse of numbring. And Cintius a diligent writer of such monuments, and a studious Antiquarie, affirmeth, That at Volsinij there stuck such spikes to be seene in the temple of Nortia, a goddesse among the Tuscanes, to quote and represent the number of the yeares. Now, as concerning the temple of Iupiter Optimus Maximus, M. Horatius the Consull (by an act in that behalfe provided) dedicated it, the yeare next ensuing the expulsion of the kings. Afterwards, the solemne manner and custome of fastening a naile, was transferred from the Consuls to the Dictatours, as to the greater and more absolute Magistracie. And in processe of time, this custome being discontinued, it was thought a thing in it selfe worthie, for which a Dictatour should be created.
L. Manlius being elected [as is above said] for this cause, as if he had ben called to that dignitie  for some warre, and not to free the people from their scruple of conscience: and intending himselfe warre against the Hernickes, plagued the youth with a greevous muster: untill at length all the Tribunes of the Commons taking against him, opposed themselves: and were it by force, or for very shame, he relented, and resigned up his roume. Neverthelesse, in the entrance of the yeare next following, when Q. Servilius Hala, and L. Genutius the second time were Consuls, M. Pomponius a Tribune of the Commons arrested Manlius. His crueltie in taking of the musters was odious, not onely for the losse and dammage that the citizens sustained thereby, but also for tearing and mangling their bodies, partly by scourging them with rods, who answered not to their name, and partly by clapping yrons upon them in prison. But above all, his own cruell disposition by nature was hatefull,L. Manlius Imperiosus. and the surname (Imperiosus) offensive, especially to a free citie. This name he got by plaine shew of his crueltie, exercised no lesse upon his neerest friends  and kinsfolke, yea, and his very owne bloud, than upon strangers.
For amongst other matters, the Tribune laid sore to his charge, that having a young man to his sonne, detected of no leaudnesse and dishonest life,The complaints of M. Pompor^us, a Tribune of the Com. against L. Manlius. him hee had banished (as it were) out of the cittie, from his house and home, debarred from the common hall and open sight of men, from the companie of his mates and companions, set him to drudgerie and servile worke, and betaken him as it were, into

a prison and house of correction: where, a Dictatour his sonne, a young Gentleman highly  descended, by this daily miserie of his, was taught to know, that hee had indeed a lordly and imperious Sir, to his father. And for what great offence, I pray you? Because hee was not so faire spoken, nor all the readiest with his tongue. Which infirmitie and defect of nature, ought not a father to have borne withall and cloked (if there had ben any goodnesse, any common humanitie in him) rather than to punish it, and by rough handling, and sharpe usage, to make it more knowne and notorious? Why? even the very brute beasts, if it chaunce that any of their breed or young ones prove but untowardly, feed and cherish them still neverthelesse. But as for this L. Manlius, he augmenteth one inconvenience and default in his son, with another: whom, being but soft and slow of nature, he keepeth down the more: and that little life and smal mettall that is in him, he goeth about to quench and dull atones by this peasants life and rusticall usage, and  conversing amongst the cattell and beasts. These bitter complaints and accusations moved the patience, and stirred the stomackes of every man els, sooner than the yong man himselfe. Who contrariwise was greeved in his mind, that he should be a cause of his fathers troubles, thus to incurre the ill will and obloquie of the people. And that all the world, both heaven and earth might know, that hee desired rather to succour and helpe his father, than to assist his adversaries and foes, he entreth into a course beseeming and bewraying (I must needs say) a rude and rustical mind. Which, although it favour nothing of civilitie, yet for his kindnesse and dutifull pietie to his father, deserveth commendation. One morning betimes he gets him up, and unknowne to everie one of the house, with a good skeine close by his side, to the cittie hee goes: and from the gate streightwaies directly to M. Pomponius the Tribune his house.The ^i^dnesse of (...) to his father. He telleth the porter, that hee  must needs speake with his master out of hand, willing him to let him understand, that T. Manlius, the sonne of Lucius, was there. And being immediatly let in, (for the Tribune hoped, that the son was throughly angred with his father, and brought new complaints, and one matter or other against him, or some devise and ouverture, how to proceed in the commensed Action) and salutations passed to and fro betweene the Tribune and him, hee said, that hee was to talke with him apart out of all mens hearing. So the roume being voided, and all commaunded to depart farre ynough out of the way, he draweth our his skeine: and leaping aloft upon the bed, stood there, and held it full bent against him, and threatened presently to give him the stab, unlesse he would swear the oath he should tei^der unto him, namely, never to cal an assemblie or hall of the Commons togither about his fathers enditement, or impanell a Iurie against him. The Tribune affrighted  (seeing the naked weapon glittering before his face, himselfe all alone and unarmed, the other a tall and lustie young fellow, and, that which was as much to be feared as the rest, foolehardie, and presuming upon his strength) tooke the oath in that forme as he put it unto him. And afterwards he gave it out plainely and confessed (for his excuse) that by this meanes hee was forced in spight of his heart, to surcease his suit, and give over his enterprise. But the Commons were not so much offended at the sonne, for giving such an adventure in his fathers quarrell: but they could have beene more contented and better pleased, that it had lien in their power to have passed their voices, for the condemnation of so cruel and prowd a prisoner, as they had under their hands. And the more praise-worthie was this dessigne of the sonne, because so great rigor of the father, wrought no alienation at all in his heart, from the affectionate dutie that hee owed unto  him. So not onely the father escaped his arraignement, but this action of the young man turned to his owne honor and preferment. For whereas, this year it was first ordained, that the A Tribune in a (...), called Ciul^at^^ o^ (...) leader of a 1000 [(...)]Tribunes or Colonels should be chosen by voices of the legionarie souldiors (for aforetime, as at this day, the Generals themselves made them, whom they call Ruffuli) in sixe places (for so many were elected) he obtained the second rowme: and that, in regard of no desert otherwise, either at home or abroad, which might win him this favour, as who had spent his youth in the countrie altogether far from the civile societie of men.
The same yeare, by earthquake or some other forcible violence, the common place called Forum, clave and opened wide, welneere in the mids, and suncke downe to an exceeding depth: neither could that chincke or pit be filled up, by casting in of earth (notwithstanding every man laboured and brought what he could) before that they began to enquire, according as they were admonished by the divine Oracles, what it might be, wherein the most puissance and greatnes of the people of Rome consisted. (For the wisards prophesied, That if they would have the state of Rome to remain sure for ever, they should dedicat and offer it, whatsoever it was, unto that place.)

 And when they were in doubt what this should be,M. Cu^ti^^ (...). it is reported, that M. Curtius, a right hardie knight and martiall yong gentleman, rebuked them therfore, because they doubted whether the Romanes had any earthly thing better than armour and valor? Herewith, after silence made, he lift up his eies, and beheld the temples of the immortall gods, scituate neere to the Forum, and the Capitoll likewise; and stretching forth his hands, one while toward heaven, another while to the gaping chinckes and gulfe in the earth, toward the infernall spirits beneath, hee offered and devoted himselfe to assured death. And mounting upon a brave courser, as richly trapped and set out, as possible he could devise, armed as he was at all peeces, he leapt horse and man and all into the hole. The people, both men and women, threw in after him sundrie gifts and oblations, and fruits of the earth in great plentie.Curtius Lacus. The place was after called Curtius Lacus, of his name, and  not of that Curtius Metius in the old time, who was a souldiour under Titus Tatius. If I could by any meanes search out the truth, I would not spare for any paines in that behalfe. But now seeing that by reason of antiquitie the certaintie is not fully knowne, wee must goe by the common voice and report of men. And verily the name of the lake is more renowmed and noble by occasion of this later and fresher tale, than the other.
After the expiation of so great and prodigious a wonder, much consultation there was in the Senate that yeare, as concerning the Hernickes: for having sent their heraulds unto them for an almendate of harmes done, but to no effect, they determined with all convenient speed to propose unto the people, for to proclaime warre against the Hernickes, and bid them defiance. The people generally with one voice liked thereof, and approved it. The charge of that service  and exploit fell to L. Genutius his lot, to undertake. Now, for that he was the f^st Consull of the Commons that by his owne auspices and conduct should manage warre, the cittie was in great expectation of the sequele and issue: and according to the event that should fall out, good or bad in this journey, they were to judge, whether they had done well or amisse to communicate these dignities with the Commons. But it fortuned so, that Genutius being with great preparation and power set forth against the enemies, was entrapped by an Ambuscado, his legions upon a suddaine feare unlooked for defeated,L. Genutius Consuli, slaine. himselfe (the Consul) environned round about, and slain by them, that wist not whome they slew.
Which tidings being brought to Rome, the Senatours were not so pensive and sorrowfull for the common calamitie, as they frounced and tooke on most insolently, for this unhappy expedition and conduct of the Commoner Consull: and muttered  in all places these and such like speeches: Now let them go and create Consuls againe out of the comminaltie, and translate the Auspicia whether they ought not. What? Because the Senatours by an Act of the Commons, might be defeated and dispossessed of their dignities, could so inauspicate and irreligious a lawe, prevaile likewise against the gods immortall? Who now themselves have taken the matter into their own hands, and mainteined their power, their deitie and Auspices: which were not so soone medled withall, and polluted by one that had no right thereto, nor lawfull title, but both the whole armie, and captaine also, were vanquished and overthrowne; to teach them for ever hereafter, how they make their solemne Elections of Magistrates confusedly, without regard of the rightes and roialties of noble houses. These speeches both Counsell house and common place rong againe withall. So the Consull Servilius with consent of the Nobles, named for Dictator Appius Claudius, who had aforetime in an oration before the whole assembly of the Commons, dissuaded the proceeding of that law; and now with greater authoritie blamed the mishap of that counsell, which was by him misliked and reproved. A muster was proclaimed, and a publike Vacation. But before that the Dictatour and these new enrolled legions were gone as farre as the Hernickes confines, the other armie under the leading of G. Sulpitius the Lieutenant, by occasion of an occurrent that fell out there, got a good hand against their enemies. For when as upon the death of the Consull, the Hernicks advanced in scornfull and contemptuous manner, close under the campe of the Romans; with a full hope to be masters of the same; behold, what with the exhortation of the Lieutenant, and what for anger and indignitie, wherwith the souldiors stomacks werefull, they made  a sallie out against them. Whereupon the Hernicks came so farre short of their accompt, that they had no hope to assaile, no nor approch the rampier: and so in disaray they dismarched and departed. Afterwards by the comming in of the Dictatour with a fresh power, the old armie was reenforced double. The Dictatour in a solemne audience, having praised the Lieutenant and his souldiors for defending their tentes so manfully, both encouraged them that heard themselves

so highly commended according to their deserts, and also whetted on the rest to performe the  like valorous service. The enemies on the other side were nothing flacke to prepare themselves to fight againe: who in remembrance of the honour they had alreadie won, albeit they were not ignorant that the Romans forces were redoubled, encreased their own power also. For the whole nation of the Hernicks, even as many as were able to drawsword, were called forth to the wars. Eight cohorts by themselves consisting of foure hundred in a band were enrolled, even the most able and choise men of all others. This elect and especiall floure of their youth and manhood, they fed with hope and encouraged the more to this service, because they had taken order they should have double paie. Freed they were besides from all other labour and Militarie toile, that being thus reserved to intend the fight and nothing els, they should make reckoning and know, that they were to indevour and straine themselves above the ordinarie carriage of souldiors. Placed  also they were in the battaile, apart from the other rankes: to the end their valour and devoir might be more seene and marked. Betweene both campes of the Romanes and Hernicks, there was plaine of two miles in length: and there in the mid way in a maner, was the battail fought. First, the fight was doubtfull on both sides, whiles the Romane horsemen charged and recharged againe, but ever in vaine, to see if they could breake their battailons. Thus when the service on horseback, proved lesse in effect than in attempt, they asked the advise and craved leave of the Dictator: which being granted, they abandoned their horses, and with a mightie shout, ran forth before the ensignes, and renewed the battaile afresh. Neither could they have beene any longer endured, but that those extraordinarie bands opposed themselves, and received them with equall might of bodie and valour of heart. Then was the fight maintained betweene the  brave youth and principall floure of both nations. And looke what slaughter there was by common hazard of warre, as well of the one side as of the other, the losse was greater for the qualitie of the persons, than the proportion of the number. For the rest of the common souldiors, as if they had shi^ted from themselves the whole conflict, and betaken it to the vawards only, reposed their owne event and hap in the manhood of others. Many a man on both parts was smitten downe and died in the place, but more were hurt and wounded.
At last, those horsmen that dismounted, fell to call and rebuke one another, asking what hope remained els besides? If neither on horseback they were able to drive the enemies back, nor on foote force them to give ground and remove them, what third kinde of service looked they for? Why leapt they out so lustely and bravely into the forefront before the ensignes? and sought in the place of others? With  these words provoking one another, they pluckt up their hearts, and with a fresh shout set foote forward and gave a new charge. First, they compelled the enemies to recuile and loose their standing: then to give more ground: and at length plainly to turne their backe and run away. Hard it is to say, being so equally and indifferently matched as they were, what it was that turned the ballance and gave the victorie: unlesse it were the perpetuall fortune that ever followed both nations, able to advance the spirit and courage of the one, and to daunt and abate the hearts of the other. The Romanes had the Hernicks in chase, all the way long, so farre as to their campe: but because it was farre in the evening, they staied from assailing it. For by reason that it was long ere the Dictatour could by sacrifice gather any assured token of Gods favour, he sounded not the battaile before noone: whereby it continued untill night. The morrow after, were the Hernickes  fled and their campe abandoned: only some hurt and wounded souldiors were found left behind. But one troupe of them that forsooke their ensignes (when as neere unto their wals and fortes their banners were discovered, slenderly accompanied, and with few about them) was scattered abroad over the fields, and in great feare stragled all about, and shamefully fled away. And yet this victorie of the Romanes cost them well the setting on, and spent some bloud: for they lost a fourth part of their men: and that which was no small dammage unto them, some of the Romane horsemen also were slaine.
The next yeare following, when C. Sulpitius and C. Licinius Calvus the Consuls, were gone with a power against the Hernicks, and finding not the enemie abroad in the countrie, had by force woon Forentinum a towne of theirs: in their returne homeward, the Tyburts kept their  gates shut against them. And after many complaints and unkindnesses ripped up betweene them: this last quarrell was it, that moved the Romanes by their Heraulds (after restitution and amends demaunded) to send defiance, and proclaime war against the people of Tybur. That Titus Quintius Penus was Dictatour that yeare, and Serg. Cornelius Maluginensis Generall of his horsemen,

 it is agreed upon by all authors. Macer Licinius writeth that he was created for the holding of an assembly for Election of Magistrates, and that, by the Consull Licinius: because when his fellow Consull made hast to have the Election before the warre, thereby to continue his owne Consulship, it was thought good to withstand and meete with his naughtie desire in that behalfe. But Licinius [Macer] in searching to his name and family, that praise and commendation, maketh himselfe to be of lesse credite in writing of the rest: especially, seeing that in none of the olde records, I finde mention of any such matter. Mine owne minde giveth me rather, that the Dictatour was created because of the Gaules tumultuous warre. For certes that yeare they encamped themselves three miles from Rome, beyond the bridge of (...).Anio, in the way Salaria. The Dictatour having proclaimed a Vacation, because of these troubles of the Gaules, received  the Militarie oath of allthe younger sort; and with a puissant armie departed the cittie, and upon the very banke on this side of Anio pitched his tents. In the mid way betweene them and the enemies there was a bridge: which they would not breake downe on either part, least they should be thought fearfull cowards. But about the seising and gaining of that bridge, first, there was many a skirmish: and judged it could not be, considering the equall forces of both sides, who should be masters of it. Then advanced forward unto the bridge (void of all guards) a mightie tall and bigge Frenchman, and as lowd as ever he could set out a throate, maketh this challenge; Now (quoth he) let the bravest gallant that Rome hath, come forth and spare not, to combate if hee dare, that the event of us twaine may shewe whether nation is more valiant and warlike. The brave Knights and youthes of Rome, held their peace a good while, both abashed to refuse the  challenge, and also unwilling to run upon the present hazard of a single fight. Then T. Manlius, the sonne of Lucius, even he who released his father from the Tribunes troubles, goeth forth of his quarter unto the Dictatour.T. Manlius to the (...).
Without your leave and expresse commandement (quoth he) o Noble Soveraigne, I would never presume to fight out of my ranke and standing, no, not if I should see assured victorie before mine eies: but if it will please your excellencie to give me licence, I will shew unto that beast yonder (that so proudly and lustely is come forth leaping before the enemies ensignes, and braving as you see) that I am descended of that house and race, that gave the whole armie of the Gaules the foile, and turned them downe the Cliffe Tarpeia. Then said the Dictatour unto him, God blesse thee T. Manlius: On forth a Gods name, in this thy dutifull mind and zeale that thou carriest both to father and countrie: Go on I say, and with the  helpe of the gods, performe the Romane name to be invincible. Then his feeres and companions holpe to arme the younge Gentleman. A light footmans shield he takes unto him, and a spanish blade by his side, more handsome to fight short and close. Being thus armed and set out, they bring him forth against this vainglorious Gaule, set all upon joy full foolishly, and (as the auncient writers have thought it worth the noting and remembrance) scornfully lelling and blaring out his tongue.The (...) between T. Ma^lius and a mightie big Caule. Then the rest departed every man to his owne quarter and warde: and the two armed champions were left in the midst, more like a festivall spectacle and pageant to behold, than any fight at utterance, suiting to the manner, guise, and law of combat, considering they were not equally matched, if a man should judge by the eie and outward view. The one of them of personage mightie and exceeding tall, his coate armour of sundrie colours and gay, his  harnesse glittering and all damasked and engraven with gold. The other, a man of a middle Six f^ot high, or five foote and ten inches.stature of Souldiors, no great shew of armor, and that rather fit and handsome, than gaudie to behold: without any houping, singing, and joyous vaunting of himselfe, without vaine flourishes and shaking of his weapons in the aire: but he had an heart full of resolute courage, stomacke, and close anger within, reserving all his fiercenesse and eagernesse unto the very bickerment and triall of fight. As they stood thus betweene the two armies, and so many men all about looking on, in doubtfull suspence between hope and feare, the Gaule like as he had beene a huge mountaine aloft over the other, readie to fall upon him, held forth his target with the left hand to bear off the sword of his enemie comming against him, and let drive a down-right blow edgelong, that it resounded againe upon his shield, and did no harme at all. The Romane bearing his own  sword with the point upward, and with his shield having smitten the nether part of his enemies target, and turned it aside, got with his whole bodie close within him, and without the danger of being hurt: and when he had wound himselfe betweene his enemies bodie and his sword point, he redoubled one or two foines, and thrust him up into the bellie at the groine, and so overthrew him. There lay the Gaule along, and tooke up a great ground in length. When he was

downe, without any further mangling and tormenting his carcasse, he despoiled him only of his  colar of gold, which embrued as it was with blood, he did about his own neck. The Gauls with fear and admiration of this sight, wer astonied. The Romans with great cheerfulnes came forth of their wards and quarters to meet their champion, and with great praise and congratulation brought him before the Dictator. And as they merily cast forth (as the maner of soldiors is) certain pleasant ditties, ballad wise, but without artificial skil of poetrie, they were heard to surname him (...)Torquatus: which afterwards was taken up and commonly used, and became an honorable name to his posteritie, and the whole house besides. Besides all this, the Dictator bestowed upon him a coronet of gold for a reward, and openly before the whole audience of the armie, highly and wonderfully commended that fight of his. And certainly, that combat was of such consequence, and made so much  to the event of the whole warre, that the night next following, the host of the Gaules, fearfully abandoning their tents, departed into the Tyburtine countrie: and being drawne into a societie of ^arre with the inhabitants of (...)Tybur, and liberally by them relieved with victuals, they passed within a while into Campania. Which was the cause that the next yeare, C. Petilius Balbus the Consull (when his fellow M. Fabius Ambus^us was by lot, sent with commission against the Hernicks) led an armie, by the appointment of the people, against the Tyburtines. To the aid of whom, when the French were returned out of Campania; there was foule spoile and havocke made in the Lavicane, Tusculane, and Albane territories, by the leading and conduct, no doubt of the Tyburtines. And wheras the State stood well contented that the Consull should be the Genererall commaunder, against these enemies the Tyburtines; this new trouble and tumult of the Gaules, caused a Dictatour for to be created. And that was Q. Servilius Hala, who named  for his Generall of horsemen, T. Quintius. And by the authoritie and assent of the Senatours, he vowed to set out the great games, in case he sped well in this warre. The Dictatour having commaunded the Consull with his armie to tarie still, that by his own conduct of warre he might keepe in the Tyburtines, tooke the oth of all the yoonger people: and there was not one refused to go to the warre. Not farre from the gate Collina was this battaile fought, in the sight of their parents, wives and children. Great incouragements, doubtlesse, to cheere up and animatemen, absent and farre off: but now before their eies, partly for shame, and partly for pittie and compassion, they set the soldiours all on fire. After much blood shed on both sides, at the last the armie of the Gaules turne backe: and being put to flight, they made hast to Tybur, the very strength and fort of the Gaules warre. But as they fled stragling one from another, they were encountred  by the Consull Petilius not farre from Tybur. And when the Tyburtines issued forth to succour them, they with the rest were beaten into the towne. Likewise the other Consull Fabius, first in small skirmishes, and at last in one notable pight field, vanquished the Hernicks, at what time as his enemies charged upon him with all their forces and whole puissance. The Dictatour having highly commended the Consuls, both in the Senate house and also in a publicke assembly of all the people, and attributed the whole honour of his owne Acts unto them, gave up the Dictatorship. Petilius obtained a double triumph, over the Gaules and the Tiburtes. For Fabius it was thought sufficient, that he should enter into the cittie Ovant, in a petie triumph.
The Tyburtines skoffed and made good game at the triumph of Petilius. For, where was it (say they) that they encountred  and joined battaile with us? There went forth indeed out of the cittie gates a few of us to behold the flight and fright of the Gaules: but seeing our selves also to be set upon, and killed one with another as we came in the way, we retired backe, and got the cittie over our heads. And was that such a doughtie deed, that the Romanes should thinke, it deserved a triumph? But that they may not deeme it still, so noble and so wonderous an Act, to make some stirre and raise a tumult in the enemies gates: they should themselves see shortly greater fearfulnesse, even under their owne wals. Heerupon, the yeare following, when M. Popilius Lenas, and Cn. Manlius were Consuls, at the first watch of the night, they came from Tybur in warlike manner to the cittie of Rome. This suddaine occurrent, happening so fearfully in the night season, stroke a mightie terrour into them, that hastily awakened out of sleepe. Besides, many there were that wist not, either what enemies they were, or from whence they came. Howbeit they cried Al'arm with all speed, on every side. The gates were fortified with warders, the wals manned with strong gardes. When as early in the morning, they were descried to be but a mean number of enemies before the town, and those none other but Tyburtines; the Consuls sallied out at two gates, and assailed both waies their forces, as they were now come under the wals readie to skale. Then was it seen that they were

 thither come, presuming rather on the vantage of the time, than trusting in valour and manhood: so little were they able to abide the first brunt and charge given by the Romanes. Furthermore, it was well knowne, that this their comming turned to the Romanes good: for, the discord that was now breeding between the Senators and the Com: for feare of this so neer danger was quite staied. But in the next war that ensued, the enemies came after another sort, and were more terrible to the fields and countrie, than to the citie. For the Tarquinians overran all the marches of the Roman pale, wasting and spoiling all those parts, especially that border upon Hetruria: And after restitution and amends demanded, but to no effect, the new Coss. C. Fabius and C. Plantius, by the ordinance of the people proclaimed war against them. The rumors also of the Gaules war began to be rise. But amid these manifold and fearefull troubles, this was their comfort, that the Latines had peace  granted unto them, upon their own sute: and from thence a great power was received, according to the ancient league, which for many years space, they had sorelet and discontinued. The Roman forces by this aid well strengthned, made a lighter matter of it, when they heard that the Gauls were arrived alreadie at Preneste, and were set down and encamped about Pedum. It was thought good, that C. Sulpitius should be chosen Dictator, named by C. Plantius, sent for to the same purpose. Vnto whom M. Valerius was appointed for Commander of his horsemen. These marched against the Gauls with the choise souldiors of two Consular armies. This was a lingering war and protracted longer a great deale, than both parties liked of. At the first, the Gaules only were sharpe set and eger of battaile: but afterwards the Roman soldiours; by rushing into fight and skirmish; exceeded farre the fearcenesse and forwardnesse of the French. The Dictator, was nothing pleased  herewith, to put all upon the hazard of fortune, when there was no need at all, especially having to deale with that enemie, whom tract of time and disadvantage of the place, made daily worse and worse: being unprovided besides of victuals and making long aboad without any sensed fort: moreover, of that stomacke and constitution of bodie, as served wholly for expedition and quicke service, and by small delaies waxed feeble and faint. Vpon these considerations, the Dictatour held off still and drew the war on length, and had proclaimed a grievous punishment, if any without his expresse commaundement should fight with the enemie. The soldiours could not well brooke this: but first within their wards and watches began among themselves to carpe at the Dictatour: and otherwhiles they let flie at the LL. of the Senate in generall, blaming them for their direction, in that the Consuls had not the managing of this warre. They have chosen  indeed (say they) a singular Generall for the nonce, a captaine alone, who thinks whiles hee sitteth still and doth nothing, the victorie will fall from heaven, or flie into his verie lap. After this they began openly abroad, and in the day time, to cast out the same, yea and worse speeches too and more malepart namely, that they would either fight, and aske the Dictatour no leave, or go along in order of battaile to Rome. The Centurions also joined themselves to the soldiours: and not onely in conventicles and knots together, there was whispering and grumbling: but in the verie A place in the campe.Principia, yea and within the quarter of the L. Generall his pavilion, were heard confused speeches together in one accord. So as the multitude began now to grow to a full assemblie, and from all parts to call and crie aloud, to go presently to the Dictatour: and that Sex. Tullius should in the name of the whole armie speake unto him, as beseemed his vertue and courage. This Tullius  now had ben seven times alreadie a primipila^ or principall Centurion: neither was there in the whole armie, of all those that served on foot, a man more renowmed for fears of armes. He going before the armie of footmen, steppeth to the Tribunall. And when as Sulpitius mervailed, not so much to see that companie, as the leader of the companie Tullius, who of all the soldiours had ever been in best order and most obedient.The O^ation of Sex, Tuli^us unto the Dictator.Principia, yea and within the quarter of the L. Generall his pavilion, were heard confused speeches together in one accord. So as the multitude began now to grow to a full assemblie, and from all parts to call and crie aloud, to go presently to the Dictatour: and that Sex. Tullius should in the name of the whole armie speake unto him, as beseemed his vertue and courage. This Tullius  now had ben seven time
This is the matter (quoth he) o Noble Dictatour and nothing else, The whole armie in generall, supposing themselves by you condemned of cowardise, and in a manner to their utter shame abandoned, and disarmed, have intreated me to plead their cause before your majestie. And I for my part, I assure you, in case we might be charged to have lost ground any where, in case we had turned our backes upon the enemy, in case we had lost our ensignes shamefully, would think it yet a reasonable suit to be obtained at your hands, that  you would give us leave to amend that which is amisse, to correct our former fault with hardines and valour, and by some fresh and glorious exploit, to cancell the remembrance of so foule foile and shamefull dishonor. Even those very Legions that were defeated and put to flight at Allia, afterwards in their returne from Veij, recovered the same country of theirs by valiancy, which they had once before lost through cowardise. But we by the goodnes of God, through the felicitie of

your selfe and the people of Rome, have hitherto kept both the armie unfoiled, and honor unstained. And yet I fearce dare say, honour; if so be, that not only our enemies may with all reprochful tearmes scorne and flout us, as if wee were women pent in and mewed up close within our rampier: but also you our Generall (the more is our greese) deeme us your armie, to be heartles, handlesse, and armourlesse: and before any triall of us made, so despaire of us, as if you tooke your selfe to bee a commaunder and leader of a sort of maimed and feeble persons. For what else may wee thinke of it, that you, an old experienced captaine and a most valiant warrior, should sit, as they say, with one hand in another, doing nothing? For howsoever the truth is indeed, more meet it is, that you should bee thought to doubt of our valour, than wee of yours. But if this be not a devise of your owne setting, but a publick plot laid: and some matter agreed upon among the Senators at home, rather than any warreof the Gaules, keepeth us away from  thence, confined as it were from the cittie and our owne houses: then I beseech you, whatsoever I shall say, you would thinke it as spoken, not by the souldiours to their Lord Generall, but by the Commons to the rulers and Senators. Who may thus replie, that as yee have your pollicies and counsels, so will they have their designes and waies of their owne likewise. For who would thinke, I pray you, that wee are your souldiours, and not your slaves; sent to war, and not into banishment? If any set out the banner of warre unto us, lead us forth into the field, and sound the battell, readie wee are to fight like men, and like Romans: but if there bee no need of warre, we will rather sit still at home, than in the campe. And thus much, suppose as spoken to the lords of the Senate. But wee thy souldiours, o worthie Generall, beseech thee first to give us leave to fight, then desirous are we to conquer, and under thy standard and conduct to conquer: to present thee  with a glorious garland of lawrell, and in triumph to enter with thee into the citie: and after thy chariot to go up with joy and mirth to the temple of Iupiter Optimus Maximus. This Oration of Tullius, the multitude seconded with their petitions, calling alowd unto the Generall on everie side, to sound the al'arme, and commaund them to arme. The Dictatour, albeit hee thought the matter in it selfe good, but not handled in good manner; and for example sake not to be allowed: yet promised to satisfie the souldiors desire.
And calling Tullius secretly apart, questioned with him what this geere ment, what precedent or custom they had for their warrant? Tullius earnestly besought the Dictatour, not to thinke him to have forgotten either militarie discipline, or his owne place, ne yet the majestie of his soveraigne. And whereas he had not withdrawne himselfe away from the multitude being in a mutinie, nor refused to bee their speaker (who lightly resemble  those that are their ring leaders) it was onely for feare least some other should have stept in place, such as the unruly people in mutinies are wont to set up for their Chieftaines. As for himselfe, do nothing he would, without the pleasure of the Generall. Howbeit, hee would advise him to looke well about him, and carefully to see to it, that he keep his armie in order, goverment, and obedience. And high time it is now, and would not be differred. For considering their harts were kindled alreadie, and their bloud up, they would be their owne carvers, and chuse themselves both time and place, it the Generall would not graunt it them the sooner. Whiles they were thus in sad communication, there happened two Roman souldiors to take perforce from a Gaule certaine sumpter horses, which feeding without the campe, he was driving away. At whome, the Gaules let flie stones good store. And thereupon rose an al'arme from the Roman Corps de guard, and running out there was avie, on both sides. So as now they had growne to a full skirmish and battaile indeed, had not the Centurions speedily stickled them, and ended the fray. Vpon which occurrent, the credite of Tullius with the Dictatour was confirmed: and seeing the case would abide no delaies, he proclaimed battell against the morrow. The Dictatour notwithstanding hee had yeelded to fight a field, as presuming more upon the courage of his men, than their forces: began to devise with himselfe, and cast about every way, how by some stratageme he might strike a terrour among the enemies. And having a subtle wit and nimble head of his owne, this new pollicie hee thought upon: which afterwards many warriors, both of our owne countrie, and of others also,The ^ratageme of C. Su^pitius the Dictatour. yea and some even in our time, have used and put in practise. He gave order, that the mules sumpters should bee taken off their backes, leaving onely two course twillies or coverings  upon them, and setteth the muletours aloft thereon, furnished with the armour of certaine captives, and sicke and diseased persons. Of these he made wel neere one thousand, and joined unto them one hundred good horsemen. All these, hee chargeth in the night time to get above the campe into the hils, and among the glins and woods, to bestow themselves close: and not to stir

 from thence, before that he gave them a signall. Himselfe, so soone as it was day light, began with great warinesse and considerate care to embattaile and arrange his armie in length, along the very foot of the mountaines: to the end, that the enemie might have the hils full against him. Thus having set out and directed these counterfeit cornets of horse, to skare the enemies with, who, as it fell out, did more good in a manner, than the other forces indeed; at the first, the vaward of the Gaules thought that the Romanes would not come downe on even ground: but afterwards, when they saw them upon a suddaine descended, they also, as desirous of fight, ran on forward presently to joine battaile, and began the fight before the captaines had sounded. The Gaules charged the right wing more fiercely, so that hardly they might have been abidden, had  not by good hap the Dictator been there in person.
Who called upon Sextus Tullius by name, and rebuked him, demaunding whether hee had given his word unto him, that the souldiours should in that sort fight? What is become (quoth hee) of these, that with out-cries and open mouth called for battell? Where are those threats now, that they would begin to fight a field without commandement of the Generall? Lo, your Generall himselfe calleth upon you as lowd as he can, to fall to your businesse, and goeth armed before the ensignes in the vaward: will anie now follow after, that erewhile would needs lead the way afore? Fierce (I see well) in campe, fearfull in the field. And no fable it was that they heard him speake. Whereupon for very shame they were so pricked forward, that without casting any perils, or minding present danger, they ran upon the darts and shot of their enemies. This violence of theirs, as if they had beene welneere out  of their right wits, at the very first troubled and disordered the enemies. The horsemen that were sent out hard after them, forced them to turne backe, when they were once in disarray. The Dictatour himselfe seeing the battell of one side to shrincke, advaunced forward with the ensignes against the left wing, unto which he saw the maine multitude to resort and gather together, and withall hee gave the signe to them that were within the hils, according as it was before agreed. And when from thence also a new shout arose, and that they were seene to march sidelong overthwart the hill, toward the Gaules campe; then for feare, least they should be shut out from their hold, they gave over all fighting, and ran by heapes to their camp. Where M. Valerius, the Generall of the horsemen encountred and affronted them. For hee seeing the right wing discomfited, had set a compas^e about, and ridden to the fortifications and munitions of the enemies. Wherupon  they fled to the mountaines and the woods. Most of them were received by the counterfeit shew of horsemen, and by the muletours caught up, and came short home: but as many of them as feare drave through into the woods, were (after the heat of the battaile was past) cruelly slaine and hewen in peeces. Neither was there any one, setting M. Furius aside, that triumphed more worthily over the Gauls, than did C. Sulpitius. He consecrated also in the Capitol a good weightie masse of gold, gotten out of the Gaules spoile, and compassed it within an enclosure of square stone. The same yeare, the Consuls likewise warred, but with diverse fortune and successe. For by C. Plantius, the Hernickes were vanquished and subdued. But his companion Fabius fought rashly and unadvisedly against the Tarquiniens. The losse in the battaile received, was not so much, but that the Tarquiniens sacrified three hundred and seven Romane souldiours, whome they tooke prisoners. This foule and shamefull execution, caused the ignominie of the Romanes  defeature afore, to bee much more notable, and talked of abroad. Besides this losse, was the Romane territorie much wasted (to helpe the matter withall) by the Privernates, and after them by the Veliternes, who made sodaine inrodes into the countrie. The same yeare also were two more Tribes added, Pomptina and Publicia. The votive solemne plaies or games likewise, which Marcus Furius the Dictatour had vowed, were then set foorth and perfourmed.
Then and never before was the first law put up to the people by P. Petilius,A law against ambitious seeking for offices of governement. a Tribune of the Commons, and that by the consent and approbation of the Senatours, against the excessive suit and ambitious standing for dignities. By which law men supposed, that the ambition principally of certaine persons new risen and of the first head, who were woont to haunt faires and  places of great resort for that intent, was repressed and kept under. But the yeare ensuing, when C. Martius and Cn. Manlius were Consuls, M. Duellius and M. Menenius two Tribunes of the Commons, went through with a law and got it enacted, which was not so well liked of the Senatours, to wit,A law against Vsurie. concerning Vsurie of one in the hundred. But the Commons were so much the more forward and better contented, to grant and accept it. Over and besides those new wars the

yeare before entended, the Falisci were declared new enemies: and that, for two quarrels pretended  against them, One, for that their youth had served against the Romanes under the Tarquiniens: the other, because they had not delivered againe those Romanes which fled unto Falerij, after their defeature and unluckie fight, notwithstanding the Heraulds had made claime unto them and demaunded them. This province fell to Cn. Manlius. But Martius had the leading of an armie into the land of the Privernates, which by reason of long peace was unfoiled yet, and in very good stare, and thereby enriched his souldiors with good prizes. For, to the plentie and store that there was found, he added his owne bountie and liberalitie; in that he set out nothing for the common treasurie, but favoured the souldiors, and gave them leave to better their owne private estate.
The Privernates lay strongly encamped before their own cittie: and when he had assembled all his souldiors together, Now (quoth he) I give unto you the enemies campe and  their cittie for a bootie, so you will promise me to quit yourselves like men, and to be as readie to fight as to spoile. Hereupon, with a great crie they call for the Signall of battaile: and so advancing forward and exalting themselves bravely and couragiously, with assured hope of victorie, to battaile they go. There, even before the ensignes in the vantgard, Sext. Tullius, of whom wee spake before, cried out alowd, Behold, Noble Generall (quoth he) how thine armie performeth their word given unto thee: and therewith laying downe his Iavelin, with drawne sword confronteth the enemie. Then follow after Tullius, all they that fought in the vaward before the Standerds, and at the first shocke put the enemies to flight, followed the chase and drave them into the towne. And as they were scaling the wals, the towne was rendred up into their hands. So he triumphed over the Privernates. By the other Consull there was no worthie exploit done, but that as he lay encamped before Sutrium, he proposed a law to passe by the Tribes, (a course never taken before, and without example) concerning a twentith part or vicesime, to be levied of their goods that were made free. The Lords of the Senat (because by that Act there accrewed no small revenue to the Exchequer, that was now wasted) allowed thereof and gave their assent. But the Tribunes of the Com. moved not so much at the qualitie of the law in it selfe, as at the dangerous precedent given, ordained under paine of death, That no man ever after should in making of lawes withdraw the people apart: For, if that were once by law permitted, there would be nothing, were it never so pernicious to the people, but it might be enacted by souldiors, that have sworn to their Consuls allegeance, and were at his devotion. The same yeare was C. Licinius Stolo at the suit of M. Popilius Lenas, condemned upon his owne statute in(...). 10000  Asses, for that he together with his sonne, was possessed of a thousand acres of land, and under colour of freeing his sonne, he had deluded the statute in that case provided.
After this, the two Consuls M. Fabius Ambustus the second time, and M. Popilius Lenas the second time made two wars. That which Lenas fought with the Tyburtines was performed with case and facilitie, For having driven the enemies into the towne, he forraied their fields. But in the other war, the Falisci and the Tarquiniens, discomfited in the first battaile the other Consull. Their greatest feare arose upon this occasion. For, their priests carying afore them light burning torches, and snakes besides, went after a lunaticke and franticke manner, and with so strange and uncouth a shew troubled and disordered the Romane souldiors. And therwithall, at that very instant the souldiors, as if they had been bestraught, besides themselves, and astonied, dismarched  fearfully and stumbled upon the munitions and fortifications of their campe. But after, when as the Consull, Lieutenants and Colonels mocked and rated them, for being skared like children with these vaine bugbeares: for shame sodainly they tooke heart againe, and like blinde men ran upon those very same things, that before they had sled from. And so after they had dispatched this vaine devise and preparation of their enemies, they fell upon the armed men indeed, discomfited their whole armie and put them to flight: and being the same daie masters of their camp, with a rich bootie returned victours, both recounting in their militarie merie ditties and songs, the foolish preparation of the enemie, and also condemning their owne fearfulnes. After this, the whole nation of the Tuscanes arose, having for their leaders the Tarquiniens and the Falisci,C. Martius Rutilius first Dictator of the Commons. and came as farre as Salinae. Against which fearfull danger, was C. Martius Rutilius chosen, the first Dictatour that ever was of the Commoners: who named for his Generall of the horsemen a Commoner likewise C. Plantius. But the Senatours thought this a shamefull indignitie, that the Dictatorship also should now be chosen in commune: and did all they could possibly to hinder, that there should be nothing decreed toward the war, nor any preparation made

 for the Dictatour. But so much the sooner, and with more readinesse, all that the Dictator proposed, the Commons granted. So he departed from the cittie, and marched on both sides of the Tyber (transporting his armie in boats and plankes fastened together) to what place soever he heard the enemies were gone: and surprised many forraiers of them, as they wandred and straggled one from another, in the fieldes. He set upon their campe also, and wanne it: and after that he had taken eight thousand prisoners, and either slaine or chased all the rest out of the Romane pale; hee triumphed, by the suffrages of the people onely, without the approbation and assent of the Senatours. And for as much as they would not in any case have an assemblie for Election of Consuls, held either by the Dictatour a Commoner, or by the Consull: and because the other Consull Fabius was busied abroad in the warres, and not returned;  therefore, the matter fell againe to an Interreigne. So there were Interregents one after another, Q. Servilius Hala, M. Fabius, Cn. Manlius, C. Fabius, C. Sulpitius, L. Aemylius, Q. Servilius, and M. Fabius Ambustus. During the second Interreigne, there arose some variance, for that both Consuls were Patrity, i. of the Nobles. And when the Tribunes interposed themselves, and crossed those proceedings. Fabius the Interregent, alleadged a law out of the twelve tables in these tearmes, THAT WHATSOVER THE PEOPLE ORDAINED OR GRANTED LAST, THE SAME SHOULD BE GOOD, AND STAND FIRME AND RATIFIED: and in the suffrages and voices of the people, were comprised their graunt and ordinance. But when the Tribunes, for all their gainsaying and stepping between, could prevaile no more, but to prorogue thei. The assemblie of the people. Comices for the Election, there were at length two of the Nobles created Consuls, C. Sulpitius Peticus the third time, and M. Valerius Publicola: who the same day they were chosen, entred into their office. Thus in the 400 yeare after the foundation of the cittie, and the 35 after it was recovered from the Gaules, the Commons lost the Consulship againe, when they had enjoied it nine yeares. And two Consuls of the Patrity; upon the Interreigne, began to governe, to wit, C. Sulpitius Peticus the third time, and M. Valerius Publicot^. The same yeare was Emp^lum woon from the Tyburtines, without any memorable warlike exploit: were it that, under the conduct of both Consuls there jointly together, the warre was managed, as some have written: or that about the same time the Tarquiniens countrie was by the Consull Sulpitius overrun and wasted, whiles Valerius led forth a power against the Tyburtes. But more adoe had the Consuls at home, with the Commons and Tribunes. The Consuls thought now, it concerned them in trust  and credit, as well as in vertue and valour, that as they, being Patrity both of them, had received the Consulship, so they should make-over the same againe to twaine of the Nobilitie: and either wholly to give up their interest and title for ever, if so bee the Consulship should now become a Commoners dignitie: or els to keepe it wholly in their possession, wherof they were first seized intirely, in right of their auncestours. On the other side, the Commons frounsed and stormed in these and such like tearmes.
What showld we live any longer? and why are we accounted citizens? In case, that which was first gotten by the vertue and power of two only persons, L. Sextius, and C. Licinius, we cannot now all of us together hold and keepe? Certes, better wee were to endure the KK. and Decemvirs againe, or any other heavier and more fearefull name of absolute and lordly Empire, than to see both Consuls of the Nobilitie: and that wee, may not both rule  and obey in turnes, but that the one part setled in the place of rule for ever, should thinke us, the Commons, were borne for nothing els but to obey and serve. The Tribunes themselves were nothing behind to set forward these troublesome mutinies. But when people are up once altogether and in an hurle, the principall leaders are hardly seene above the rest in the action.
And when as they were come downe into Mars field sundrie times to assemblie, but ever to no purpose and effect, and that many Comitiall daies of assemblie were passed over, only in seditions troubles: at the last, the Commons being overmatched through the stiffenesse and obstinacie of the Consuls, tooke the matter so greevously to the heart, that when the Tribunes brake forth into these speeches, Now farewell freedome for ever: now are wee driven, not onely to forbeare comming into Mars field, but also to abandon and forsake the cittie, taken captive and oppressed by  the lordly rule of the Nobles, and therewithall departed: the Commons with sorrowfull cheere did the semblable, and followed after. The Consuls being thus left destitute of one part of the people, yet neverthelesse went through with the election, as few as they were there remaining. And Consuls there were elected of the Nobilitie both, M. Fabius Ambustus the third time, and T. Quintius. In some annales or yearely records, I find Cos. M. Popilius, in steed of T. Quintius.

In that yeare, were two warres performed with prosperous successe. And the Tyburtines were  sought withall untill they yeelded. From them was the cittie Sassula woon by force: and other townes had tasted of the same fortune, but that the whole nation laid armes aside, and submitted themselves to the Consuls his mercie. He triumphed over the Tyburtines: otherwise the conquest was mild and gentle ynough, without extremitie of execution. But the Tarquiniens were cruelly dealt withall: and many a man of them slaine in field. Of the prisoners that were taken, whereof there was a mightie number, there were 358 of the Noblest and greatest Gentlemen chosen out, and sent to Rome. The rest of the common sort were put to the sword. Neither sped they better at the peoples hands that were sent to Rome. For in the mids of the Forum, were they all beaten with rods and beheaded. This execution made quittance with them, for sacrificing the Romanes in the market place of the Tarquiniens. This good successe in warre caused the Samnites  also to seeke for peace and amitie. Their Embassadours were courteously answered by the Senate, and so upon covenants they were received into societie. But the Commons sped not so well at home in the cittie, as abroad in warfare. For albeit the Vsurie was well eased by bringing it downe from twelve to one, in the hundred: yet the poorer people were overcharged with the paiment of the very principall, and became bond and thrall to their creditors. Wherby the Com. in regard of their private streights, that they were driven unto, never troubled their heads with the making of both Consuls of the Nobles, nor with the Assemblies and Elections, nor other publicke affaires. Still the two Consulships remained among the Patritij. And created there were Consuls, C. Sulpitius Peticus the fourth time, and M. Valerius Publicola the second time.
Now when as the cittie was earnestly amused upon the Tuscane war, by reason that the newes  went, how that the people of Caere, for very pittie and compassion, and in regard also of consanguinitie, tooke part with the Tarquiniens: behold the Embassadors of the Latines turned them cleane against the Volscians. Which Embassadors brought word, that there was an armie levied alreadie from thence and in armes, even now upon the point to invade their borders: and would from them enter the territorie of Rome, and spoile as they goe. The Senate therefore thought good to neglect neither businesse, and gave direction, that to both places certaine legions should be appointed, and the Consuls to cast lots for their severall provinces and charges. But afterwards, the greater care was taken for the Tuscane war, upon intelligence given by Sulpitius the Consull his letters, whose commission was against Tarquinij, that the countrie was wasted and spoiled all about the Romane Salinae, [or Saltpits] and part of the booties caried away into  the confines of the C^rites: and that the youth of that people were doubtlesse emploied in the driving of that bootie. Whereupon Valexius the Consull, who was opposed against the Volscians, and encamped in the marches of Tusculum, was called backe from thence, and commaunded by the Senate to nominate a Dictatour. Who named T. Manlius, the sonne of Lucius, and he taking to him A. Cornelius Cossus for his Generall of the horsemen, contenting himselfe with his Consular armie, by the authoritie of the Senate, and the peoples suffrages, proclaimed warre against the Caerites, and sent them defiance. Then were the Cerites afraid of war indeed, and not afore, as though there had ben more force in their enemies bare words, to denounce and signifie war, than in their owne deeds, who by spoiling and boothaling, had provoked the Romans to war. Then saw they plainely that they were overmatched and not able to make their parts good: then  repented they that they had made such wast and spoile, cursing the Tarquiniens for solliciting them to revolt, not one of them making any preparation of armour or war: but every man laboring what he could, that embassadors should be sent, to crave pardon for their trespasse and offence. When their Embassadours were come to the Senat, they were from thence put over to the people. And then they besought the gods, whose sacred Images they had received in the French war and devoutly kept and cherished, That the Romanes now in their flourishing estate, would take that pitie and compassion of them, which they in times past had of the Romanes, in their calamitie and hard distresse.The embassadors of C^r^, to the people of Rome. And turning to the chappels of Vesta, they called upon the Flamines and Vestall virgines, sometime their guests, whome they so chastly and religiously had received and given intertainement unto, saying in this wise.
Would any man beleeve we had deserved no better , but thus of a suddaine, without cause given, to be reputed enemies? Or suppose we had done somewhat smelling of hostilitie, would any man impute it rather to deliberate counsell, than to some fit of heat and sollie? And that we would blemish and marre our owne good deserts, especially conferred and bestowed upon so thankefull persons, with new misdeeds and shrewd turnes?

 and chuse to make the people of Rome their enemies now in their wealthie and slowring State, and in their most happie felicitie of war: whose friendship in their adversitie we had embraced? Beseeching them not to terme that, considerate advise, which rather were to be called force and necessitie. For the Tarquiniens, say they, passing with a cruell and puisant armie through our countrie, and requesting nothing but a way, had drawne with them some of our rusticall pesants, to assist them only in setching of that bootie, which now so heavily is laid to our charge. Whom if you please to have them yeelded, we are readie to deliver them: if to be punished, they shall suffer accordingly: most humbly craving, that their citie Caere, the verie sanctuarie of the people of Rome, the harbour and hostell of their priests, the place of receit for the Romane sacred images and reliques, they would grant unto them safe from the calamitie of warre, and exempt from  the slaunder thereof: and therather for the prosessed vestall virgines sake, so kindly intertained, and for the love of the gods, by them so devoutly honored. The people were moved, not so much with the justice and equitie of the present cause, as for their old desarts and good turnes, to forget rather the harm sustained, than the good received. Wherupon, the people of Cere were pardoned, and agreed it was that a truce for one hundred years should be registred among the Acts of the Senate. Then were the forces diverted against the Falisci, who were tainted likewise with the same offence. But the enemies would no where be found. They wasted therfore all over their confines: and forbare to assaile their townes. So they withdrew their legions to Rome. The rest of the yeare was emploied in repairing their wals and towers: and the Temple of Ap^llo was dedicated. In the verie end of the yeare, the contention between the Senatours and the Commons,  brake off the Election of the Consuls: whiles the Tribunes stifly denied to suffer any assemblie therfore to be holden, unlesse it were according to the law Licinia. And the Dictatour againe was as stoutly and stifly bent, to abolish wholly out of the citie the Consulship, rather than it should be indifferent for the Nobilitie and common people. Thus by adjourning the Election, the Dictatour left his office, and the matter grew to an Interreigne. And the Interregents, finding ever the Commons maliciously set against the Senatours, succeeded one after another unto the eleventh Interregent: and all the while continued the discord and variance. The Trib. they called on hard for the maintenance of the law Licinia. The Commons, they had an inward griefe that stuck neerer to them, upon the excessive usurie that still increased: and ech mans privat care and greevance, brake out in their publicke contentions and debates. The LL. of the Senate weary  of these troubles, commaunded L. Cornelius Scipio the Interregent for the time being, for concord and unitie sake, in the Election of Consuls to observe the law Licinia. So P. Valerius Publicola, had joined with him in fellowship of governement, Caius Martius Rutilius, one of the Commons.
Now whiles mens minds were enclined once to concord, the new Consuls labouring to ease also this matter of usurie, the onely spill or bone (as it were) between, that seemed to hinder the uniting of their hearts, and impeach the generall agreement; took order publickly for the paiment of debts,Five bankers Instituted, called Mensarij. by creating fi^e officers or Quinquevirs, whom of the despensing and disposing of the publicke monies, they called Mensarij. And surely, for their equitie and carefull diligence, they deserved in all monuments and records to be remembred and renowmed. And these they  were, C. Duellius, P. Decius, M. Papyrius, Q. Publius, and T. Aemylius. Who underwent and managed this matter, so intricate and difficult to be dealt in: so grievous and combersome to both sides for the most part, but evermore to one at the least. Which they performed both with Indifferent moderation otherwise, and also with some cost and deffay of charge, rather than any losse and dammage to the State. For the long debts and more entangled, rather in regard of the debtors slacknes and negligence, than their want of abilitie, either the citie out of the common stock crossed out of the booke, by setting up certaine counters or tables with readie coine in the publicke hall (provided, that there were good securitie unto the citie by sureties and cautions put in aforehand) or els the goods of men valued at indifferent and reasonable prices discharged. So as not onely without any wrong done,All debts cleared in Rome. but also without the complaint of both parties, a mightie  deale of debts was satisfied and paid.
After all this, a vaine feare of the Tuscane warre, upon a false Al'arme given, that their twelve nations conspired and were consedered together, caused a Dictatour to be chosen. So C. Iulius was named in the campe: for thither to the Coss. was the patent of the Senats decree sent. And to him was joined as Generall of the horsemen, L. Aemylius. But all was quiet without forth.

Within the cittie the Dictator gave the attempt, that both Consuls should be created of the Patritij: which brought the government for the time to an Interreigne. And the two Interregents that were in that while (to wit) C. Salpitius and M. Fabius, obtained that which the Dictator had reached at in vaine; namely, that both Consuls might be created of the Nobilitie: for now the Commons were more pliable and tractable, by reason of the fresh benefit received, in the easement and satisfying of their debts. So there were chosen C. Sulpitius Peticus, he, who was the former of the twaine that gave over the Interreigne, and T. Quintius P^nus. Some there be that give to Quintius the addition of C^so for his surname [and of Cajus for his forename.] Both of them went forth to warre, Quintus against the Falisci, and Sulpitius against the Tarquiniens. Who, for that they could never meet with the enemie in open field, by burning and spoiling made warre with the fields rather than with the men. By which lingring continuance, as it were  of a languishing consumption, the stubbornes of both nations was so well tamed, that they made petition, first to the Consuls, and by their permission after to the Senat, for a truce, and obtained the same for the terme of fortie years. Thus the care was laid aside of the two warres, which seemed so neer at hand. And whiles there was some rest from Armes, it was thought good because the paiment of debts above said, had changed the owners and masters of many things, that there should be held a general Sessing of the citizens. But, when there was an assembly summoned for the chusing of Censors, C. Martius Rutilius professing himselfe to stand for a Censorship, even he that had been the first Dictatour of the Commons, troubled the peace and unitie of the States of the cittie. This he went about (as it seemed) in a verie undue and unseasonable time. For, both Consuls were then of the Nobilitie, as it fell out, who gave it forth that they would not admit him  to be a Competitour, nor propounde his name at the Election. Howbeit, both he by earnest perseverance in his resolution obtained that which he went about: and also the Tribunes with all their might endeavouring to recover their right, which was lost in the Election of the Consuls, set to their helping hand. And as the countenance and majestie of the man himselfe, seemed worthie of the highest type of honour: so the Commons were right willing, that by the same man who had opened the way unto the Dictatourship, the Censureship also should draw to that side, and be in part conferred upon them. Neither in the assembly was there any variance in the Suffrages,C. (...) but that, together with Manlius Navjus, Martius should be created Censor. This yeare likewise had a Dictator, M. Fabius, not for any feare of warre, but because the law Licinia, for the choise of Consuls, should not be revived and observed. The Generall of the horsemen  unto the Dictatour was Q. Servilius. And yet for all the Dictatorship, the agreement of the Senators together, was in the Election of the Consuls of no more force than it was in the chusing of the Censors. For M. Popilius Lenas was Consull, of the Commons, and L. Cornelius Scipio of the Nobles. And the Commoner Consul, by good fortune, proved more famous of the twain. For when upon tidings brought, that a mightie armie of the Gaules were encamped in the Latine countrie, this Gaules warre was laid extraordinarily upon Popilius, because Scipio lay grievously sicke. Who having soone levied an armie, and commaunded all the younger men, to meet him in their armour at Mars his Church, without the gate Capena, and that the Questors should bring thither the Standerds and ensignes out of the Aerarium, [cittie chamber] and after he had chosen out of them, fully foure Legions, he delivered all the residue of the soldiours  unto P. Valerius Publicola, the Pretor: and moved the LL. of the Senate to enroll another armie to be in readines, against all uncertaine occurrents of warre, what need soever the cittie should have. And now himselfe being at all points throughly furnished, setteth forward to meete the enemie. Whose power because he would know, before he made triall therof with the uttermost hazard, he began to cast a trench and raise a rampier upon the next hill unto the Gaules campe, that he could come unto. The Gaules, a fearce kind of people and by nature eager of fight, having discovered a farre off the Romane ensignes, embattelled themselves forthwith, as readie to bid battaile. But when they saw the Romane armie not brought forth into the plaine and even ground, but that they were strongly defended, not onely by the height of the place, but also with a ditch and palaisado, and supposing them to be smitten with feare, and the fitter therfore to be  assailed, for that they were at that instant busily occupied about their other fortifications; with an hideous noise and horrible shout, gave the charge upon them. The Romanes gave over their worke never the sooner (they were the Triarij of the rereward that made these fortifications) but the spearmen or javelottiers of the vaward, and the Principes of the middle ward, who stood

 readie armed in guard for the defence of the pioners, made head and received them with fight Besides their valour, the higher ground was their vantage: so as all their darres and speares light not in vaine (as commonly they doe that are flung and launced on levell ground) but stucke all fast as being peised with their own weight: so that the Gaules being surcharged with dartes either sticking through their bodies, or fast set in their shields, and so weighing them downe; having also run themselves upon the hill; first, as doubtfull what to do, made staie; afterwards, when protracting of time had discouraged themselves, and encouraged their enemies, they were driven backe and fell one upon another; and in that medley made greater havocke and worse, than the slaughter was by the enemie: and crushed they were to death, more in that croud and thrust, than were slaine by sword. Yet were not the Romanes sure of victorie: for when they were come down  into the plaine, there was a new piece of worke to begin, and a fresh trouble behind. For the Gaules, by reason of their number, little feeling such a losse (as if a new armie had started up in sight, out of the ground) stirred up their fresh souldiors and unfoiled, against the enemie in his victorie. Wherupon the Romanes made a stand and staied their egernesse: both because they being alreadie wearied, were to abide a new conflict; and also for that the Consull, whiles he laid about him with the formost, without regard of his own person, was wounded well neare through the left shoulder with a pike, and thereupon for a while was departed out of the battaile. By occasion of which lingering, the victorie had like to have been lost againe: but that the Consull when his wound was dressed and bound up, came backe againe with speede to the formost ensignes, and said:M. Popilius Ienas, the Consull, exhorteth his soldiours to fight. Why stand yee still firs? yee have not to deale now, with the Latines or Sabines  your enemies, whom after yee have conquered by sword, yee may make of enemies friendes and confederates: but upon very savage beasts we have drawne sword. Either we must have their bloud, or they ours.
From the campe ye have driven them backe: chased ye have them head long downe the hill side: over the bodies of enemies lying along, now ye stand: fill the plaine also with their dead carkases, as ye have done the hils alreadie: and never looke that they will flie, so long as ye stand still. You must advance your ensigns, and charge the enemie afresh. With these exhortations they fell to it the second time, and forced the formost rankes and files of the Gaules to loose ground: and then with pointed close battailons of footmen, they brake through into the heart of the maine battaile. Whereupon the barbarous people being disaraied, such as had neither certaine directions to follow, nor Captaines to commaund, turned their force upon  their fellowes, were scattered here and there about the plaines, fled in this randon beyond their tents, and made toward the fort of Alba; which among many hils that stood of even height, they espied mounting above the rest. The Cos. followed the chase no farther than their campe: both because his hurt made himselfe unweildie, and also for that he was unwilling to put his tired armie to a new labour, considering the enemie had gained the hils tops, and so rested from farther pursuit. And when he had given the whole pillage of the camp to his souldiors, he brought backe to Rome his armie with victorie, and enriched with the spoiles of the Gaules. The Consull his wound staied his triumph: which was a cause also that the Senat wished and longed for a Dictatour, to hold the assembly for the Election of Consuls, whiles the other were sicke.
L. Furius Camillus being chosen Dictatour, had joined unto him P. Cornelius Scipio for his  Generall of horsemen. Hee restored againe to the Senatours their auncient possession of the Consulship: and for this good turne, was himselfe with exceeding affection of them all, created Consull.Popilius a Commoner niu^phe.h. And for his companion he chose unto him App. Claudius Crassus. But before the new Consuls entred into their office, Popilius, with great love and favor of the Commons triumphed over the Gaules: who mumbling and muttering among themselves, would estsoones aske one another, whither there were any repented of a Commoner Consull: rating with all at the Dictatour, who despising the law Licinia, had gotten for his reward a Consulship; which was more shamefull and infamous, in regard of his private seeking for it, (for being Dictatour, hee had made himselfe Consull) than for any other publicke harme and injurie. This yeare for many and sundrie troubles was very famous. The Gaules from the Albane glinnes (for that they were not  able there to endure the cold of Winter) raunged all over the champion and the sea coasts, and wasted the countrie. The seas likewise were dangerous by reason of the Greekes navie. Also all the tract along Antium, and the river of Laurentum, even to the very mouth of the Tyber. So as the rovers and men of war by sea, and the land robbers of the French, met both together, and strucke once for all a daungerous battaile: and then departed asunder, the French unto their standing

campe, the Greekes backe unto their ships: both doubtfull, whether they had woon or lost.
Amid these troubles, the greatest feare by farre, arose from this, that the Latine Nations held certaine Diets and Councels at the grove of Ferentina; and when the Romanes demaunded soldiours from them, flat answere was made, That they must no more thinke to commaund them, whose aid they stood in need of. And as for the Latines, they were resolved rather to beare armes in defence of their owne libertie, than fight for the maintenance of the dominion of strangers. The Senate being greeved and perplexed, as well for these two forraine warres, as also for the revolt of their consederates, seeing no other way, but to keepe them in by feare, whome loialtie would not restraine, commaunded the Consuls in their mustering, to extend and straine to the utmost the whole strength of the State: for now that their Allies failed them, they were to trust upon their cittie forces onely. From all parts therfore, the youth as well without in the countrie, as within the cittie were taken up, and ten legions (as men say) were enrolled of souldiors, amounting to 4200. foote and 300. horse in a legion. Which puissant armie, if now at this day any forreine wars were toward, these mightie forces of the people of Rome, which the whole world is hardly able to containe, if they were united and brought into one together, would not easily make againe: so great are we growen in wealth onely and superfluous delights, to which we strive and apply our mindes.
Among other heavie occurrents of that yeare, Ap. Claudius one of the Consuls, in the very preparation of the wars, departed this life. Wherupon the whole government was devolved upon Camillus. To which sole Consull, either for his qualitie and worthinesse otherwise (not meete to be controlled by the absolute command of a Dictatour) or for the luckie presage of his name  so fortunate in all the tumultuous wars of the Gaules, the Lords of the Senate thought it not decent and convenient, that there should be a Dictatour adjoyned. The Consull, having ordeined and appointed two legions for defence of the cittie, and parted the other eight with the Pretor L. Pin^^tus, bearing in minde his fathers valour and manhood, undertooke the Gaules war himselfe, without casting lots therfore: commanding the Pretor to keepe the sea coasts, and to put the Greekes backe from landing on the shore. He went himselfe downe into the countrie of Pomptinum, and because he was not willing to give battaile in the champian, unforced therunto; and thought the enemie might be wearied out well enough by keeping him short, forforaging and fetching in booties, who of necessitie was driven to live of prey, chose a convenient place for a standing campe. Where, as they passed the time quietly in their wards, as a setled garrison: there commeth forth a mightie Gaule, in person tall and big, for armour brave and glorious: who clattering his shield and speare together, and thereby making silence, gave defiance and challenged by his interpretor, the Romans to a combat, man to man. There was one M. Valerius a Colonell of footmen, and a very young man, who thinking himselfe nothing lesse worthie of that honour than T. Manlius, having first knowne the Consull his pleasure, advanced himselfe forth apart from the rest,The (...) armed at all points. But this conflict (as touching the devoir of the men) was lesse notable than the other, by reason that the hand of God came between and tooke a part. For as the Romane was readie to joine and cope, behold, sodainly a raven setled upon the crest of his morion, even full in the face of his enemie. Which at the very first the Colonell tooke joyfully as a token of good lucke sent from heaven. Afterwards, he praied devoutly, that the God or goddesse whosoever, that sent unto him from above that augurall soule, to presage and foresignifie the future event, would be favourable and gratious unto him. And lo, (a wonder to be spoken) the bird not only held the place still, which it first light upon, but also, as often as the champions buckled and closed together, mounting up with the wings, made at the eies and face of the enemie, with beake and clawes both, so long, untill Valerius killeth him. For the Gaule being affrighted at this so strange and wonderous a sight, both his eies dazeled, and his minde was mightily troubled. Then the raven tooke his rise, flew on height quite out of sight toward the East. All this while the campe on both sides was quiet hitherto. But after that the Colonell began to rifle and disarme the bodie of his slaine enemie, neither could the French keepe themselves within their Stations, nor the Romanes conteine, but run with more sp.ed unto  their Conquerour champion. And so about the bodie of the Gaule that lay along dead, began some skermish, and thereof grew a sharpe and cruell battaile. For now not onely the companies of the next quarters, and corps de guard, but also the whole legions on both sides, came abroad and fought.
Camillus commanded the souldiors, joious for the victorie of the Colonell,

 joious also for the gods, so favourable and readie to helpe, for to go to battaile: and shewing estsoones unto them the Colonell, set out bravely, and enriched with the spoiles of his enemie: Follow this brave gentleman, good souldiors (quoth he) and about the dead champion of the Gaules kill their whole troupes, and lay them along. In this fight appeared the helpe of God and man evidently: and they fought it out with the Gaules, and had no doubtfull conflict: both armies had so conceived and deeply imprinted before hand in their mind, the future event of these two souldiors that had fought together. Betweene the formost, whose concurse had raised others, there was a sharpe conflict: but the rest of the multitude, turned backe before they came to the voley of dartes. And first they were scattered along the Volscian and Falerne countries: but afterward they tooke their waies toward Apulia and the lower Adriaticke sea.
 The Consull having assembled the souldiors to an audience, solemnly before them all, commended the Colonell, and rewarded him with ten oxen and a coronet of gold. Himselfe, by direction from the Senat, to attend the war by sea, joyned campe with the Pretor. And there, because through the cowardise of the Greekes that would not come into the field, the war was like to be long and lingering, he nominated, by the authoritie of the Senat, T. Manlius Torquatus for the Dictatour, to hold the Election of Consuls. The Dictatour having named for his Generall of horsemen, A. Cornelius Cossus, held the Election, and with exceeding favour of the people, declared for Consull one like himselfe, and tracing the steps of his owne vertue and glorie, M. Valerius Corvinus (for that was his surname afterwardes) in his absence: a young man, I say, three and twentie yeares olde. To Corvinus was adjoyned companion in government a Commoner, M. Popilius Lenas the fourth time. Camillus performed no memorable exploit with the Greekes: for neither were the Greekes good souldiors on land, nor the Romans at sea. At the last, being kept from landing; and failing, besides other necessaries, of fresh water, they left Italie. Of what people, or of what nation in Greece this fleete consisted, is not certainly known. I would thinke verely, that they were the Tyrants or potentates of Sicilie, above all other. For all Greece beyond them, at that time wearied and toiled out with civill warres, much feared the greatnesse of the Macedonians. After the armies were discharged, and that both abroad there was peace, and also at home quietnesse, through the unitie of the States: least they should be glutted with too much joie, behold, a pestilence arose in the cittie, and constreined the Senate to commaund the Decemviri, to overlooke the bookes of Sibylla: and by direction thereof, was a Lectisterne  celebrated. The same yeare there was a Colonie drawne out of the Antiates, to people Satricum, and the towne was repaired by them, which the Latines had destroied. Also there was at Rome a league concluded with the Carthaginian embassadours, who came of purpose to sue for societie and amitie. The same rest continued still both at home and abroad, when T. Manlius Torquitus, and C. Plantius the second time were Consuls. The Vsurie which was before after one in the hundred, became now but halfe so much. The paiment of debtes was dispensed and ordered into three yeares by even portions, so as a fourth part should be paied out of hand. And albeit some of the Commons (for all that) were pinched therewith, yet the Senate had more regard to see credite kept with the chamber of the cittie, than of the difficulties of private persons. The greatest matters were well eased, in that they forbare to collect the tribute and to  muster souldiours.
The third yeare after that Satricum was reedified by the Volscians, M. Valerius Corvinus the second time Consull, with C. Petilius, upon newes out of Latium, that embassadours from Antium went about to the nations of the Latines, solliciting them to rise up in armes, was commaunded to make war upon the Volscians, before the enemies forces were greater: who put himselfe on his journey with a fierce armie toward Satricum. Whither when as the Antiates and other Volscians were come to meete him, with a power provided aforehand, against any preparations from Rome, presently without any staie they joyned battaile, as being through a deepe setled and long hatred, malitiously bent one against the other. The Volscians, a nation more hastie to rebell, than hardie in fight, being defeated in a battaile, fled amaine, and highed apace  to put themselves within the wals of Satricum. But when the wals were not able to save them, for that the towne being environed and invested round with souldiors, was readie to be taken by scaling, there were upon 4000. of them, besides the common sort not meete for service, that yeelded themselves. The towne was rased downe and burnt. Onely they spared the firing of Matutaes church. And the whole saccage and spoile was bestowed upon the souldiors. But there

were not comprised within this bootie, the 4000 that yeelded. Those, the Consull in his triumph  caused to be led bound before his chariot: and after that, solde them; and brought a round sum of money into the treasurie. Some write, that this number of captives, were bondslaves. And that is more like to be true, than that they should be sold, who yeelded themselves. After this followed Consuls, M. Fabius Dorsuo, and Servius Sulpitius Camerinus. Then began the Auruncan war upon a sodaine invasion that they made. And for feare, lest the action of that one State and cittie, had been the resolution of the whole Latine nation and by their maintenance, there was created Dictatour (as if it had been against all Latium alreadie up in armes) L. Furius Camillus: who chose for his Generall of horsemen, Cn. Manlius Capitolinus. And (as the use had been in time of great troubles and sodaine tumults) he mustered without any respect of Immunitie and Exemption, and therewith proclaimed a Cessation of all courtes of lawe: and the legions  with all speed possible were led against the Auruncans. Where they found, that they caried a mind of harriers rather than of warriors. So that in the first battaile, that war was dispatched. Howbeit the Dictatour, because they not onely made the quarrell and warred first, but also offered fight without any drawing backe, supposing there was some neede of Gods help withall from heaven, had vowed a temple to Iuno Moneta: and after he had obtained that he vowed for, and thereby was charged to performe his vow, so soone as he was returned home to Rome with victorie, gave up his Dictatorship.The temple of I^ ^ M^^sta. The Senat commanded two officers called Duumvirs to be created for the edifying of that temple, according to the magnificence of the people of Rome. The place was appointed and set out on the [Capitoll] hil, even the very plot of ground, where somtime before stood the dwelling house of
M. Manlius Capitolinus. The Coss. having imploied the Dictatour  his armie in the Volscian war, surprised at unwares the towne Sora out of the enemies hands. The temple of Moneta was dedicated the yeare after it had been vowed, when C. Martius Rutilius the third time, and T. Manlius Torquatus the second time, were Consuls. Immediatly upon the dedication of that church, there ensued a strange wonder, like unto that old marveile of the hill Albanus. For it rained stones, and in the daie time it seemed to be darke night. And the bookes of Sibylla being perused (for that the cittie now was mightily given to superstition) the Senat ordeined, that there should be a Dictatour named for the ordeining of certaine feasts and holydaies. So P. Valerius Publicola was chosen, and with him, Q. Fabius Ambustus Generall of the horsemen. Order was given, that not onely the Tribes should go in solemne procession with their praiers and Letanics, but also the nations that bordered upon them: with a precise direction  unto them, upon what daies every one should make supplication. That yeare (as it is reported) there passed heavie judgements and sentences of the people against the Vsurers, with whom the Aediles had commensed sute. And without any notable cause to be remembred, they grew to an Interreigne. Vpon which, that something might be thought therby done, both Consuls were made of the Nobles, M. Valerius Corvinus the third time, and A. Cornelius Cossus.
Now from hence forth will we indite of greater wars, both for the puissance of the enemies, and also for their far distance: as well for their spacious countries they inhabited, as long tract of time that they continued.The beginning of the Samnite (...). For this yeare began the Romans to bear armes against the Samnits, a nation powerful in wealth, and valiant in field. After which war, fought on both sides with alternative fortune, there succeeded Pyrrhus their enemie, and after Pyrrbus the Carthaginians. To see  (good Lord) the wonderful stirs and troubles: and how often the Romans fel into extremies of perils, that their dominion and Empire might arise unto this greatnes and high state, which hath much ado to hold it own, and stand maintained. But the cause of the Romans war with theAl^uzzo and the Du^^^e of B^not ^nte as far e^to Nap^s. Samnits, being in societie and amitie linked together, arose first from others, and not upon any quarrel between themselves. At what time as the Samnits warred unjustly (as being more mightie) upon theThe Inhabitants of Si^i^i^ n^nt, other ^^ise called T^an^n, or Thrano. Sidicines: they as the weaker, and forced to flie for succour unto the richer, banded with the Campaines. Who bringing with them a greater name, than power (in deed) to aid and assist their Allies, and flowing in roiot and superfluous delights, hapned in the countrie of the Sidicines to be foiled and defeated by the other, who had been inured and hardned by continuall use of arms: and so afterwards drew upon their owne heads, the whole violence and poise of the wars. For the  Samnites letting the Sidicines alone, went to the head, and set upon the Campains, as it were the verie fortresse and castle of defence for all the borderers. For well they wist that there they might win victorie as easely: but riches and honour at their hands they were to atchieve much more. And when they had gained and held with a strong garison, the hils calledMonte di Capus. Tifata, that were

 adjoining, and commaunded the cittie Capua. From thence they descended with a fouresquare raunged battaile into the plaine that lieth betweene Capua and Tifara: where a second field was fought: In which the Campanies had the overthrow, and were beaten within their owne wals. Having therfore no hope neer hand, and seeing the strength of their youth greatly decaied, they were constrained to seeke for aide of the Romanes.
Whose Embassadors being admitted into the Senate, and having audience given them, spake much what to this effect. The people of Capua, most noble Senatours, hath sent us in ambassie unto you, to crave at your hands friendship for ever,The Embassadours of the Campaines in the Senate of Rome. and succour for the present. Which amitie if we had requested in our prosperitie, well might it sooner have begun, but knit had it been with a weaker bond and not so durable. For then, remembring ourselves to have entred league and societie on even  ground, and in equall estate with you; friends haply we should have beene as we now are, but bounden and devoted unto you, we had never been. But now, in case by your commiseration and pittie we be gained and won, and in our distresse, by your aid, helped and relieved; we must needs affectionately embrace a benefit from you received, unlesse we would be thought unthankefull wretches, and unworthie of any helpe either of God or man. And albeit the Samnites, have been before us intertained in friendship and confederacie, yet we thinke that, no sufficient barre, but that we may also be received into the same. Onely thus much it ought to make for them, as to be preferred before us in ancientie of time, and degree of honour. For in that alliance between you and the Samnites, there is no expresse clause, no caveat or proviso contained, against the making of any new confederacies. And certes, alwaies heretofore ye have thought it cause good  enough of your friendship, if the partie who sought the same, were but willing and desirous to be your friend. Wee Campaines (albeit our present condition suffereth us not to speake magnifically) giving place to no nation but yourselves, either for the stately port of our cittie, or goodnesie, and fruitfulnesse of our soile, in entering into your acquaintance, shall not a little, I suppose increase and better your good estate. And first for the Aequians and Volscians, those eternall and perpetuall enemies of this cittie, they shall not so soone at any time stirre and put out their heads, but we will be streight upon their jacks. And looke what ye first shall find in your hearts to doe for our safetie, the same will we alwaies doe for your Empire and honour. And when those nations be once subdued that are betwen you and us (which your vertue and fortunat felicitie, promiseth will be shorly) then shal your dominion reach all the way in a continued train,  as farre as unto us. A pitifull and lamentable case it is, that our present fortune urgeth us to confesse. To this exigent and hard termes of extremitie are we Campaines driven (right honourable) that subject we must be, either to our friends or to our enemies. If ye defend us, yours will we be; forsake us once, we must be the Samnites. Consult yee now therfore deliberately, whether ye had leifer, that Capua and all the territorie of Capua, should be annexed unto your power and State, or added to the Samnites Seignorie. Your mercy, your succour, o Noble Romanes, ought in equitie to extend unto all men, but especially unto those, who by yeelding their reliefe and helping hand (even above their power) unto others, that implored and humbly besought succour, are now themselves fallen all, into the same streights of necessitie. And yet, to say a truth, we fought in shew and semblance of word for the Sidicines; but in verie deed and effect for our  owne selves. For, considering a neighbour nation, bordering even vpon us, to be robbed and spoiled most wrongfully by the Samnites; we well foresaw, that when the Sidicines were once set a burning, the same fire would soone be driven and reach unto us. For now are not the Samnites come to assaile us, as discontented for any injurie received: but, as well pleased that they have cause of quarrell, offred and presented unto them. For if it had been but a revenge onely of anger upon some pretended wrong, and not a meane and occasion, to satisfie their greedie appetite: had it not been enough for them, that they had vanquished and put to the sword our Legions once in the Sidicine countrie, and a second time in Campaine itselfe our owne territorie? What a cankred and mortall malice is this, which bloodshed and massacres in two battailes cannot satiate or asswage? Besides the wasting of our fields, the driving away of booties, as well  of people as cattell, the firing of villages, the ruine and havocke they made; and in everie place nothing but fire and sword. Could not their anger and wrath have beene satisfied with all this? But it is their greedie and unsatiable covetousnes and nothing else, that must be fulfilled. That is it which carieth them, that haleth and harieth them to the assault of Capua. At it their teeth water, that most goodly and beautifull cittie will they either destroy, or be LL. thereof themselves. But

may it please you Romanes, to gaine it afore by your owne benefit and good desart: rather than  suffer them to seize upon it, by wrong and mischiefe. I speake not this before a people that useth to make it straunge and goodly to undertake any rightfull and just warres. If ye but shew a copie of your countenance, as if ye would aid and succour us, I suppose yee shall have no need at all of further warre. The Samnites overweening of themselves and contempt of others, reacheth to us onely: further it proceedeth not. So that under the very shadow of your assistance, o Romanes, we may be safely covered and protected. And whatsoever we shall hereafter gaine therby, whatsoever we shall be of our selves (even as much as we are worth) readie are we to acknowledge it all yours. For your sake shall the Campaine ground be titled: for your behoofe shall the cittie Capua be resorted unto and frequented: and accounted shall ye be of us, no lesse than founders, parents, yea and as the immortall gods. There shall not be a borrough or Colonie of yours, that shall go beyond us in obsequious dutifulnes towards you. Doe but affoord unto us Campaines, o Noble Senators, a token of your gracious countenance, yeeld us your invincible name as a powrefull deitie, and bid us hope assuredly, that Capua shall remaine still and continue in safetie. What a number thinke ye of all sorts and degrees of people, followed and accompanied us, when we came from thence? How left we all places filled with their vowes, their praiers and teares? In what expectation now, do the Senate, and people of Capua, our wives and children, attend our returne? Assured I am, that the whole multitude stand about the gates looking toward the high port-way that leadeth from hence thither, waiting to know what news, expecting what answere, my LL. your pleasure is that we should report backe from you unto them, so carefull, so heavie, so perplexed. One word presenteth unto them safetie, victorie, life and libertie: the other, I dread to boden what it may import. Wherefore to conclude, determine of us, either as of them that shall and will be, your consederates and faithfull Allies; or else such as must be worse than nothing. After that the Embassadours were withdrawne aside, and the Senate fell to counsell: although a good part of them were of opinion, that the greatest and welthiest cittie of all Italie, the most plenteous countrie, and nere unto the sea, might be as it were the garner and storehouse, whatsoever variable chaunges of corne and victuals might happen: yet they set more by keeping their faith and promise, than of that great commodity that might accrew unto them: and thus by direction of the Senate,(...) made the Consull answere. The Senate judgeth you o Campaines worthie of aid: but meete it is that we intertaine your amitie, so, as a more ancient societie and friendship be not therby violate and broken.
The Samnites are in league, and confederate  with us. We must needs therfore debarre you from making that war against the Samnits, which should sooner dishonour the gods than hurt and wrong men. Howbeit, as equitie and reason doth require, we will to our Allies and friends send our Embassadours, to intreat them to offer no violence unto you. To this answere the chiefe man of the Embassage (according as he had in commission from home) replied and said: For as much as ye are not willing to defend our right and cause, by just and lawfull power against violence and injurie; your owne yet, I am sure ye will maintaine.(...) Therfore, my LL. of the Senat, here we yeeld up into your hands, and to the Seignorie of the people of Rome, the whole nation of the Capuans, the cittie Capua, our lands and possessions, the sacred temples of the gods, and all things else both holy and profane. And whatsoever from henceforth we shall suffer and abide, we wil sustaine it as your liegemen and subjects, wholly devoted as vassals unto you. At which words they all held up their hands unto the Consuls, shed teares plenteously, and fell downe upon their knees in the verie entrie of the Counsell house. The Senate moved with consideration of the changeable course and turne of humane fortune, in this world, to see so great and mightie a people for puissance, so pompous for superfluous abundance and magnificence (at whose hands but a while before, the nations bordering had craved and begged their aid) to cary with them now so base and broken hearts, as of their own accord, to submit themselves and all they had in the whole world, to the power and devotion of others: were persuaded now it was a matter of trust and faithfulnesse, not to abandon and see betraied, those that thus were reduced under their protection. Neither thought they, that the people of Samnium could in any equitie or colour of Iustice, invade that  land, or assault that cittie, which was surrendred and annexed to the imperiall State of Rome. Whereupon presently they agreed to dispatch Embassadors unto the Samnites, who had in charge and commission to make declaration unto them; First, of the Campaines petitions: secondly, of the answere of the Senate returned unto them, implying the remembrance of

 the Samnites amitie: last of all, of the Campaines surrender. Then, to request and desire them in regard of their mutuall societie and friendship, to spare and forbeare those, that were their vassales, and not with any hostilitie to invade that territorie, which was become subject to the people of Rome. If by this courteous dealing they could doe no good, then, to command the Samnites in the name of the people and Senate of Rome, to abstaine from the cittie Capua and the countrie of the Campaines. When these Embassadours debated these matters in the counsell house of the Samnites, they returned so stout and arrogant an answer againe, not in these tearms onely, That they would goe forward in the war begun: but (that which more was) the rulers comming forth of their counsell house, even whiles the Embassadors there stood, called to the captaines of the cohorts, and with a lowd voice commaunded them forthwith to make a rode into  the Campaine countrie, for to spoile and fetch booties. This Embassage being returned home again to Rome,Defiance given by the Romances to the Samnites. the Senators setting aside the care of all other matters, sent their heraulds to demand restitution: and for default thereof, after the solemne maner to proclaime open war. Wherupon they decreed with al speed possible to propound this matter to the people: and by the consent of the people, both Coss. with two armies departed the cittie, Valerius into Campania, Cornelius into Samnium: and pitched their tents, Valerius at the foot of the hil Gaurus, and the other at Satricula. The Samnit legions presented themselves first to Valerius (for that way they supposed al the forces would be bent) for indignation also, against the Campains, because they were so readie one while with their own succours, and another while in sending for the aid of others against them. And so soone as they discovered the Romans camp, in al hast (every one for his part) called  lustily to their captaines for to strike up and sound the battaile: assuring themselves, and saying plainely, that the Romanes should speed as well in succouring the Campaines, as the Campains had done before them in aiding the Sidicines. Valerius, after he had amused the enemies not many daies together, with some light skirmishes, onely to make triall of them what they could do, put forth the A coat of armes of purple or scarlet colour, hanging forth at the General, his pavilion. The exhortation of Valerius Corvinus, to his soldiors.signall of battaile at the last, but first exhorted his souldiours in a short speech in this wise, That neither this new warre nor new enemie should terrifie them: for as much as the farther they warred from the cittie, the more cowardly Nations they were, and lesse warlike still to whom they went.
That they should not esteeme the valour of the Samnites, by the late losses and defeatures of the Sidicines or Campaines: For whosoever they bee that contend and fight together, one side or other cannot chuse, but goe to the wals. The Campaines, doubtlesse,  had the overthrow rather through their owne effeminat tendernesse, as flowing too much in excesse and superfluitie of pleasures, than by their enemies hardinesse and valour. And what were two onely fortunate battailes of the Samnites, in so manie ages, to be set against so many honorable victories of the people of Rome? Who, from the first foundation of their citie, may number more triumphs welneere, than yeares: who have by warre subdued all Nations about them, the Sabines, Hetruria, the Latines, Hernickes, Aequians, Volscians, and Auruncanes. And as they ought to goe into the field, everie man presuming and trusting upon his owne manhood and glorious warfare: so should they have an eie, and consider, under whose leading and regiment they were to enter into battell. Whether hee were a man that in the hearing of his souldiours, could onely make goodly and magnificall Orations, fierce in brave words, void of Militarie workes: or  hee who himselfe knew how to handle his weapon, to advaunce before the standards, yea, and to be emploied even in the middle medley of al the battell. I would have you (quoth hee) my souldiours, to follow my deeds and not my words, and of me to learne, not onely discipline, but also good example. I have not by bribing and factions, nor yet by courting and Orations (usuall matters among Noblemen) but by this right hand of mine, attained unto three Consulships, and to the highest honour. The time hath beene indeed, when a man might have said thus unto me: No marvell, For why? You were a Gentleman of noble bloud, descended from those that were the deliverers of their countrie: and in the same yeare that the cittie had first a Consul, this house of yours had the Consulship. But now the case is altered, the way unto a Consulship, is as open to you Commoners, as to us of the Nobilitie. Now is it not the guerdon of birth and gentrie,  as aforetime: but the reward and recompence of vertue and valour. And therefore my souldiours, shoot at the highest dignities, and aime at soveraine honour. And although yee that are men, have by the grace and approbation of the gods, given unto meet his new addition of surname [Corvinus] yet have not I forgotten the auncient name of the Publicolas, appropriat unto our familie. I love and ever will (as alwaies I have done) the Commons of Rome, at all times

alike, both abroad in warres, and also at home in peace: as well a privat person, as in mine offices, were they little, or were they mickle: whiles I was Tribune, whiles I was Consull: and no changeling have I been throughout all my Consulships, one after another. Now for this present enterprise which we are about, with the helpe of God, and in his name, have a cast with mee for a new and fresh triumph over the Samnites. Never was there a Generall more familiar with his souldiours: as willing as the meanest of them, to lay his hand to any base offices that were to bee done; yea,The familiaritie (...) with his souldiours, and his other good parts. and in the very training and exercises of the souldiours, at what time as equals trie maisteries of activitie and strength, one with another, gently would he other whiles take the foile, as well as the victorie, and ever keepe one countenance still: not rejecting or refusing any one, whosoever would offer to match him, or be his mate. For deed, benigne and bounteous to his power, and as occasion required: in his words, no lesse mindfull of the freedome of others, than respective of  his owne place and dignitie: and (than which, there is nothing more popular) look by what vertuous demeanure and carriage of himselfe, he sought to attaine unto honours and promotions, with the same he bare them, and went through with them. Therfore the whole armie with incredible cheerefulnesse accepting this exhortation of their captaine, issued forth of the campe into the field. Never was there battaile fought more indifferently on both sides. Their hope was like, their forces equall, with full trust and confidence in themselves, and yet without contempt of their enemies. The Samnites, for to whet their courage, presumed upon their fresh and late atchieved acts, and their double victorie but few daies before. The Romans on the contrarie side, stood upon their honour and reputation for the space of foure hundred yeares, and their conquests ever since the foundation of their cittie. Yet they were troubled, both the one and the other, to  deale with a new and unknowne enemie. The manner of their fight shewed what stomackes they carried. For the conflict was such, as for a good while they seemed on neither part to yeeld one foot.A cruell battell (...). Then the Consull, seeing they could not by fine force bee caused to recule, thought to set a suddaine feare among them: and therefore assaieth, by sending in the horsemen upon the formost ensignes, to breake their ranckes, and put them in disarray.
But when he saw, that in so small roume of ground they toiled themselves in vaine, and could not well manage their troupes and cornets, nor breake in upon the enemies, hee rode backe againe to the vaward and forefront of the Legions, and dismounted from horsebacke, Wee that are footmen (qd.he) when all is done, must doe the deed I see well. Come on then, and as ye behold me (which way soever I go) by dint of sword to make way and entrance into the enemies battell: so every man for himselfe, downe  with him that stands next in his way. Straightwaies shall yee see, that where as now their speares and pikes stand glittering and bent upon us, there will be a wide lane made over their slaine carkases. He e had not so soone spoken these words, but the horsemen at the Consuls commaundement, ran upon both the wings and points, and made way for the footmen to enter the maine battaile. First and formost the Consull in person chargeth the enemie, and whomsoever he happened to encounter, him hee killeth in the place. This goodly sight set the rest on fire: and then everie man did his best, laid about him manfully, and carried it afore him right worthily. The Samnites stood to it still and moved not, albeit they got more knockes and wounds than they gave. Thus when the fight had continued a good while, notwithstanding, much bloudy slaughter about the Samnites ensignes, yet no flying was there on any side: so resolute were they, by death  onely to bee vanquished. Whereupon, the Romanes feeling their owne strength for wearinesse decaied and spent, and but little day left, inflamed with anger, gave a fresh charge all at ones upon the enemies. Then (and not before) began they to shrincke and give ground, and encline to flight: then were the Samnites taken prisoners, and slaine thicke. Few or none had escaped alive, but that the night came so fast upon them, that it interrupted the victorie, rather than ended the battaile. Both the Romanes themselves confessed, they never fought with a more stubborne and obstinate enemie: and the Samnites also being demaunded the primitive cause, which forced them (so stiffely bent as they were) to run away at the last, said, that the Romanes seemed to have burning fire in their eies, and to carrie in their faces and visages the furious rage of mad and frantike persons; and there at first began they to bee affrighted, more than at any thing else. Which  fearefulnesse of theirs, they bewraied not onely by the present event of the battaile, but also by their dislodging and departure away in the night. The morrow after the Romanes were masters of their emptie and naked campe: unto which all the whole multitude of the Campaines came running in numbers to rejoice and congratulate their victorie.
 But this joy had like to have been foulely blemished with an overthrow and defeature in Samnium. For Cornelius the Consull being departed from Satricula, had engaged his armie unadvisedly within a forrest, through which went an hollow valley or lawne, forelaid on both sides with an ambush: neither discovered he his enemies over his head, before such time as he could not retire with his ensignes into a place of safe receit. But whiles the Samnites staied, onely untill hee had brought his armie fully downe into the bottome of the vale, P. Decius, a Colonell of footmen, espied in the forrest one little high hill, which commaunded the place where the enemies lay encamped: and as it was for an armie heavily armed, and charged with carriage, hard to bee gotten up unto: so for them that were lightly appointed and deliver, nothing difficult. Hee perceiving the Consull troubled in mind and affrighted: See you not (quoth hee) o Aulus Cornelius  yonder hill top above the enemie? That is the very fortresse of our hope and safetie, if so be that we can gaine the same lustily,The policie and valour of P. Decius. as the Samnites have left it blindly. I require no more of you, but to let mee have the Principes and spearemen of one onely Legion. And when with them I have once seized the top thereof, set forward you from hence and feare not, neither make doubt to save your selfe and the armie. For the enemie being under us, and lying open to all our shot, cannot stirre without great losse and present mischeefe. As for us, either the fortune of the people of Rome, or our owne manhood shall worke our evasion. Being commended by the Consull, and having received that troupe and guard which he demanded, he marcheth close through the woodie pase, and was not descried by the enemie before he approched the place that hee went to get. And whiles they all were amased thereat and wondered, and wholly turned their eies to himward,  he both gained the Consull some time to withdraw his armie into a more convenient and open ground, and possessed himselfe of the hill top, and there rested. The Samnites, whiles they turne their ensignes to and fro, (as men that had lost the vantage of both sides) could neither make after the Consull, but through the same valley, wherein a while before they had him under their shot, nor yet erect their squadrons, and march up that hill, which Decius over them had alreadie gained. But being more angrie with those, that thus had disappointed them of the faire meanes they had of a brave exploit, and considering withall the neerenesse of the place, and their small number which were gotten thither, they were one while of mind to environ the hill round with armed men, and to keepe Decius from the Consull; another while, to make them way, that when they were come downe into the valley, they might set upon them. Thus whiles they  were in doubt what to doe, the night overtooke them. Decius at the first, was in good hope to fight with them from the higher ground, as they mounted up against the hill: but afterwards ^he marvelled much, that they neither began to charge upon him, nor yet when they were disappointed and put by that purpose, through disadvantage of the ground, fortified themselves with trench and rampier,P. Decius to his under captaines. and other pioners worke. Then calling the Centurions unto him, What unskilfulnesse (quoth hee) of militarie service, what supine slackenesse and slouth is this? and how got these lozels the victorie of the Sidicines and Campaines?
Yee see their ensignes waving hither and thither: one while hudled they are in one together, another while advanced and displaied at length. As for munitions and fortifications, no man beginneth any: and by this time we might have been entrenched round about. But if wee stay here longer than for our vantage, wee might  bee counted lazie lubbers like them. Come on then, goe with mee, that while, day light serveth, we may see in what places they quarter their guards, and what way wee may get from hence and escape. All this went hee to espie and discover himselfe in person, clad in a common souldiours jacket, leading with him the other captaines in the habite of their souldiors; to the end, that the enemies might not take marke of the Generall himselfe, how he went about to view them. After this, when hee had disposed the sentinels and corps de guard, to all the rest hee commaunded a watchword to be given, that when the trumpet sounded the second watch, they should come all unto him armed, and make no noise at all. When they were thither assembled with silence, as hee had commaunded,P. Decius to his souldiours. This stilnesse my fellow souldiours (quoth hee) must yee keepe, whiles yee heare me speake, and forbeare all giving assent by uttering your voices (as souldiours use to doe)
 When I shall have delivered my mind to you, let as many as like thereof, go softly on the right hand, and not speake a word: and looke what side is greater, that course shall stand and take place. And now listen what my conceit is, and what I would have done. The enemie hath not invested you here, as men either fled away for feare, or lagging behind for slouth and idlenesse. The place have yee woon by manhood: by manhood must yee from thence escape. In comming hither, ye

have alreadie saved a brave armie of the people of Rome: and now by breaking out from hence, save your owne selves. Worthie you are, that being but a few, have succoured many, yee should not stand in need your selves of any mans helpe. With that enemie yee have to deale, who yesterday through their senselesse slouth, overslipped their happie oportunitie to defeit our whole armie; who were so blind, that they saw not this hil of so great importance, even over their heads, before it was by us gained: who being so many thousands, could neither debarre us from climbing up, as few as wee were, nor when wee had gotten the place, compasse us about with a trench, having so much day as they had. These enemies, whom ye have thus deluded and beguiled, whiles they were awake, and had their eiesight: yee are to deceive when they are fast asleepe: nay, you must doe so indeed, there is no other remedie. For at that passe wee are now, that I am rather to shew you, in what tearmes of extremitie yee stand, than to advise you to the execution of any  good counsell. It is no consulting at this time, whether ye should here stay, or depart hence; sith that besides your weapons, and hearts setting up rest upon their weapons, fortune hath left you nothing at all. And die wee must, pardie, for hunger and thirst, if wee dread the swords point more than befitteth hardie men, and valerous Romanes. One way there is therefore, and but one way of safetie, even to make a brave sallie through and away. This must wee doe, either by day or by night. And that doubt is soone cleared. If we looke for the morrow day, what hope have wee, but that the enemie will cast a ditch and bancke, even round about us: who alreadie as ye see lying under this little knap, have compassed it with their very bodies. Now, if so be that the night be a convenient and favourable time for irruptions and sallies, as in truth it is: then, this houre of the night certainely, is of all other the fittest. At the second watches sound ye are come hither, at  which time all men are in their most sound and dead sleepe. Amid their bodies being fast asleep, shall ye goe. Either by silence deceive them unwares, or if they perceive you, affright them with a suddaine outcrie. Doe but follow mee, as yee have done alreadie. I, will follow the same fortune that guided me hither. Now as many of you as think this good counsel, and a course like to speed well, make no more adoe, but passe on my right hand. So they all passed, and followed after Decius as hee went through the quarters, void of watchmen and warders. Now were they escaped the mids of the campe, when a souldiour, as he clambred over the watchmens bodies, lying heavie asleepe, chanced to stumble at a shield, which gave a sound againe. Whereat the watchman being awakened, raised his next fellow; and they being start up, call up other, not knowing whither they were enemies or fellowes, whither the garrison of Decius on the hill was broken forth, or the Consull had surprised the campe. Decius then, seeing his souldiours could not passe cleer and undescried, commaunded them to set up a shout. And there with he amased them with a new fright, who were alreadie drowned in drowsinesse, so as they could neither take weapons readily, nor make head against them, nor yet pursue after them. Whiles the Samnites were thus maskered and in confusion, the Romane garrison had by this time slaine the warders whom they met, and were marching toward the Consull his campe. As yet was somewhat of the night to come: but now they seemed to be safe,P. Decius to his (...). and past all danger. Then (quoth Decius) on forward in this courage of yours, o hardie Romanes.
This your passage and returne, to and fro, all ages shall extoll and praise. But for the full sight and view of so great valour, we had need of broad day light: for yee deserve better, than that the still night should hide you in so glorious a returne of yours into  the campe. Let us here rest, and wait for day. His words were obeied; and so soon as the day brake, he dispatched a messenger afore unto the Consull: and so with exceeding great joy they made speed unto the campe. And when it was knowne in the campe by the privie watchmen, that they who had put their lives, in most dangerous hazard for the safetie of them all, were themselves returned safe; then everie one came forth to meet them as fast as they could, with praises and commendations, calling them both all and some, their saviours: praising the immortall gods, and giving thankes, yea, and extolling Decius to the skie. This was the triumph of Decius in the campe, as hee marched through the middest thereof with his armed garrison, whiles everie man cast his eies upon him, and made him a Coronell, equall to the Consull in all kind of honour. When hee was come to the Pretorium, the Consull by sound of trumpet, called all the armie to an audience, and as hee entred into a discourse of the deserved praises of Decius, Decius himselfe interrupteth him, and cutteth off his speech. Whereupon the Consull put off the Oration. Decius then persuadeth the Consull, to set aside all other things, and whiles the occasion and opportunitie was offred, he urged him effectually, to give an alarme to the enemies, both while

 they were amazed with this skare by night, and also lay skattering about the hill, as it were in their severall skonces. Besides, he thought verily that some were sent out after him to make fresh suit, and wandred astray in the forrest. So the Legions were commaunded to arme, and being departed out of the campe, and by meanes of the espials better acquainted with the forrest, they were conducted by a wider and more open way toward the enemie: whom sodainly they surprised and charged, unawars and unprovided as he was. And for as much as the Samnite soldiers were stragling abroad, and most unarmed, and could neither rally themselves and take armes, nor retire into their trench, they drave them at first with feare into their camp: after, whiles the gards about it were disordred and troubled, they were masters therof also. The noise was heard all about the hill, and caused everie man to flie out of his hold. So a great part of them took their heeles: before  the enemie could come. But so many as for feare were driven within the trench (and those were some 30000) were all slaine: and the campe rifted and spoiled. The Consull having atchieved this exploit,P. Decius solemnly precised and rewarded. called an assembly: and not only finished the praises of Decius, as he before began, but also amplified them with fresh commendation of this new service. And besides other militarie gifts, he rewarded him with a crowne of gold, a hundred oxen, and one especiall white one, fat and faire above the rest with guilded hornes. The soldiors who together with him held the hill aforesaid,The souldiors also recompensed had given unto them for ever after, a double proportion of corne, and for the present one oxe a peece, and two single liveries. After the Consull his reward was bestowed, the Legionarie soldiors themselves put upon Decius his head a wreath of greene grasse, in token of a deliverie from siege,A garland called (...). and with notable shouts and loud cries approved this gift. Another chaplet  or garland, also, in token of like honour, did his owne band and companie set upon him. And thus being adorned with these ornaments of honour, he sacrifice that chosen white oxe unto Mars; and bestowed his owne hundred oxen among those his soldiors, who had accompanied him in that exploit and service. To the same soldiors the legions gave a pound measure of wheat meale, and a m,*Sextari^^ ^uch about our wine (...).sextare of wine, a peece. All these particulars were performed and done with great cheerfulnes, and seconded with shouting and acclamation of the soldiors, to signifie their good liking and generall assent.
A third battaile was fought at Suessula: wherin by M. Valerius, was put to flight the host of the Samnites. Whereupon, the whole manhood and flowre of their youth that remained at home were sent for and assembled, determining to fight it out and trie their fortune once for all. Fearfull  newes hereof came from Suessula to Capua: and from thence couriers and postes were dispatched to Valerius the Consull, for aid. Forthwith he advanced the standards, and leaving the cariages belonging to the campe, with a strong gard, he marched forward in great hast: and not farre from the enemie, he tooke a little plot of ground to encampe in; as having besides their horses of service, no beasts at all for cariage, nor a rabble of slaues and varlets that follow the campe. The Samnites (as if without further delay they were to fight) embattelled themselves. But seeing none to encounter them, they came with banner displaied to the verie campe of the enemies. And there so soone as they beheld the soldiors upon the rampier, and understood by them that were sent out of purpose to view the circuit of the campe, in how small compasse they had fortified, guessing therby how few their enemies were; there ran a noise throughout the  armie, to make no more adoe but to fill up the ditches, to cut through the banks, and so presently to breake into the campe. And even in that rashnesse had the warre beene decided and dispatched, but that the captaines held in the violence of the soldiors. But for as much as their own number so great, required good store of victuals, and was both by their lying before Suessula, and also by their long stay there without fight brought to scarcitie well neere of all things: it was thought good, that whiles the enemies kept within their hold as affrighted, the soldiours should be sent about the countrie a foraging. In which meane time they supposed that the Romanes likewise, would have spent all, who were thither come lightly appointed, and had brought no more come with them, than they could carie on their shoulders, besides their armour. The Consull having espied the enemies stragling over the countrie, and their guards sclenderly manned,  after a briefe exhortation to his soldiours, led them forth to give an assault upon their campe. Which when he had woon at the first shout and onset, and killed more of the enemies within their tents, than either in the gates or upon the rampier; hee caused the ensignes that he had taken, to be brought together into one place: and leaving there two legions, for a guard and defence; with a straight charge, that untill he came againe, they should forbeare to rifle and

make spoile,A notable defeature of Samnites. he went forward in order of battaile. And when the horsemen which hee made out  afore, had like hunters driven the scattered Samnites, as it were, within net and toile, he fell upon them and committed an exceeding great carnage. For frighted as they were, they knew neither at what signall they should rally themselves together, nor whether they should make speede to the campe, or flie further away. But so great was their fright and flight both, that there were brought to the Consull, 40000 shields, more in deed than there were men slaine: besides 170 ensignes, together with those that were woon in the campe. Then returned he unto the enemies tents, and bestowed the whole pillage there, upon the souldiors. And such was the happie successe of this war, that it both caused the Falisci being in truce, to sue unto the Senat for a league: and also turned the Latines, who had prepared their forces alreadie, from warring with Romans, to wage warre upon the Peligni. Neither rested the same of this so fortunate a victorie within  the marches of Italie: for even the Carthaginians also, sent their embassadours to Rome, with gratulation, and a present of a golden crowne weighing 75 bb. sterl.twentie five pounds, to be set up in Iupiters temple within the Capitoll. Both Consuls triumphed over the Samnites: and Decius followed after, all goodly to be seene, with his gifts and worthie praises: whiles the souldiors as their maner was, with merie jests and rude ditties, magnified and renoumed the name of the Colonell no lesse than the Consuls.
After this, the Embassees of the Campaines and the Suessians had a daie of audience: and upon their humble request it was granted, that thither should be sent a standing garrison to winter there, for to stop the excursions and invasions of the Samnits. But Capua, even then no good place for militarie discipline, wrought an alteration in the souldiors there: who having once gotten  a smatch, and taken a delight in a world of pleasures of all sorts, quite forgat their owne naturall countrie.The Ma^^^^ and co^puscle of the Garrison soldiors at Capua. For they of the garison, began to lay plots and devise how to get Capua from the Campaines: even by the same wicked practise, by which themselves had woon it first from the auncient possessours and inhabitants: saying it made no matter, and they were but rightly served, in case their owne precedent lewd example, should returne upon their owne heads.
Againe, why should the Campaines, not able to defend themselves, nor maintaine their liberties and goods, be LL. of the most plentifull countrie of Italie, and of a cittie answerable and correspondent therunto: rather than the victorious army, which with their sweat and bloud, had repelled and expelled the Samnits from thence? And was it any reason, that they who had yeelded to be vassals unto them, should enjoy that fruitfull and pleasant tract; while they themselves weried with fighting, struggled stil and wrestled in a pestilent aire, and drie barren soile, about the cittie of Rome? and within that cittie, indured the setled, inveterat and intestine mischiefe and plague of usurie, that surcharged them daily more and more? Whiles these projected conspiracies were contrived in secret conventicles, and as yet not broched and divulged in all mens knowledge, the new Consull. C. Martius Rutilius came in place: whose lot it was to be L. Deputie of the province Campania, leaving his fellow Q. Servilius in the cittie. Who having intelligence by the Captaines and Coronels, of all the particularities of those designes: being a wise man, both for his olde age and long experience (as who was now Consull the fourth time, and withall had been Censour and Dictatour) thought it best to dissimule the matter and to make voide and frustrate the present heat and outrage of the souldiors, by differring and prolonging their hope, as if they might  put in execution their plots at their best leisure, whensoever they pleased. He raiseth therefore a rumour, that the garrisons should in the same townes winter againe the yeare following. [For divided they were into sundrie citties of Campania: and the webbe begon at Capua, was spred from thence through all the forces.] By meanes of this good respite to bethink themselves and devise of these matters,The singular policie of M. Rutilius the Consul. the mutinie for the present was well quieted. The Consull then led forth the souldiors into the summer places of abode and repose, and purposed whiles he had the Samnites in quietnesse, to clense the armie by casseering and discharging those busie-bodies and troublesome spirites: pretending colourably, and saying, That some of them had served alreadie so long as the law required, others were now well stept in yeares, or waxen feeble and their strength decaied. Some had their pasports limited, and were sent home: at the first, one by one singled  out; afterwards, certaine whole cohorts or bands, as having wintred far from their dwelling places, from their goods and substance. Vnder a pretence and colour also of militarie services and imploiments, whiles some were dispatched one way, some another, a great part of them were rid cleane away. All this multitude, the other Consull and the Pretor kept still at Rome; devising

 this cause, and that, of delaies and abiding behind. And verily at first, they being not ware of this delusion, were not unwilling to visit home. But after that they perceived, that neither they who were dismissed first, returned againe unto their colours, nor any in a manner discharged els, but such as had lien in winter garrison at Capua: and those especially, who of them were the authors of the conspiracie; first they merveiled, and afterwards feared in very deede, that their complots were revealed and come to light, and that now presently, they should be put to examinations and tortures, abide arraignment and judgement, be executed secretly apart one by one, and suffer the insolent lordlinesse, and cruell tyrannie of Consuls and Senatours over them. These and such like speeches sow they and whisper secretly, that were in the campe, when they saw the principall authors of the mutinie, who were the sincwes and strength thereof, by the wily pollicie of  the Consull to be dismembred from them.A mutinie and sedition of the garrison souldiors of Campania. One cohort of them, being not far from Anxur sat them downe at Lautulae, in a narrow pase or wood betweene the sea and the mountaines, to intercept and staie, whomsoever the Consull sent about this or that pretended businesse as is abovesaid. Soone were there gathered together a right strong power: and nothing wanted to make a shew of a full armie, but onely a head and captaine. And disordered as they were, they went robbing and spoiling, as far as the Albane countrie, and under the hill of long Alba they encampe themselves within a trench and rampier. Which worke being finished, they spend the rest of the day in consultation about chusing a Commander, little trusting any one there present in place. And who possibly (say they) could be sent for as far as from Rome?
What Senatour or Commoner was there, that either wittingly would venture upon so great and dangerous  an enterprise: or to whom the cause of an armie, enraged upon an injurie received, might safely bee committed? The next morrow, whiles they reasoned still about this point, and sadly debated the matter, some of the wandring and vagarant sorraiers of the countrie thereabout, bring certaine intelligence, that Titus Quintius emploied himselfe in husbandrie, and held a farme in Tusculanum, minding neither the cittie, nor dignities of state and common weale. This man was come of noble linage, and having served with great credit and honour in the warres, by a wound received, was lame of a legge, and gave over soulderie, determining to lead the rest of his life in the countrie, sequestred far from all courting and ambitious suing for civill offices. They had not so soon heard his name, but presently they tooke knowledge of the man, and (that which might turne to their good) agreed with one accord, he should be sent for. Small hope there was  that he would willingly doe any thing: they thought therfore to use force and to bring him to it by feare.T. Quintius surprised by the rebels and made their Leader against his will. So, in the dead time of the night, they that were sent thereto, entred the ferme house, and finding Quintius sound and fast asleepe, they awakened him: propounded unto him either rule and honor, or els present death: and no mean between, in case he made stay and refused to go with them: and so they haled and brought him to their camp. Incontinently he was saluted L. General at his first comming. And when the man was affrighted at this sodaine and wonderfull occurrent, they endue him with the ornaments and ensignes to that honor belonging, and will him to lead them as their commander to the cittie of Rome. Thus having plucked up the Standerds, in this headie fit of their owne, rather than upon any advise or counsell of their Captaine, they march in warlike maner with an armie, toward Rome, within eight miles of the citie, upon the causey or street  way, now called Appia Via: and had approched immediatly in that train to the very cittie, but that they heard there was a power comming against them, and a Dictator created to withstand them, to wit, M. Valerius Corvinus, together with L. Aemylius Mamercus Generall of horsemen. So soon as they were come in entervew one of another, and took knowledge of the armor and ensignes: the remembrance of their native countrie wrought in them straightwaies a mitigation of their mood. They were not yet so far gone, nor so hardie, as to shed civil bloud: neither had they knowledge of any other wars but forrein: and the uttermost rage and maddest fit that ever they proceeded unto, was counted their Secession and departure away from their own countrymen. And therfore both captains and souldiors on either side, sought means to meet together, and draw to emparle. Quintius for his part, who having had alreadie his hands ful of wars in defence of his countrie, could worse brooke taking arms against the same: Corvinus likewise for himselfe, as one that with loving affection embraced all his fellow citizens, but the soldiors especially, and above all others those of his owne armie, that fought under his banner, came forth to a parle. And forthwith as soone as he was once knowne, he had no lesse reverence done unto him of the adverse part, than silence and audience given of his owne men.
The immortall gods (quoth hee) o soldiors, as well those

which are common to you all,The Oration of (...) to the Rebels as mine owne peculiar patrones, when I tooke my leave of the citie, I adored and worshipped in this wise, craving humbly upon my knees at their hands, to vouchsafe me the honor, not of a victorie over you, but of procuring concord and unitie among you. Occasions there have been, and will be ynow elsewhere, to win glorie and warlike renowme: From hence, peace onely is to be sought. And even that which among my vowes that I made, I besought so devoutly of the immortall gods, it lieth in you to make me enjoy. Doe but call to mind that neither in Samnium, nor among the Volscians yee are encamped, but upon Romane ground: that those hils which yee behold, are the hils of your native soile: this armie which yee see, are of your owne countriemen and fellow cittizens: and my selfe your Consull, under whose conduct and Auspice, yee have the yeare past twise defeated the Samnite legions, twise by fine force woon their campe, and driven them out of the field. I am, sirs, that M. Valerius Corvinus, whose noblenesse yee have had triall of, not by any wrongs done, but by good turnes on your part received. Author have I beene of no proud law, nor cruell Act of Senat against you: a man in all my government and rule that I bare, more rigorous to my selfe than severe to you. And if ever there were one, who might be proud either of Noble race and gentrie, or of his own vertue and valour, of majestie and high calling or honorable dignities; of such progenitors am I descended, such proofe of prowesse have I given: at that age attained I to Consular honour, that being three and twentie years old, I was able to have beene feared and dread, not of Commons onely, but also of the Senatours. But what deed or word hath passed from me in your knowledge, more grievous and odious when I was once Consull, than all the time I was but a Colonell? The same course held I still during my two Consulships ensuing: and such shall my cariage be, and none other, whiles I am Dictatour: that I will be no more mild and gracious to these here about me that are mine own and my countries soldiors, than to your selves affronting; who are, I tremble to speake it forth, mine enemies. Yee shall therfore draw sword upon me, before I draw upon you. The trumpets from thence shall begin sound, the shouting from thence shall arise, the charge from thence shall be given first, if we must needs go to it and fight. Now, find in your hearts (if you can) to doe that, which neither your fathers nor grandfathers before you ever could: no, not they who went away and departed into the mount Sacer, nor those who afterwards held and kept the Aventine. Expect, untill your mothers and wives, with their haire hanging about their eares, come forth of the cittie to meet with you one by one, as sometime they did to Coriolanus. Then, the Volscian legions were quieted and pacified, because they had one Romane  for their leader: will not yee then, being a whole armie, all of the Romanes, surcease this unkind and impious warre? And thou T. Quintius, howsoever thou art come there to stand, whether with or against thy will; in case there bee no remedie, but fight wee must, retire thy selfe among the hindermost: nay, with more honestie flie thou shalt, and shew thy naturall countrimen a faire paire of heeles, than fight against thy countrie. But stand still hardly with honor and credit among the formost, to make attonement: thou shalt be a truchman in this our parley and conference, to all our goods. Ask and have, any reasonable and indifferent conditions: although in truth we were better to yeeld unto hard and unequall capitulations, than wickedly and ungodlie, one to fight with another. Then T. Quintius with teares gushing out at his eies, turning to his owne companies:T. Quintius to his (...). And even me also (quoth hee) o soldiours (if need there be at all of me) yee have a much better captaine for peace than warre.
As for him who even now uttered those words in your hearing, was neither Volscian nor Samnite, but a Romane, even your owne Consull sometime, soldiours, and your owne Generall heretofore: whose Auspicate conduct, you having tried for you and in your defence; doe not prove now against your selves to your perdition. Others had the Senat to send as captaines, who would have fought more maliciously with you: but they have made choise of him who above all others, could beare with you, yea and forbeare you that have been his soldiors: whom you of all others especially might trust, as having been your Generall. Peace, yee see, even they desire that are able to get the victorie. And what is it then that we ought and should desire? Why then set we not anger and hope aside, two false motives, two deceitfull guides and counsellers; and betake our selves and all we have to a man of  approved trust and fidelitie? These words being liked well of all (as appeared by a generall shout) T. Quintius went forth before the ensignes in the forefront, and pronounced that the soldiours should be at the Dictatour his devotion and pleasure: beseeching him to consider and undertake the cause of poore and wretched citizens; and having taken it into his hands, to maintaine

 and protect the same,T. Quintius to the Dictatour. according to that faithfulnesse wherwith he used to governe the Comonmonweale.
As for himselfe privately, he would not indent ought for his owne securitie: neither reposed he hope in any thing else but innocencie. The soldiours indeed were to capitulate, as once heretofore the Commons, and a second time the legions had done with the Senatours: namely, that this their revolt and petie rebellion, might not be laid unto their charge, to their hurt and utter undoing. Then the Dictatour, after he had first commended Quintius, and willed the rest to be content and of good cheer,Militarie ordinances enacted. rode post to the cittie, and by the advise of the Senators, preferred a bill unto the people in the grove Petelinus: THAT THE MUTINIE AND INSURRECTION SHOULD TURN NO MAN TO SCATH AND DANGER. He besought the Quirites also of thus much favour besides, THAT NEITHER IN BOURD NOR EARNEST, THIS SHOULD  BE LAID IN NO MANS DISH. The same time there was proposed besides, a sacred militarie law under pain of death, THAT NO SOLDIORS NAME ONCE ENTRED INTO THE MUSTERMASTER HIS BOOKE, SHOULD BE RASED OUT AGAINST HIS WILL: With this branch annexed over and besides, THAT NO MAN VVHO HAD BEN AFORETIME A COLONEL OR TRIBUNE, SHOULD AFTER HAVE THE LEADING OF BANDS, AND BE A CORPORAL. This was followed hard and urged by those of the conspirarie, in regard of one P. Salonius, who in manner ech other yeare had bene either a Colonel, or a chiefe The next degree to a Colonel.Centurion, whom now they call Primipili. Him the sodiors spighted much, and were maliciously set against, because he had alwaies opposed himselfe against their conspiracies and innovations, and tooke not part with them who fled from Lantulae. But when this one point could not be obtained of the Senat, for the favour they  bare to Salonius: then Salonius himselfe besought the Senators that they would not regard his honour, more than the concord of the whole cittie: and so at length it also was granted and enacted. As unreasonable a damaund was this also, That of horsmens pay, (and that was triple at that time) some Asses should be deducted, for that they also had withstood the conspiracie. Over and besides, I find in some writers, that L. Genutius a Tribune of the Commons, published this law unto the people, That Vsurie might be made altogether unlawfull. Likewise in other Acts of the Commons it was provided, That no man within ten years space, should be capable of the same office twise: nor in one yeare beare two offices: and that both Consuls might be of the Commons. Which if they all were granted to the Com. it appeareth that this insurrection caried some sway and force with it. In other Chronicles it is recorded, that neither Valerius was chosen Dictatour, but that all this  busines was by the Consuls managed: nor so great a multitude of conspiratours rose, before they came to Rome, but even in Rome tooke armes: ne yet that they came by night, in forcible manner into T. Quintius ferme-house, but into the dwelling house of C. Manlius: and that he was taken up by the rebels to be their Generall, and from thence went as farre as foure miles end, and there encamped in a fortified place: that the motion of concord arose not from the captaines, but that of a suddaine, when both armies stood araunged in order of battaile, they fell to greeting one another: and that the soldiors began to take one another by the hands and imbrace with tears: and that the Consuls seeing the soldiors so backward from fight, were forced to move the Senat for an atonement. So as among ancient writers, there is no certentie set downe, but that a sedition there was, and the same appealed. But the rumor therof, and the cruell warre which the Samnites  begun, withdrew certaine nations from the Romanes societie and alliance. For besides the faithlesse and untrustie league (a long time) of the Latines: the Privernates also with suddaine rodes, invaded and wasted Norba and Setia, two Colonies of the Romanes neere bordering and adjoining.



THE EIGHTH BOOKE OF  THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the eighth Booke.
THe Latines, together with the Capuans revolted: and the Latines having sent their Embassadours to the Senate (of Rome) offered and presented peace, upon this condition onely, that they would create one of their Consuls out of them. This Embassie thus declared, Annius their Pretour, who had audience in the Capitoll, in going downe from thence, tooke such a fall, that he died in the place. T. Manlius caused his owne sonne to loose his head, because, contrarie to his expresse commaundement, he had fought against the Latines, notwithstanding his good  successe in that combate. At what time as the Romans were greatly distressed, and like to life the field, P. Decius then Cos. with Manlius, devowed and offered himselfe to present death, f^r to save the armie: and setting spurs to his horse, rode into the middest of the enemies battaile: where he was slaine, and by his death recovered victorie to the Romanes. The Latines yeelded and rendred themselves. When T. Manlius returned int^ the cittie, there was not one of all the youth came forth to meet him, and doe him honour. Minutia, a professed Vest^ll virgine, was condemned for her incest, or incontinent life. The Ausonians being subdued, a Colonie was planted in Cales, and another likewise in Fregellae. Many Romane dames were detected of practising poison: and most of them were faced to drinke of their owne empoisoned cups first, whereof they died presently. Whereupon was the first law then ordained against poysoning. The Privernates, when they rebelled were vanquished, and afterwards endued with the Burgeoisie of the cittie of Rome. The Palaepolitanes were defeited in battaile first, and after siege, surrendred upon composition. Quintius Publilius, who bl^cqued them within their wals, was the first man that had his commission renued, and continued  still in government, when the ordinarie time was expired: and by meanes of the Consuls, had a triumph graunted unto him. The common people were delivered from the danger of their creditors, by occasion of the silthie lust of one of them, Lu. P^pyrius, who would have forced, and against nature abused C. Publius, a debtor of his. When L. Papyrius the Dictator was returned from his armie into the cittie, for to take the Auspices anew, by reason of some error supposed in the former, Q. Fabius the Generall of the horsemen, having in his absence espied the oportunitie and advantage of performing a worthie exploit, gave battaile contrarie to his Edict, and put the Samnites to the worse. For which cause, when the Dictatour would seeme to punish him accordingly, Fabius made an escape and sted to Rome. And when his cause would not bear him out, he had his pardon, at the earnest sute and praiers of the people. This booke containeth also the fortunate exploits against the Samnites.

NOw was C. Plautius Consull the second time, with L. Aemylius Mamercus, when as the Setines and Norbans brought tidings to Rome of the Privernates revolt, with complaints of harms sustained at their hands. Newes came likewise, that an armie of Volscians, under the conduct of the Antiates, were encamped at Satricum. Both these warres fell by lot to Plautius. Who taking his journey first to Privernum, forthwith bad them battaile: and with no great conflict gave his enemies the overthrow. The towne was woon and restored againe to the Privernates, with a strong garrison therein placed, but two parts of their lands were taken from them. The armie thus having obtained victorie, was conducted thence to Satricum against the Antiates. Where was a cruell battaile fought with much bloudshed on both sides: and when as the tempestuous  and stormie weather parted them asunder, before that either side enclined to victorie, the Romanes no whit wearied with that conflict so doubtfull, addressed themselves to fight against the morrow. But the Volscians having taken a view and account what men they had lost in fight, were not of like mind to adventure the hazard againe: and therefore as vanquished men they

 dislodged by night in disorder; and fearefully tooke their way to Antium, leaving behind them their wounded, and part of their baggage. Great store of armour was there found, both upon and among the slaine bodies of the enemies, and also within the campe. Which the Consull promised to dedicate to dame Lua,The (...) Lua and so hee harried and spoiled the confines of the enemies, even as farre as the sea coast. But against the other Consull Aemylius, who was entred into the Sabellian land, neither were the Samnites encamped, nor their legions opposed any where. Whiles therefore with fire and sword hee wasted their countrie, the Samnites Embassadours came unto him, craving peace: but being by him posted off to the Senate, after they had audience given, they let fall their stout stomackes, and requested peace for themselves with the Romanes, and libertie to make warre against the Sidicines: which petition they enforced with more  reason and equitie.
First, in that they had entred into amitie with the people of Rome, during their prosperitie, and not as the Campaines in their adversitie: againe, they were to take armes against the Sidicines, enemies alwaies to themselves, and never friends to the people of Rome: who also, neither in peace (as the Samnites) sued for friendship and alliance, nor in time of warre (as the Campaines) sought for aid and succour: and finally, were neither under the protection of the people of Rome, ne yet their vassals and subjects. When as T. Aemylius the Pretor had consulted with the Senate, about these points demaunded by the Samnites, and that the LL. thought good that the league with them should be renued; the Pretor in the name of the rest, made answere to the Samnites, That neither the fault was in the people of Rome, that the confederacie betweene them, was not perpetuall; neither gainsaied they, but for as much as they were wearie  themselves first, and repented of the warre commensed through their owne default, the league might yet be newly made againe. Touching the Sidicines, they would be no hinderance, but that the Samnite people, might use their libertie, and do what they thought best, either for war or peace. The league being thus concluded and confirmed, and they returned home, presently the Roman armie was brought from thence upon receit of a yeeres pay, and corne for three months, according to the capitulation covenanted with the Consull, in consideration of a truce graunted, untill their Embassadours were returned.
The Samnites, with the same forces which they had emploied to withstand the Romane war, went forth against the Sidicines with undoubted hope, speedily to win the citie of their enemies. Then, had the Sidicines before made an offer to yeeld themselves unto the Romanes, but seeing  the Nobles to reject them, as comming too late, and wrested as it were perforce from them in their last extremitie, they tendered the same to the Latines, who were alreadie of their owne accord risen up, and had taken armes. The Campaines likewise (so readie and forward were they to beare in mind an injurie of the Samnites, rather than a good turne of the Romanes) for bare not to join in this quarrell. Thus was there raised a mightie power of so many Nations banded together, under the conduct of the Latines, and invaded the borders of the Samnites, where more hurt was received by rodes than skirmishes. And albeit the Latines in fight had the better hand, yet were they well content for avoiding so many conflicts, to depart out of the enemies countrie.
Which gave the Samnites leasure to send Embassadours to Rome, who before the Senate complaining, that they endured the same measure still, being now associates, which they had abidden  before when they were enemies: besought most humblie, that the Romanes would bee satisfied with that victorie of the Campaines and Sidicines, their enemies, which they had gotten out of the Samnites hands, and not suffer them to bee troden underfoot by those Nations, the most dastards and cowards of all others: requesting moreover, if so be the Latines and Campaines were under the dominion of the people of Rome, that they would commaund them by vertue of their authoritie, to forbear the Samnites countrie: and if they refused to obey, then to chastice and keep them in by force of war. To these demands they framed a doubtfull answer, as being loth and abashed of the one side to confesse, that the Latines were not at their devotion, and fearing againe on the other side by reproving and provoking them to turn away their harts, and loose them for ever. And this was the answer.
As touching the Campaines, their case was otherwise, who were not by covenants and conditions in form of league, but by voluntarie and simple submission, under their  protection; and therfore they should be quiet whether they would or no: but as for the Latins, by any capitulation comprised in their accord, they were not prohibited to levie war with whom they list. Which answer, as it sent the Samnites away, in doubt what to think the Romans would do; so it estranged and alienated the Campaines for feare: and made the Latines more stout, as supposing

the Romans now would give them the head, and yeeld any thing unto them. And therfore  under a colour of preparing warre against the Samnites, they summoned and helde many Councels one after another: and in all their meetings and consultations, their princes and chiefe men secretly amongst themselves did nothing but plot and practise war with the Romans. In which conspiracie also, the Campaines had their hand as deepe as the rest, even to beare arms against those, who had been their Protectors. But although they did what they could to keepe all close of purpose, and were desirous before the Romanes should stur, to be secured from the Samnites, (an enemie pressing hard on their backs) yet nevertheles this complot was discovered, and intelligence thereof given at Rome, by meanes of certaine persons linked to the Romanes in private acquaintance and mutuall hospitalitie. Hereupon were the Consuls commanded to resigne their magistracie before the ordinarie time, that so much the sooner there might be new created  against so great a danger and preparation of warre. But here rose a scruple of conscience, that the assembly for Election should be holden by them, whose government was thus shortned and abridged. Whereupon they proceeded to an Interreigne. And two Interregents there were one after another, M. Valerius and M. Fabius: who created Consuls. T. Manlius Torquatus the third time, and P. Decius Mus.
In that yeare, it is recorded for certaine, that Alexander King of Epirus, arrived in Italie with a navie: who, no doubt if he had sped well at his first entrance, would have proceeded farther and warred upon the Romanes.Alexander the (...). In this age flourished Alexander the Great in glorious conquests, who being this man his sisters sonne, and a warriour invincible, whiles he atchieved feats of arms in another part of the world, hapned to die in his best time and prime of his youth. But to proceed  forward. The Romanes although there was no doubt but that their associates, and namely the Latines, were revolted: yet as though they were carefully busied about the Samnits only, and nothing intended them; they sent for to Rome ten of their chiefe Peeres, pretending to give them in charge what their pleasure was to have done. At that time the Latines had two Pretors or Provosts, L. Annius of (...)Setia, and L. Numitius of Circeia, both Romane Colonies. By whose means, besides Signia and Velitre, being also Colonies of Rome, the Volscians were sollicited likewise to take armes. And thought good it was, that those Latine Pretors by name, should be cited with the rest. No man was ignorant for what intent they were sent for. The Pretors therefore, called a Councell before they went, and there declared how they were convented by the Senat of Rome, demanding their advise what answere to make as touching those matters, wherwith, as they supposed, they should be charged. When some were of this opinion, some of that;(...) then Annius spake and said: Although I myselfe have moved you to resolve upon an answere, yet I thinke, it concerneth us more in our main estate, to determine what to do, than what to say.
And when we are growne to a resolution once of our affaires, and what course to take, an easie matter wil it be to frame words fit for the purpose. For if even now already under a shadow and pretence of an indifferent league, we can abide and finde in our hearts to endure bondage, what standeth in the way, but that having abandoned and betraied the Sidicines, we be obedient not only to the Romans commandement, but also to the Samnits? and answere the Romans in these plaine termes, That at their beck only, and if they doe but nod their head, we will presently lay downe all armes? But if at length, the desire and longing after libertie doe touch our hearts, and give  an edge unto our spirits: if there bee a league betweene us: and if confederacie ought to be nothing els but a societie and equall fruition of libertie and priviledges: if I say, we may now glorie and vaunt, whereof sometimes we were ashamed, that we are of kin to the Romanes and of their bloud: if they have an armie of associates, by the addition wherof they redouble their forces, and which the Consuls in leaving or levying their proper wars, will not part and sever from their owne: why is there not equalitie in all things els? Why is not one of the Consuls a Latine? Looke where is parr of power and forces, there also is part of rule and command. And certes, even this in itselfe, is not a matter of so great honour unto us, as who have granted and confessed Rome to be the head of Latium: yet by long patience and continuall sufferance onely, we have brought to passe that it might seeme honourable. But if ever yee wished to see the day  wherein ye might participate in government and recover your liberties again, lo, that time is now come, presented unto you by your own valour, and the gratious goodnes of the immortall gods. Tried their patience ye have in denying soldiors: who doubteth not but that they were in a great choler and angrie at the heart, when we brake a custome of two hundreth yeares prescription

 and above: yet neverthelesse this griefe have they put up, and given us not one foule word. We warred upon the Pelignians in our owne name and quarrell: and they, who aforetimes allowed not us the libertie so much as to defend our own marches of our selves, nothing gainsaid and crossed it. That the Sidicines were taken to our mercy and protection, that the Campaines revolted from them and sided with us, that we levied an armie against the Samnites their confederats, they heard and knew well enough: and yet they stirred not once forth of their cittie. How come they to be so calme and quiet, but upon a privity and knowledge, both of cur puissance and of their owne weaknesse? I am able to avouch by the report of men of good credit, that when the Samnites complained themselves of us, they had such an answere againe of the Senate of Rome, that it plainly appeared that they themselves pretended not to require that Latium should be  under the Romane Empire. Doe yee but take upon you, and lay claime unto that which they secretly do yeeld unto you themselves, and repossede it at your pleasure. Now if any man be affraid to be the speaker, Lo, here am I, who professe to be the man, and to say thus much not onely in the audience of the people and Senate of Rome, but also of Iupiter himselfe, who is resiant in the Capititoll, namely, That if they will have us to be of the league and confederacie, they shall admit from among us one of the Consuls, yea and a part also of the Senate. As he with great spirit and boldnes, not onely advised this, but promised also thus to doe; all that were present with a generall applause and assent, permitted him, to doe and say what soever he thought expedient for the common good of the Latine nation, according to that trust which they reposed in him. So soone as he was come to Rome (with other Embassadors) he was admitted into the Senate,  and audience given him in the Capitoll.
Where when T. Manlius the Consull by the authoritie and direction of the Senatours, had dealt with him and the rest, not to make warre upon the Samnites their confederates: Annius faring like a conquerour, as if he had woon by force and armes the Capitoll; and not as an Embassadour, who was to deliver his mind and message safely, by the protection of the law of nations,The Oration of Annius in the Senate of Rome. began in this sort: The time required (quoth hee) now at length, o T. Manlius and yee Senatours of Rome, not to treat and deale with us in any affaires by way of authoritie and commaundement, namely, when you saw Latium by the favour of the gods to flourish exceedingly both in men and munition, as having subdued the Samnites, confedered with the Sidicines and Campains, and now also combined with the Volscians: and besides even your own Colonies and townships to, have made choise to submit themselves to the Latines  rather than the Romanes. But for as much as you cannot find in your hearts of your selves, nor see, how to make an end of your proud and outragious lordship and tyrannie; Wee, albeit we are able to restore Latium into her auncient freedom by force of armes, yet for kinred sake wil be content to offer indifferent articles and equall conditions of peace, for as much as it hath pleased the immortall gods, that we are egall unto you in power and puissance. Imprimis, there is no remedie now, but your two Consuls, must be one a Romane, and the other a Latine: Item, that the number of Senatours be elected as well out of the one nation as the other. Item, that we become one people incorporate, and one Commonwealth. And to the end that there may be one imperial seat, and one name of al, and therfore we or you must needs yeeld, we are content a Gods name (and to the good of both nations may it prove) that this cittie and state of yours  be counted the better and more noble: and let us be called all, by the name of Romanes. By good hap it so fell out, that the Romanes also had for their Consull, T. Manlius to match him; one as stout and hot as the other: who could not contain his anger no longer, but openly said, That if the Senatours were so farre overseene and besides themselves,The Oration of T. Manlius. as to take conditions of a Setine, he would come with his sword by his side into the Senate house, and what Latine soever he saw there in counsell, he would not faile but sley him with his own hand in the place. And therewith turning to the image of Iupiter: Hearken (quoth hee) o good god Iupiter. Heare this wickednesse and inindignitie: heare o Iustice, and pietie to godward. Wilt thou abide to see, o Iupiter, in this thy holy and sacred temple, wilt thou indure, as taken captive and troden under foot, to see Consuls of aliens and a Senate of forreiners? Are these the covenants o yee Latines, which Tullus king of Rome  made with the Albanes your forefathers? or which L. Tarquinius after him, concluded with you? Remember yee not the battaile at the lake Regillus? Have yee so forgotten indeed, both your owne calamities and overthrowes of old, and also the good turnes and benefits received at our hands? When this speech of the Consull, was seconded with the indignation also of the Senatours, it is recorded, that when they called upon the gods, witnesses of those covenants, and reiterated

their names oftentimes. Annius in mockerie of those protestations, was over-heard  to despise and skorne the power and godhead of the Romane Iupiter. But this is certaine, that as he in heat of anger stepped hastily to the entrie or porch of the temple, and went apace, hee fell downe the staires, and so hurt his head that dashed against the bottome staire, that hee swowned withall, and lay for dead. But because all writers agree not, that hee yeelded up his last breath thereupon, I also will leave it doubtfull as I find it: as also this, that in the very charging of him with breach of covenants, there poured downe a tempestuous storme with many mightie thunderclaps. For, as these and such like things may be very true, so they may be prettily devised and invented for the nones to represent and shew the wrath and vengeance of God.
Torquatus being sent by the Senate to give the Embassadours their dispatch, seeing Annius there to lie along, cried out alowd, in the hearing both of the Senate and the people, and said, No force, it is  well, and as it should be; thus begin and blesse, o yee immortall gods, our just and rightfull war. Surely there is a god above, there is a power divine and deitie in heaven, thou art no feigned and imaginary god, o mightie Iupiter, and not in vaine have we hallowed thee in this place, as the father both of gods and men. Why stay yeethen, o Romane Quirites, ye likewise my LL. of the Senat, to take armes in the name of the gods, having them alreadie as you see, to bee your Leaders? I for my part, shall soone so overthrow and lay the legions of the Latines along on the earth, as yee now see their Embassadour, lying here at the staires foot. The words of the Consull, received with so great applause of the people, animated and enkindled them in such sort, that had not the carefull diligence of the Magistrates ben more (who by commandement of the Consull acompanied the Embassadours as they went) than the ordinarie safe conduct of the law  of Nations, they had not escaped the rage and furie of the multitude.
The Senate also gave their assent to this warre, and the Consuls having levied two armies, and passed through the countrie of the Marsians and Pelignians, and joined unto them the Samnites power, encamped themselves before Capua, whither the Latines with their associates, were alreadie come together.
There, as the report goeth, the Consuls both of them in their sleep, had a vision: and there appeared unto them, one and the same shape of a mans personage, much greater and more stately than the ordinarie port of men, who should deliver these words unto them, That of the two armies embattailed and affronting one another, the one was appointed as a due tribute to the infernall spirits, and to Mother Earth: and of the other, the cheefe Generall onely. And looke of whether armie the said soveraigne Generall should devow and offer unto those  infernall spirits, and to mother Earth, the Legions of the enemies, and his owne person withall, that part and that Nation shall have the victorie. When the Consuls had imparted one to the other these night-visions, it was thought good and agreed (for to divert and appease Gods anger) that certaine sacrifices should be slaine,(...) and also if the same shewed in their inwards, as appeared in their sleepe, then one or other of the Consuls should fulfill the destinies, and accomplish fatall appointment. When as the answeres of the Soothfaiers agreed also to that secret religion which was now entred and setled alreadie in their minds, then the Consuls calling together the Lieutenants and Colonels to a counsell, and openly declaring before them all, the pleasure of the gods, (to the end, that the wilfull and voluntarie death of one of the Consuls, might not fright his armie in the field) they agree betweene themselves, that of whether side the Roman  battaillons began first to give backe and recule, the Consull of that armie, should devow and betake himselfe to die for the people of Rome and the Quirites. It was debated also in that assemblie, that if ever at any time before there had been warre managed by severe rule and governement, the militarie discipline should now be revived and reduced to the old manner and ancient rigour: their care in that behalfe was the greater and more redoubled, for that they were to fight against the Latines, suiting altogether to them in language, fashions, armor, and especially above all, in the orders and lawes of warfare. For, many a time, in these two armies, souldior with souldiour, Centurion with Centurion, Colonell with Colonell, had sorted and conversed together, as colleagues and compeeres in the same garrisons, yea, and under the same colours and pennants. By reason whereof, to the end, that by no errour the souldiours should be mistaken or deceived, the Consuls made proclamation through the campe, That no man should fight with his enemie out of his owne rancke, and place appointed unto him It fortuned now, that among other Captaines and guidons of horsemen, which were sent out every way as skouts and espials to discover the coasts, Q.Manlius the Consull his sonne, together with the rest of his cornet and troupe,

 was passed above the enemies campe, so neere, as he was within an arrow shot of their next corps de guard. In which was quartered the cavallerie of Thusculum, under the leading of (...) Metius a knight, both for birth, and also for his noble feats of armes highly esteemed in his countrie. He espying the Roman horse, and knowing the Coss. sonne, advancing before them, and of especiall marke above the rest (for all Noblemen and of qualitie, were well ynougst known one to another.) What? will ye Romanes (qd. he) with one cornet of horse, fight with the Latines and their confederates? What shall your Consuls, what shall two Consular armies doe the meane while? Marrie (quoth Manlius) they will be here time enough for you, and with them Iup. himselfe, a witnesse of league and covenants by you broken. Iupiter I say, who only can do more, than all mens forces in the world. And we who at the poole Regillus, have given you fighting your bellies  full, will here also quitour selves so, that never after yee shall have any great joy and pleasure, to encounter and joine battaile with us again. With that, Geminius, riding forth as he was on horsbacke, a little from his companie, Wilt thou then (qd. he) till that day come wherein ye meane with so great a doe, to set forward your armies to a generall set field, break a staffe with me in the meane time; that by the proofe and event of us twaine, it may henceforth appeare, how far the Latine men of armes, surpasse the Romane? The young man his bloud and courage was soone up either upon anger and choler, or for very shame to refuse the combat, or because God would so have it, and it was his destinie that could not be avoided. Forgetting; therfore his fathers commandement, and the expresse edict of the Consuls, he runneth on head and rashly, to a single fight: wherein, it skilled not much, whether he had the better or the worse, for any great  ods thereby in the maine triall of the quarrall. Thus when the rest of the horsemen of both parts were retired aside (as it were) to behold some spectacle or running at tilt in the void place of the plaine field that lay betweene, they ran their horses in full carriere one against the other, with sharpe and deadly speare in rest. Manlius with his launce aloft, glid over and rased the morion of his enemie, and Metius with his speare lightly touched, and passed by the horsenecke. Then having turned about their horses, Manlius came upon him first with a second charge, and so redoubled the push, that he thrust the others horse in, between the eares. At the smart of which wound the horse reared and cabred with his forefeet, and with great force shaking his head, cast his rider. And as hee bare his speare and shield, to raise himselfe from his greevous fall, Manlius ran him through at the throat, so as the spear head came forth at his ribs, and nailed him fast to the ground.  And having disarmed and dispoiled him, rode back to his own troupe: and both together with exceeding joy, hastened to the campe, and so to the Generals pavilion, even to his father; full little knowing his fatall destinie, and what was to befall unto him, whether he had deserved praise, or incurred danger of punishment. That all the world qd.he (o father) may be persuaded and report truly that I am descended indeed of your bloud, and your undoubted son, Lo here I am, who being defied and challenged to fight man to man, have killed mine enemie a man of arms: see here the spoiles of him slain and dead. Which so soone as the Cos. heard, presently he could not abide to look on his son, but turned away, and by sound of trumpet, commanded the host to a publike audience. Which being assembled in great number.
For as much (qd.he) as thou, T. Manlius, without regard of Coss. authoritie, or dread of thy fathers majestie and power over thee, against our edict  and expresse commandement, hast fought with the enemie, and that without thy ranke and place; and as much as lay in thee, hast broken the discipline of warre, whereby to this day the State of Rome hath stood maintained, and hast brought me thy father to this hard point, that I must forget either the Commoweale, or else mine owne selfe and mine: we will abide rather the punishment and smart for our own misdeeds, than the whole state, to her so great prejudice and damage, should pay for our folly and transgression.Manlius executed by his owne father. A fearefull and dolorous example will wee afford: but good and profitable to all youth for ever hereafter. As for mee verily, both the inbred love and affection of all fathers to their children, and also this shew and proofe of thy valor and knighthood (although seduced with deceitfull apparance and vaine resemblance of honour) moveth me not a little: but since that, either by thy death the Coss. hests must bee established, or by impunitie  of thy disobedience, for ever disanulled, I would not wish thee to refuse (if there be any of my bloud in thee) but by thy punishment to restore and set up again, the militarie discipline which this day by thy default is fallen down and ruinate. Go serjeant, and bind him to a stake. At this so cruell a sentence, they were all amazed and in an extasie, that were present: and as if they had seen the edge bent against themselves, for fear more than for any modestie or reverence, they were quiet.

So when they were come againe to themselves, as if their spirits had beene recovered after some  deep impression of a wonder which had astonied them, they stood still with silence: but so soon as the poore wretch his head was chopt off, and his blood seen to gush and spin out, then began they all of a suddaine to speake freely and complaine with open mouth, so as they forbare neither lamentations nor curses: they covered the youth his bodie with his owne victorious spoiles, they erectected a funerall pile of wood over his corps without the trench and rampiers, set it on fire, and burnt him accordingly; and so with as great love and affection as soldiors could shew, performed their last dutie unto him, and solemnized his obsequies. Thus the commandements of Manlius were not onely dreadfull for the present, but gave an heavie and fearfull precedent for the future, to all soverain Commanders of an armie. Howbeit, the rigor of this punishment made the soldiors more dutifull to their captaines and leaders: and besides that, the rounds and sentinels, and the set corps degard, were everie where more carefully looked unto and observed: even in the verie hazard and extremity also of the battaile afterward, that austere severitie did much good. For their fight was much like unto a civile warre. So little, or nothing at all in a manner, differed the Latines from the Romanes Commonwealth, but onely in heart and courage.
Aforetime they used Romane long large sheilds, covering their whole bodies; but in processe of time, after that they became Stipendaries and to take pay, they bare shorter targets. And where as aforetime they had their battaillons thicke and close together, like to the Macedonian Phalanges, afterwards they began to range their battails into bands more loosely and distinctly, and last of all they were divided into thinner orders and squadrons: everie such order or squadron contained three score soldiors, two Centurions, and one Portensigne. The forefront of  the vantgard, were javeliniers called Hastati, in fifteen squadrons, distant some litle way one from another: such a squadron had twentie soldiors lightly armed, and all the rest a sort of targatiers. And those were called light armed, who caried onely a speare or javelin to fight with at hand, and other darts to launce from them aloofe. This forefront contained the flowre of youths, that grew up as apprentises to warre-service. Then followed after them of stronger and riper age, as many bands or squadrons, which were called Principes; whom there followed hard at heeles, thirtie squadrons, all targatiers or shieldbearers, with brave armor above all others. And this battaillon of thirty companies, they called Antepilani[avant-darters] for that the other fifteen orders or bands, were placed hard before the ensignes. And of these, everie band consisted of three parts: and ech of them they called Primum pilum, and it was composed of three banners or pannonces: and everie such banner conteined 186. men. The first Pannonce or banner conducted the Triarij, who were old soldiors of approved valour: the second, those that were called Rorarij, of lesse puissance both for age and prowesse: the third, such as were named Accensi, who were of least account and trust, and therefore they were cast behind unto the taile of the battaillon. When the armie was thus ordred in battaile array into these bands and squadrons, the javeleniers foremost of all began the fight: if they were not able to discomfit the enemies, then they with steedie footing and soft pace retired back into the void places betweene the squadrons of the Principes, who received them: then began the Principes to enter in the medley and to maintaine fight, and were seconded by the Hastati or Iavelins. The Triarij remained standing all this whiles firmely, about their ensignes, setting out their left legs afore them at length, with their targets on their shoulders, and their pikes or javelins sticking on the ground, with their heads somwhat bending forward, much like as if their battaile were fortified with a Pallaisado or rampair of pa^les and sharpe stakes. Now if those Principes had not good successe in fight, they retired themselves by little and little from the forefront, to the Triarij. And hereupon grew the proverbe, that when a thing was at a dead lift and in distresse, they would say, We are come to the Triarij. Then the Triarijstanding up right, so soon as they had received the Principes and Hastati, into the void place between their files, presently drew in their rankes and files close together, and shut up as it were all waies of passage and entrance, and with one maine joinct and close battaillon (as if now there were no more hope behind) advanced toward the enemie. And this most of all feared and terrified the enemies, when thinking to chase those that they seemed to have vanquished, they saw a new battaile of  fresh men starting up, and the same increased in number.
Now were there commonly foure legions enrolled, consisting of five thousand foot, and three hundred horse to everie legion. As many more were added unto them, and those mustered out of the Latines, who at that time were enemies to the Romanes, and had ordred their

 battaillons after the same manner in all respects. And they knew well enough that not onely ensigne with ensigne, all pikes and javelins with pikes and javelins, Principes with Principes, but one centurion with another, if the arraies were not broken; were to encounter. Two Primipili or chiefe Centurions, there were amongst the Triarij in the one armie and the other. The Roman, of bodie not so strong and well set, howbeit a good souldior otherwise, skilfull and of great experience: the Latine, exceeding mightie, and a notable fighter of all others. Well knowne they were one unto the other, because at all times they had the same conduct and equall place of charge. The Romane not greatly trusting to his owne strength, was permitted even at Rome by the Coss. to chuse unto him an under-centurion whom he would: who might protect and defend him safe from an enemie, that should happen to deale with him hand to hand. And it fortuned  that the yong man by him elected, fought in the medlie and got the victory of the Latin centurion. As for the battaile, it was stricken not far from the foot of the hill Vesuvius, in the very way that leadeth to Veseris. The Romane Consuls before they came into field, killed their beasts for sacrifice. And the bowell-prying Soothsaier (as it is reported) shewed to Decius the head of the Liver on the inner side wounded (as it were) and cut off: otherwise in all respects, his sacrifice was acceptable to the gods. As for Manlius, he had as good signes of Gods favour in his, and all as well as might be. That is well yet (qd. Decius) if my colleague speed well, and have good successe by his sacrifice. Their battels being so arranged, as I said before, they marched into the field. Manlius led the right wing, Decius the left. At the first they fought on both sides with equal forces and like courage and heat of stomack. But afterwards, on the left wing, the Roman Hastati, not able to  sustaine the violent charge of the Latines, retired to the Principes, In which trouble and fearfull disorder, Decius the Cos. called aloud to M. Valerius. We have need of Gods helpe (qd. he) o Valerius. Where art thou, the publike high priest of the people of Rome? Come and say afore me that forme of words, wherby I may devow and betake my selfe for the legions. The priest commanded him to put on his long purple robe embrodered before, called Pretexta, to cover his head, and to put forth his hand under the said robe at his chin, and standing upon his javelin, with both his feet, to pronounce these words after him,(...) as follow. O IANUS, IUPITER, FATHER MARS, QUIRINUS, BELLONA, o YEE LARES AND DOMESTICAL GODS, THE GODS NOVENTITES AND INDIGETES; YE GODS LIKEVVISE, WHOSE POVVER EXTENDET^ OVER US AND OUR ENEMIES, AND o MANES THE INFERNALL GODS, YOU I INVOCAT  YOU I VVORSHIP AND ADORE, YOUR PARDON I BESEECH AND FAVOUR, CRAVE, THAT YEE VVOULD PROSPER ALL POVVER AND VICTORIE UNTO THE PEOPLE OF ROME AND QUIRITES; AND PUT TO FEARE, FRIGHT, AND DEATH, THE ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME AND QUIRITES. AND IUST AS I PRONOUNCE IN SET VVORDS, SO FOR THE VVEALE PUBLICKE OF THE QUIRITES, THE ARMIE, LEGIONS AND AIDS OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME, I BETAKE WITH ME UNTO MANES THE INFERNALL SPIRITS, AND DAME TELLUS, THE LEGIONS AND AIDS OF THE ENEMIES, AND MY SELFE AFTER THEM. Having made this praier, hee willed the serjeants or Lictours to go to Manlius, and with all speed to tell him, that his colleague was devowed for the armie. Himselfe gyrded after the Gabine fashion, and armed at all peeces, mounted on horseback and  so rode into the middest of his enemies. Of both armies he was seene, to carrie with him much more stately and venerable port than a man, as sent from heaven to be a satisfaction of all gods wrath, and to turne away all plague and mischiefe from his owne people upon the enemies. All terrour and feare he carried with him as he went, and first disordered the ensignes of the Latines in the edge and border of the battaillons, and afterwards entred within forth into the whole armie. This was noted and seene most evidently, that which way so ere he rode, the enemies were smitten with feare, as if they had been blasted and strucken with some untoward aspect and influence of a planet. But so soone as he was fallen and overcharged with shot of darts, presently from that place all about, the cohorts of the Latines (out of all question) as amased men, fled away and avoided. And therewithall likewise, the Romanes as if they had been discharged and freed from their  religious feare and scruple of conscience, and as if they had but then and not before, heard the sound of trumpet to battell, began to charge and fight afresh. For both the Rorarij advanced forward and ran among the rankes of the Aulepilani, and therby reenforced the Hastati and Principes, and caused them to fight more stoutly: and the Triarij kneeling on their right knee, waited till the Cos. gave them some token to arise. Afterwards in processe of fight, when in other parts

the Latines in their number prevailed, Manlius the Consull, having heard of the finall ended of  his companion, and (as right and pietie would) accompanied as wel with plaints and tears as with due praises so worthy and memorable a death, for a while doubted, whether it were yet time for the Triarij to arise. Afterwards thinking it better that they should bee reserved in heart and fresh, unto the last push of extremitie, he biddeth the Accensi from the hinmost taile of the re^eward to come forth before the standerds. Who so soone as they were come in place, forthwith the Latines, supposing the enemies had done the like, raised their Triarij. Who having for a good while sought fiercely and wearied themselves, and either broken their javelins or dulled their points, and yet by fine force repulsed their enemies; thinking now all had been done and the victorie atchieved, as being come as farre as to the utmost skirts of the battaillons; Then, quoth the Consull to the Triarij, Rise now fresh and lustie as ye are, against the wearied, mindfull of your  countrie, parents, wives and children, mindfull of the Consull, who for your victorie hath taken his death. The Triarij all heartie and unfoiled, were not so soone risen up, shewing themselves in their bright and glittering armor, but there began on a sodaine and unlooked for, a new medley and conflict. For they receiving the Antepilani between their files, set up a shout and outerie, troubled and disordered the Principia of the Latines, gored their faces with their javelins, slew the principal flower and strength of their best and formost men, and passed untouched in a maner through the other bands, as it they had beene disarmed: yea and brake through their pointed and close battaillons, with so great a murder, that scarcely they left behind them a fourth part of their enemies alive. The Samnites also under the foot of the hill, being seene a farre off in battaile aray, smote a terrour among the Latines. But among all either citizens or allies, the especiall commendation  of that service, rested in the Consuls: of whom, the one turned all the threats and dangers from the gods both above and beneath, upon himselfe alone; the other in that battaile shewed such valour and policie, that it is confessed both of Romans and Latines, who have written of that journy and commended it to posteritie, that of whether armie T. Manlius had the conduct, that way doubtlesse would the victorie go. The Latines after their defeature and flight, retired to Minturnae: their campe presently upon the battaile was woon, and many a man there surprised alive and cut in pieces, but the Campaines especially. That day, could not the corps of Decius be seene, for that the night came upon them as they sought for it: the morrow after it was found amongst a mightie companie of slaine enemies, overwhelmed with swords, darts and javelins: and with all honour and solemnitie according to his death, performed by his brother  Consull were his funerals.
This also amongst the rest, seemeth worth the remembrance and to be inserted in this place, namely, That it was lawfull for Consull, Dictatour, and Pretor, whensoever they sacrificed and betooke to the Divell the Legions of their enemies, for to devow and offer with all, not themselves in any case, but any citizen whom they would: provided alwaies that he were one of the enrolled legion of the Romanes. AND IF THE MAN WHO IS; THUS ADDICTED AND DESTINED TO DEATH, HAPPEN TO DIE, ALL IS WELL, AND AS IT OUGHT TO BE: BUT IF HE DIE NOT, THEN VVAS THE IMAGE OF HIM. 7. FOOTE HIGH OR ABOVE BURIED IN THE GROUND, AND A PURGING OR PROPITIATORIE SACRIFICE VVAS SLAIN IN HIS STEED: BUT VVHERSOEVER IT CHAUNCED THAT IMAGE TO BE SO ENTERRED, THITHER  VVAS IT NOT LAVVFULL FOR ANY ROMAN MAGISTRAT TO SET FOOT AND COME. BUT IF A MAN VVOULD NEEDES OFFER AND DEVOVV HIMSELFE TO DEATH, AS DECIUS DID, AND DIE NOT, HE SHALL NOT PURELY PERFORME ANY SACRED DUETIE, OR DOE SACRIFICE, EITHER FOR HIMSELFE OR THE CITTIE, THAT HATH ONCE THUS BETAKEN HIMSELFE. IF HE VVILL BEQUEATH AND OFFER HIS ARMOR TO VULCAN, OR TO SOME SAINT VVHOMSOEVER HE LIST, BE IT PERMITTED AND LAVVFULL FOR HIM SO TO DOE, EITHER BY VVAY OF SACRIFICE OR OTHER OFFRING AS HE PLEASETH. AS FOR THE VVEAPON OR SPEARE OVER VVHICH THE CONSULL STANDING ON BOTH HIS FEETE, MADE HIS PRAIERS AND INVOCATIONS, IT IS NOT LEEFULL THE ENEMIE TO SEISE THEREON: BUT IF HE FORTUNE  TO VVIN THE SAME, A PROPITIATORIE SACRIFICE MUST BE OFFERED TO APPEASE MARS, TO VVIT, A SVVINE, A SHEEPE, AND A BULL. And albeit the records both of all devine and humane customes and traditions, make no mention hereof, and are now growne out of use and remembrance, by reason that we prefer new and forreine ceremonies, before the

 olde auncient rites of our owne countrie and auncestours, yet I thought not a misse, to make report hereof, even in those verie wordes and termes, as they were used, delivered, and pronounced.
In some writers I finde, that the Samnites having waighted to see the event of this battaile, came to aide the Romanes when all was done and past. Also, that there was succour a comming from Lavinium unto the Latins, but not before they had the overthrow; by reason that they spent a great time in deliberation. And when as now, the formost ensignes and some part of the armie was gone forth of the gates, and newes came of the defeature and slaughter of the Latines; as they turned their banners and returned into the cittie, it is said, That their Pretor or Provost named Millionius, spake these words, That so small a way as they had gone, m^st cost them deare,  and full sweetly would the Romanes be paid therfore. Such as were remaining of the Latines after the battaile, and were scattered a sunder in many and divers waies, when they were rallied together, shrowded themselves for safetie in the cittie Vescia. Where, in their Councels and assemblies, Numisius their Generall, averred, and assured them, that Mars in deede was common, and the hazard indifferent to both parties, as having made an equall massaker in the one armie and the other; and that the bare name only of Victorie went with the Romans: for otherwise, they carried away with them the fortune of men vanquished, and sped no better than they. For (faith he) The two roiall pavilions of their Coss. are polluted and defiled; the one with the paricide of his own son, the other for the death of the Cos. who had devowed himselfe to die: all their forces in manner slaine: their Iaveliniers and principals killed: a bloudie slaughter committed both before  and behind the Standerds: and onely the Triarij at the last upshot, renued the medly and set all upright. And albeit (quoth he) the power of the Latines also be shrewdly abated, yet for a fresh supplie, either Latium or Volsciare nearer than Rome. And therfore if they so thought good, he would with all speede raise the lustie floure and chosen manhood, both out of the Latins and the Volscians, and returne againe with a fresh armie to Capua: and with his sodaine comming unlooked for, surprise and defeate the Romanes, expecting as then for nothing lesse, than a second battaile. So by dispatching his cautelous and deceitfull letters into all parts of Latium and the Volscian nation, (by reason that they who had not been present at the battaile were sooner induced to give rash credit) there was a tumultuarie armie in great hast levied, enrolled, and assembled together out of all quarters. This host as it marched, Torquatus the Consull met at Tifanum,  a place betweene Sinuessa and Mintu^n^. And before they could chuse out a plot of ground to encampe in, they bestowed their cariages and baggage on heaps, of either side: fell to a battaile presently, and made a finall end and conclusion of all the war. For the enemies were brought so lowe, that as the Consull led his victorious armie to wast their countrie, all the Latines yelded themselves to him: and this their rendring the Campaines likewise followed. Thus Latium and Capua forfeited and lost part of their territories. The lands of the Latines with the Privernates laied thereto, and the territorie of Falerij which belonged to the people of Capua, even as farre as the river Vulturinus, was devided amongst the Commons of Rome. Two acres in the Latine countrie, with a supplement of three foure parts out of the Privernates land to make up the whole: and three acres in the territorie of Falerij, with addition of a fourth part to boote for  amends because it was so farre off, were assigned for a man. The Laurentines only, of all Latium, and the horsemen of the Campains, escaped this punishment and were exempted from the rest, because they had not revolted. And a decree passed, that the league with the Laurentes should bee renued: and from that time usually every yeare, is it renued, after the tenth daie of the Latine holidaies. Those Campaine horsmen were made free denizens of Rome: and for a monument and memoriall thereof, they set up and fastned a brasen table at Rome in the temple of Castor. The people of Capua were enjoyned to pay yearly to every one of them, (and they were a thousand and vj. hundred in all) 45. 45. Denarij. amount 1020 sh. 1 d. ob. stethDeniers.
Thus after the warfully determined, and both rewards dealt, and punishment inflicted according to each mans desert, T. Manlius returned home: whom the elders onely [for certaine] went  forth to meete on the way: the youth, not onely then, but ever after, during his life abhorred and with curses detested him. The Antiates made certaine rodes into the territories of Hostia, Ardea, and Solonae. And for that Manlius the Consull was not able himselfe in person to intend and manage that warre, by reason of sickenesse, he nominated for Dictatour, L. Papyrius Crassus, who as it hapned was at that time Pretor: by whom was named for Generall of the horsmen,

men, L. Papyrius Cursor. This Dictatour, albeit he kept the field and lay en^camped certaine moneths  within the consines, yet atchieved no worthie and memorable exploit. After this yeare thus renowned for the victorie of so many and so puissant nations, and withall, for the noble and famous death of the one Consull, and for the government of the other, albeit sterne and rigorous, yet notable and renowmed; there succeeded Consuls, T. Aemylius Mamercus, and Q. Publius Philo, who met not with the like subject and matter of great affaires: and they themselves were more mindtull either of their owne private busines; and studious to maintaine a side and faction in the Commonweale, than to advance the State of their countrie. Howbeit, the Latins (who rebelled for anger that they lost their lands) they discomfited in the plain of Fenecta, drave them out of their camp, and forced them to leave the field. Where, whiles Publius (by whose governance and conduct that victorie was atthieved) received surrender of the Latines, the floure  of whose youth was there all slaine and killed up, Aemylius lead his armie against Pedum. As for the Pedanes they had maintenance from Tybur, Preneste, and Veliterne, who tooke their parts: there came also aid from Lanuvium and Antium. Where the Romane Consull, albeit he had the better hand in skirmish, yet for that there remained behind a new peece of service about the cittie it selfe Pedum, and the campe of their confederates which was adjoined close to the towne: all of a suddaine he gave over the warre unfinished, because he heard that triumph was decreed unto his brother Consull. He also himselfe returned to Rome, and called earnestly for triumph before victorie. At which untimely and covetous desire of his, the Nobles being offended, denied flatly; that unlesse he either forced Pedum by assault, or wan it by composition, he should not triumph. Herupon Aemylius being discontented and ahenated from the Senat, bare  his Consulship afterward like to the seditious Tribunes. For so long as he was Consull, he ceassed not to charge and accuse the Nobles before the people; and his Colleague no whit gainsaid him, as being himselfe one of the Commoners. He tooke occasion of these accusations upon this, that the lands in the Latine and Falern countries, were devided in pinching and skant measure, among the Commons. And after that the Senat, desirous to abridge the time of the Consuls government, had decreed that a Dictatour should be declared against the Latine rebels; Aemylius (whose turne it was at that time to governe) nominated his owne companion in office to be Dictatour, by whom Iunius Brutus was named Generall of the horse. This Dictatorship was popular and altogether framed to the humour of the common people: both by reason of felaunderous and accusatorie Invectives made against the Nobles: and for that it enacted three  statutes, most favourable and pleasing to the Commons; and as crosse and adverse to the Nobilitie: first, That the Actes devised and enacted by the Commons, should bind all the Qutrites or cittizens of Rome: secondly, That all lawes which were proposed, and to passe by the suffrages of the Centuries, before the Scrutinie began, and their voices gathered, the nobles should allow and approve: thirdly, That for as much as they were come thus farre alreadie, that both the Censors might be of the Commons, now one censour at the least should be a Commoner of necessitie. In so much as the Nobles thought verily that there was more lost at home this yeare by these Consuls and Dictatour, than gained to the Empire abroad, by their victories and warlike exploites.
In the yeare following when C. Furlus Camillus and Q. Maenius were Consuls, to the end that  Aemylius the Consull of the former yeare, might be more notably reproched for the quitting and letting slip of a victorie that should have bene atchieved in his yeare, the Senate began to mutter in their speeches, that Pedum by force of armes, by valour of men, and all possible means whatsoever, should be destroied and rased to the ground. Whereupon, the new Consuls being forced to lay aside all other affaires, and to go in hand with that service, first rooke their journey thither. Now was Latium growne to those termes, as they could neither abide warre nor indure peace. To maintaine the wars they wanted meanes: and peace they could not away with nor abide to here of, never since the losse of their lands. So they thought best to hold a middle course; to stand upon their guard, and to keepe themselves within their townes: that the Romans being not provoked, should make no quarrell of warre: and if there were tidings brought of any  town beleaguerd, there might be aid sent from all parts to the besieged. And yet for all this, were the Pedanes succoured but of verie few. The Tiburtines and Praenestines, whose countrie lay neerest, came to Pedum. But for the Aricines, Lanuvines and Veliternes, who joined their forces with the Antiates and Volscians, were suddainly assailed and set upon, neer the river Astura

 by Menius, and vanquished. Camillus fought before Pedum with the Tiburtines; who came into the field with a right puissant armie, and put him to much trouble and hazard: howbeit he had as good successe in the end as Menius. The greatest tumult and trouble was caused especially by occasion of a suddaine fally of the townsmen in the verie time of the conflict. Against whom, after that Camillus had opposed part of his forces to make head, he not only drave them within the wals, but the same day also, when he had discomfited both them and their succors, he skaled the town and was master thereof. Then it was thought good, with greater preparation of power and couragious resolution, after the winning of that one citie, to go about with the victorious armie from one to another, and so to subdue and tame for ever, the whole nation and name of Latium. Neither rested they, untill partly by maine force, and partly by taking one cittie after another by  way of surrender, they had brought all Latium under their subjection. After this, having disposed and placed garrisons in everie town which they had gotten, they departed to Rome for triumph: which was to them by a generall consent of all men granted. Besides their triumph, this honour was to them done, that two statues of horsemen (a rare thing in those daies) should be erected for them in the Grand place, called Forum.
But before that they gathered the suffrages of the people, in the assembly for Election of Coss. against the yere following, Camillus in this wife made a speech to the Senat, touching the Latine nations.The Oration of Camillus to the Senate of Rome. My LL. and Senators of Rome, That which by warre and force of armes was to be done in Latium, is now by God his goodnes and the valour of our soldiours brought to good passe.
The armies of our enemies slain before Pedum and Astura: The Latine townes all, and Antium  a cittie of the Volscians either by force woon, or rendred by composition, are now held and kept to your behoose, by your owne garisons. It remaineth now to consult (for as much as they troubleus oft by rebellion) and to devise some meanes how to keepe them quiet in continuall peace. In this consultation, the immortal gods have given you thus much power to resolve upon, that it lieth wholly in your hands, to chuse whether Latium shall continue still a nation or no: and therfore may ye for ever procure your selves repose and securitie from thence, either by rigour and punishment, or by clemencie and pardon, chuse you whether. Are ye minded to proceed by way of crueltie against those that have yeelded themselves, and are vanquished? Ye may, indeed, destroy all Latium, and make all wast and a desart wildernesse, from whence oftentimes in sundrie and dangerous wars of yours, ye have had the helpe of an armie of Allies, and found them fast and valorous.  But will ye (as your ancestors have done before you) enlarge the Roman Empire by receiving unto your citie those whom ye have conquered? Then have ye matter and means to grow up still and wax mightie, to your great honour and glorie. Certes, that governement and dominion is of all other most strong and sure, wherein the subjects take joy in their obedience. But whatsoever you meane to determine in this behalfe, yee had need to make speed and resolve betimes. So many nations yee hold in suspense of mind betweene feare and hope: and therefore behoofull it is, that you both rid and deliver your selves (as soon as you can) of the care they put you to; and also whiles their heads are busied and minds unresolved (standing as they doe amased in doubtfull expectation) either by punishment or by benefit, to forestall and prevent them before they take heart againe. For, our part it was hitherto and devoire to effect and bring about,  that yee might be able to dispose of all at your pleasure, and as you would your selves: now your dutie it is to determine what is best for your selves and the Commonweale. The lords and chiefe of the Senat praised this motion of the Cos. and deemed it good in generall. But for as much as the condition of the parties was divers, and their cause not all one, they said that they might resolve and determine best, according to the desert of each state, if they were specified by name, and the opinions asked in particular. So they fel to consultation of them severally as they were propounded: and set downe this order and decree, Imprimis, that the Lanuvines be enfranchised citizens of Rome, and enjoy againe their owne religion and sacred ceremonies, with this proviso, that the chappell and grove of Iuno Sospita should be common to the Burgeoisses of Lanuvium and the people of Rome. Item, that the Aricines, Nomentanes, and Pedanes, shall bee made dennisons  of Rome, and endued with the liberties and priviledges of the Lanuvines. Item, that the Tusculanes retaine still that freedome of their cittie safe, which as then they enjoied: and the crime and attaindre of rebellion, to be charged upon a few of the cheefe, to save the common state from danger. Item, that there should be greevous punishment inflicted upon the Veliterns, who being auncient Romane citizens, had notwithstanding so often taken arms and rebelled that their

wals should be dismanteled and rased: their Senatours from thence translated, and confined beyond  Tyberis, there to dwell, upon paine, that whosoever were found on this side the water, it might be lawfull for any man to take him as his prisoner, and to raunsome him at a (...) 1000 Asles. Provided alwaies, that he should not enlarge him, nor release him of his yrons, untill the monie were fully satisfied and paid. Into the possessions and lands of those Senatours, were tenants and Coloners sent to inhabite: who being once enrolled, Velitre seemed againe as populous as beforetime. At Antium was there a new Colonie planted, with this proviso, that the auncient inhabitants of the Antiates should be permitted (if they themselves would) to be enrolled there, and remaine still. From thence were their long Gallies and war-ships had away, and the people of Antium, wholly forbidden the sea: but the freedome of Romane citizens to them was graunted. The Tyburts and Prenestines forfeited their lands, not for their late trespasse of rebellion, common with other Latines, but because they repining and envying the good estate of the Romanes, had in times past joined armes with the Frenchmen, a savage and unsociable nation. From the other Latine cities and States, they took away the priviledge of mariage, the commerce of traffick, and entercourse of mutuall intelligences, and holding counsels themselves, for ever after. to the Campaine gentlemen that served with horse aforesaid, for that they would not give consent to revolt with the Latines: to the Fundanes also and Formanes, through whose countrie they had alwaies had free, safe, and quiet passage to and fro, this honour was done, as to be made cittizens of Rome; but without the libertie of giving voices. Item, it was decreed, that the Cumanes and Suessulanes, should be of the same condition and state that Capua was. The ships of the Antiates were part of them transported to the Arfenall at Rome, and the rest set on fire and  burned. With the stems, beakeheads, and brasen pikes whereof, it was thought good, that the pulpit of common pleas and Orations in the grand place of Rome, should be beautified and adorned: which publicke pulpit was thereupon called Rostra.
Whiles C. Sulpitius Longus, and P. Aelius Patus were Consuls, when as the Romanes held peaceablie under their dominion all the countries, as well through the favour which they woon by bountifull dealing, as by might and strong hand, there arose war betweene the Sidicines and auruncians. The Aurunci, who had yeelded afore to T. Manlius Consull, and were taken into protection, afterwards rebelled not: whereby they had a more just cause to request and seeke for aid at the Romanes hands. But before that the Consuls had led forth their power out of the cittie (for the Senate had commaunded, that the Aurunci should be defended) tidings came, that  the Aurunci for feare had quit their towne; and being fled with their wives and children, had fortified Sinuessa, which now at this day is called Aurunca: and that the auncient wals, with the towne it selfe, were by the Sidicines destroied. Hereat, the Senate offended with the Consuls, by whose delay and lingering, their allies had been betraied in time of their necessitie, ordained a Dictatour to be chosen. So there was elected C. Claudius Regillensis, who appointed for Generall of horsemen C. Claudius Hortator. But hereupon rose a scruple of conscience about the creation of the Dictator. And when the Augurs had pronounced, that they thought him not rightly created, both Dictatour and Generall of horsemen, gave over their roumes. The same yeare Minutia a Vestall Nun, was first suspected of incontinencie, for going in her apparrell more trimme than was decent for one of her calling and profession: and after that, brought in question and  accused by a bondservant, that informed against hir to the high Priests. First, by a decree of theirs she was awarded to abstaine from divine service, to keepe her house, and not to manuprise and set free any of her bond slaves, but to have them forthcomming, whensoever they were called for: and after farther examination and judgement passed, was buried quicke under the ground; at the gate Collina, in the paved causey on the right hand, within the plain or field called Sceleratus, Execrable or polluted. I suppose, that place took the name of such Simple fornication or incontinencie in a professed Votarie, was called Incest. incest or filthy whoredome. The same yeare Q. Publius Philo was elected Pretor, the first that ever was of the Commons, notwithstanding the mind of Sulpitius the Consull, who said, That hee would not take his name to propound it for Election, nor admit him among other competitours. But the Senate strived the lesse in impeaching this Pretorship, seeing they could not have their will in the highest  roumes and dignities.
The yeare next ensuing, under the Consulship of L. Papyrius Crassus, and Caso Duellius, was notable and famous for the warre of the Ausonians, in regard rather of the noveltie, than the greatnesse and danger thereof. They were a people that inhabited a towne called Cales, and had

 joined their power with the Sidicines their next neighbours. The whole power of which two nations being discomsited in one battaile, and the same not so memorable, was for the neerenesse of their citties more readie to flie, and in their flight more safe and secured. Yet the Nobles of Rome omitted not the care of that warre: for that the Sidicines so often, either had themselves moved warre, or aided those that began, or els were the cause of all troubles. Whereupon they endevoured all that they could, to make Consull the fourth time, the noblest warriour in those daies, M. Valerius Corvinus, who had for his brother in governement M. Attylius Regulus. And least haply some error by chaunce should be committed, suit was made to the Consuls, that extraordinarily, and without casting lot, that province might fall to Corvinus: who having received the armie (after the victorie at Cales) of the former Consuls, went forth. And when at the first  shout and onset hee had discomfited his enemies, who in remembrance of their former late overthrow were affrighted, hee assaied to assault their very wals: and so eager and hotely bent (I assure you) were the souldiours, that even at the first they would have set ladders to, as making full account to skale up to the top, and enter the towne. But Corvinus, because that was an hard adventure, was desirous to accomplish that enterprise by the long toile of his souldiors, rather than their present perill: hee raised therefore a countermure, and platformes, and rolling frames, mounted against the wals: but as good hap was, by an opportunitie that fell out, they had no use of these munitions and fabrikes. For M. Fabius a Romane prisoner, taking vantage of the negligence of his keepers upon a feastivall holyday, and making meanes to breake his bonds; let himselfe downe by a long cord, fastened at one end to a pinacle or battilment of the wall, and  slid by the armes, among the munitions and fabrikes of the Romanes: who so persuaded and prevailed with the Generall, that hee caused him to give an assault upon the enemies, now being fast asleepe, as having filled their bellies with wine and good meats. So that with as little a do were the Ausonians and their cittie surprised, as they were afore vanquished in fight. A great bootie of pillage was there gotten: and after a garrison placed at Cales, the legions were brought back to Rome. The Consull by decree of the Senate triumphed: and that Attilius should not bee without his glorie too, both Coss. were appointed to lead forth an armie against the Sidicines: but before they went, they appointed by a decree of the Senat, L. Aemylius Mamercus to be Dictator, to hold the election of Consuls. Who named Q. Publius Philo for his Generall of horsemen.
 In this Election, holden by this Dictator, there were created Consuls, T. Veturius, and Sp. Posthumius. Who, albeit there remained some part behind of the Sidicines warre, yet to the intent they might gratifie the Commons by some good turne, and prevent their longing before they spake themselves; proposed an Act concerning the bringing of a Colonie to Cales: and when as the Senate had ordained, that two thousand and five hundred men should bee enrolled and assigned thither; they created Triumvirs for to bring them thither, and to divide the lands, namely Caeso Duellius, T. Quintius, and M. Fabius. After this, the new Consuls having received the armie of the old, entred into the enemies confines, wasting all before them, untill they came to the very wals of their cittie. Now, for that the Sidicines had assembled a puissant armie, and seemed themselves fully resolute and bent upon utter despaire to put all unto the last adventure, and to  sight it out to the last man. Moreover, because it was noised, that all Samnium was risen up in armes: by authoritie from the Senate, the Consuls appointed P. Cornelius Ruffinus Dictator, and M. Antonius was nominated Generall of the horse. But hereupon grew againe another scruple, that there was some errour escaped in the creation: so they resigned up their places, and because there ensued also a plague hereupon (as if all their Auspices for the Elections of Magistrates had been touched and infected with that errour and default) the managing of all affaires fell to an Interreigne. Which being now entered upon by the fift Interregent, M. Valerius Corvinus, then Consuls were created, L. Cornelius the second time, and Cn. Domitius.
When all things els were at quiet, the rumor of the Gauls war was so rife and hot, that it was taken for a very The rumor of the Gaules war, was even taken for a Tumult (quasi timor multuls) and supposed more dangerous than another ordinarie warre. Tumult. Wherupon it was thought good, that a Dictator should be created. And M. Papyrius Crassus was nominated, who had P. Valerius Publicola for Generall of the horsemen. When they had mustered the soldiors more streightly and with greater regard than would have been for wars neare hand, the espials who were sent out, brought word that all was well and quiet among the Gaules. But suspected it was that Samnium now the second yeare was readie to drop out of their allegeance and seeke a change. Whereupon the Romane armie was not withdrawne

out of the Sidicine countrie. Howbeit the warre of Alexander King of Epirus, drew the Samnits  into the Lucanes countrie, which two nations uniting their forces, gave the King a battaile, as he made rodes from Pestus. In which conflict, Alexander having gotten the upper hand, entred into a league and amitie with the Romanes: although it was much doubted, with what faithfulnesse he would observe the same, if all his affaires prospered as well. The same yeare was a solemne Cense or Numbring of the people of Rome holden, and the newe citizens were matriculated and enrolled. And therefore two Tribes were annexed, Melia and Captia: the Censors that ordeined them, were Publ. Philo, and Sp. Posthumius. The Acerranes became Romane citizens, by an act proposed by L. Papyrius the Pretor: by vertue whereof, they were enfranchised Denizens, but without the priviledge of giving voices. These were the acts for this yere both at home and abroad.
The yeare next following (were it through the unkinde distemperature of the aire, or by some wicked practise of man) was infamous, when M. Claudius Marcellus and T. Valerius were Consuls. I finde the surname of this Consull to varie in divers Chronicles, in some Flaccus, in others Potitus. But it matters not much whether be true. This rather I could willingly have wished (and yet all authors doe not record it) that it had been falsely recorded, That those persons by forcery and poison were made away, whose death hath diffamed that yeare with the note of a pestilence. But yet as the thing is left in writing, I purpose to deliver it, left that I should seeme to derogate ought from the credence of any writer. When as the chiefe personages of the cittie died upon like diseases, and after one and the same manner of symptomes, a certaine chamber-maid presented her selfe to Q. Fabius Maximus (being for the time an Aedile of State) and professed to  bewray the cause of that publike and contagious maladie, if shee might be assured by faithfull promise from him, that by the utterance thereof, she should not come to harme nor trouble. Forthwith Fabius delivered this matter to the Consuls: and the Consuls made relation thereof to the Senate: by the consent of which State, assurance was made accordingly unto the partie aforesaid, to reveale the matter. Then shee declared, that by the lewd and mischievous wickednes of women, the cittie was thus afflicted: and namely, That certain dames of Rome even their owne wives, boiled and tempered ranke poisons, (to kill their husbands) and if they would follow it presently, they might be taken in the maner. So they went straight waies with the wench, and found some women as they were seething and preparing venimous drugs, yea and some poisoned confections alreadie put up. Which were brought into the market place, and about 20  of those dames, with whom the poisons were found, were sent for by a serjeant. Two of them, Cornelia and Sergio, both noble women borne, stoutly standing upon these termes, and stiffely avouching, That they were soveraine medicines and holsome for the bodie of man, were by the chamber-maid aforesaid confuted, and enjoyned to drinke therof, that they might disprove her, and make her a lier, and to have devised of her owne fingers ends this false slander. Who tooke a time to commune and conferre together, and the people were avoided aside to make them way. Now when as in sight of all the world, these two dames had propounded the matter to the rest there in place, they also refused not: and so having drunke the poisoned potion, they all perished by their owne mischievous practise. Then presently were their complices apprehended, who detected and discovered a great number of otherwives: of which one hundreth and seventie  were condemned. Never afore that daie was there any inquisition nor processe at Rome, about poisoning and sorcerie. So as the thing was taken for a prodigious wonder, and imputed rather to their minds, besotted and bewitched, than to any fellonious intent of theirs. Wherupon the Magistrates of the cittie, calling to mind and searching the old Chronicles, found, that in times past, at what time as the Commons in a mad fit withdrew themselves and departed the cittie, there was a spike or great naile driven and fixed by the Dictatour: and that the mindes of the people, which by discord had been bestraught and out of their right wits, were by that ceremoniall satisfaction, brought againe in good tune: and therefore it was throught good, that for the fastning or sticking up of such a naile, there should a Dictatour be created. So Cn. Quintilius was nominated, who named L. Valerius Generall of horsemen, who so soone as the naile was  fastned, gave over their places.
Consuls then were created, L. Papyrius Crassus the second time, and L. Plantius Venox. In the beginning of which yeare, there came from the countrie of the Volscians as Embassadours to Rome, the Fabraternes and Lucanes, making request that they would take them into their protection;

 promising that if by them they were defended from the forces of the Samnites, they would become loiall and obedient subjects to the people of Rome. Then were Embassadours sent from the Senat, to give commandement to the Samnites, to forbeare doing any violence upon the borders of those nations. Which embassage sped well and tooke place; not so much for that the Samnites desired peace, as because they were not as yet readie prepared for war. The same yeare began the Privernates warre. The confederates whereof, were the Fundanes, and their Leader likewise a Fundane, one Vitruvius Vaccus, a man of great name and reputation, not onely in his owne countrie, but also at Rome. His dwelling house stood sometime in mount Palatine, even the very same, which after the building was pulled down, and the ground forfeit and confiscate, was called Vacci Prata. Against whom as he wasted and spoiled farre and neare the  Setine, Norbane and Corane countries, L. Papyrius went forth with a power, and rested not far from his very campe. But Vitruvius neither had the wit to keepe himselfe within his trench against a mightier enemie, nor yet the heart to encounter farre from his fort. But having put his souldiors in battaile array, before they were all well out of the gate of the campe, whiles the soldiours had more minde to flie backward than march forward and encounter the enemie; without either advise or confident courage he fought: and with as little adoe, and without any question of the matter he was vanquished: so by reason of the shortnesse of the way, and the easie retire into the campe so neare, he found no great trouble to save his souldiors from much slaughter. For in the verie conflict, few or none in a manner were slaine, and not many in the presse of the rout and taile of the flight, at what time as they rushed into their campe. And in the beginning  of the night, the armie thus discomfited, made hast to Privernum, there to defend themselves within a wall rather than a trench. Plautius the other Cos. having from Privernum, overrun and forraied the territorie, and driven booties away, conducted his armie into the Fundane countrie.
The Senat of the Fundanes as he entred into their confines met him, saying: They were not come as Orators to entreat either for Vitruvius, or for those that tooke his part; but for the people of the Fundanes: who that they were innocent and not culpable for this war, Vitruvius himselfe hath plainly proved and declared, in that he chose Privernum to be his place of retreat and refuge, and not the cittie Fundi the verie place of his nativitie. And therefore at Privernum the enemies of the people of Rome were to be sought for and pursued, who unmindfull of both their owne countries, had revolted as well from the Fundanes as the Romanes. As for the citizens of  Fundi, they were at peace with Rome, nay they were Romanes in heart, and carried a thankfull remembrance of a benefit received: they intreated therfore and besought the Consull to forbeare hostilitie with a guiltlesse people: assuring him that their lands, their cittie, their owne bodies, their wives and children were and should be at the devotion of the people of Rome. The Consull after that he had commended the Fundanes, and sent letters to Rome that they remained firme and fast in their allegeance, turned his way to Privernum. But before hee dislodged (as Claudius writeth) the Consull executed those that were the heads of the conspiracie, and three hundred and fiftie of those rebellious conspiratours were sent prisoners to Rome. But the Senat accepted it not, and were not content with that submission, as judging the Fundane people, desirous to be excused and discharged, with the punishment of the needie and base sort of people.  Now when as Privernum was besieged and invested with two Consular armies, the one of the Consuls was called home, to hold, the Election of magistrates. That yeare were erected in the great race called Circus, the Barriers, from whence the horses and their chariots are let forth, when they run their prices. But before they were well past the care of the Privenates warre, there arrived a terrible and fearefull brute of the Gaules warre, which never was regarded sleightly of the Nobles of Rome. Incontinently therefore the new Consuls, L. Aemylius Mamercus, and Cn. Plautius, on that verie day, namely on the First of Iulie. Calends of Iuly, wherein they entred their offices, were commanded to determine and agree between themselves upon their provinces: And Mamercus, who had the charge of the Gaules warre, levied and enrolled an armie without allowing any immunitie and exemption from warfare. Moreover and besides, even the poore handi-crafts  men and artisanes, such as keep their shops, and live by sedentarie occupations, a sort far unmeet for martiall service, are said to have been called forth, and prest to the wars: and a mightie armie was assembled and met together at Veij, that from thence they might march to encounter the Gaules: For it was thought good that they should now go farther forward, for feare least the enemie taking another way, might deceive them and march directly to the cittie of Rome. But

a few daies after, when it was knowne for certaine that all the trouble and feare for that time  was overblowne, they diverted their forces from the Gaules, and bent all against Privernum. But the yssue hereof is reported two nmanner of waies, some write that the cittie was forced by assault, and that Vitruvius came alive into their hands: others, that before the utmost extremitie of assault was used, they of their owne accords, carying before them white wands in token of peace, yeelded themselves unto the Consull: and that Vitruvius by his owne countrimen was rendred and delivered unto him. The Senat being moved, and their opinion asked concerning Vitruvius and the Privernates; sent for the Consull Plautius to triumph, after that he had dismanteled the walles of Privernum, and there placed a strong garison: and they gave order in the meane time that Vitrurius should be kept fast in prison untill the Consuls returne, then to be whipped and put to death. They appointed also that his habitation in Palatium should be pulled down, and his  goods consecrated to their Idoll Semon Sangus. And look what mony [of brasse] was raised therof, it served to make brasen round plates, which were offered and set up in the chappell of Sangus towards the temple of Quirinus. Touching the Senat of the Privernates, thus it was decreed, that everie one of Senators calling, who remained at Privernum after their revolting from the Romanes, should in the same condition and state as the Veliternes, be confined beyond Tybris, and there dwell. These Actes being thus set downe, there was no more talke of the Privernates untill the triumph of Plautius.
After the triumph, the Consull having executed Vitruvius and his complices, supposing now that he might safely propound the cause of the Privernates, to the LL. of the Senat, whiles they were newly satisfied with the execution of the guilty offenders. Since that (qd. he) my LL. of the Senat, the principall authors of this revolt and rebellion, have both at  the hands of the immortall gods, and at yours, suffered now alreadie condigne punishment; what is your further pleasure, and what shall be done with the innocent and harmelesse multitude? For my part verify, although I be rather to demand your opinions than to deliver mine owne: yet seeing the Privemates neere neighbours unto the Samnites, with whom we now at this time intertaine a most uncertaine and slipperie peace, I would have as little grudge and rancor left as may be, between us and them. As the question in it selfe was doubtfull and ambiguous, whiles men gave advise some to proceed cruelly, others to deale gently, according to ech man his nature and inclination: so, there was one of the Privernate Embassadours that made it more doubtfull, and put all out of square; a man mindfull of that state wherein he was borne, more than of his present need and extremitie. Who being demaunded of one (that had spoken to the point, and  delivered some sharpe censure and heavie sentence against them) What punishment he judged the Privernates deserved? Mary (quoth he) that which they deserue, who deeme themselves worthie of libertie and freedome. At whose stout and arrogant answere, when the Consull saw those to be more eagerly and bitterly bent, who before impugned the cause of the Privernates: to the end that he himselfe by some mild and gentle demaund might draw from the partie more modest language: What (quoth hee) if we should remit and pardon your punishment; what kind of peace might we hope to have at your hands? If (quoth hee) yee offer us good peace, yee shall find it on our part loiall and perpetuall: but if ye tender hard conditions of peace, yee shall have it last but a finall while. But then one gave out, that the Privernate began to threaten plainly: and said moreover, that such speeches were enough to stir up any peaceable and quiet people to war, that never thought to have fought. But the better part of the Senate drew these his answeres to a better sense, and said that it was the speech of a man, and of a man free borne. For, was it credible (quoth they) that any state, nay any particular person, would longer abide (than needs he must) that condition which he misliketh and goeth against his stomacke? There onely is peace sure and like to hold, where men are contented and willing to keepe themselves in peace: and never let men look or hope to find faithfull loialtie, where they will impose thraldome and servitude. And to this purpose the Consull himselfe especially moved and inclined their hearts, reiterating these words to the Senatours that were first to give their opinions, and that so lowd, as he might of many more be over-heard, That they above al other, and none but they indeed were worthie to be made Romane citizens, who minded and esteemed nothing in the world, but their freedome. Whereupon, both in the Senat they obtained their suit: and also by the authoritie of the LL. a Bill was exhibited to the people, That the Privernates might be enfranchised Romanes.
The same yeare were three hundred sent as a Colonie, to inhabite Anxur: and had two acres of ground a peece allowed them. The yeare following was memorable in no respect, either of

 home affaires or forraine, in the time of P. Plautius Proculus, and P. Cornelius Scapula Coss. Onely this fell out that yeare, that in Fregellae (which somtime was in the territorie of the Sidicines, and after, of the Volscians) there was a Colonie planted: and unto the people there was given a dole, or distribution of raw flesh amongst them, by Marcus Flavius, at the funerall of his mother. Some there were that thought, how under a colour of honouring his mother, he desraied and paid unto the people a deserved hire and reward, in that when he was by the Aediles arrested and brought to his answere for adulterie committed with a dame or maried wife in the cittie, the people had by their voices acquit him. This dole given for a favour past at his triall, was the occasion also of a dignitie following: for in the next Election notwithstanding he were absent, he was preferred to the Tribuneship of the Commons, even before those competitors that were  present in place.
There stood sometime the cittie Palaepolis, not farre from thence where as now Naples standeth. In those two citties, one and the same people inhabited, descended and deriving their beginning from Cumes, and the Cumanes fetch their ofspring from Chalcis in Euboea. With that fleet wherein they sailed from their owne countrie, they were able to doe much at sea, and were mighie upon those coasts where they dwelt. And first landing in the Ilands Aenaria and Pitchecusae, afterwards they adventured to seat themselves in the maine and continent. This cittie relying and trusting in their owne power, as well as presuming upon the faithlesse and disloyall societie of the Samnites with the Romans, or bearing themselves bold upon the rumor that ran of a pestilence that reigned in the cittie of Rome, wrought much mischiefe and hostilitie against such  Romanes as inhabited the Campaine and Falerne countries. Whereupon, when as (in the time of Lucius Cornelius Lentulus, and Quintus Publius Philo Consuls, the second time) there were Faecials sent to Palaepolis, for to demaund restitution againe, and a proud answere returned backe from the Greekes, a Nation more stout and valiant in tongue than in deed and execution; by the authoritie of the Senate, the people decreed, that there should bee warre made upon the Palaepolitanes. And when as the Consuls had devided their Provinces betweene themselves, it fell to Publius his turne to warre upon those Greeks. Cornelius with another armie was opposed against the Samnites, if they should happen to stirre any way. For the report went, that they looking and expecting assuredly the revolt of the Campaines, would encampe neerer and joine with them. There, Cornelius thought it best to keepe a standing  campe. The Senat was certefied from both Consuls, That they had small hope of peace with the Samnites. Publius gave intelligence, that two thousand Nolane souldiours, and foure thousand Samnites, were rather by the compulsion and importunitie of the Nolanes, than with the good will of the Greekes, received at Palaepolis. At Rome it was for certaine knowne, that in Samnium there were new musters taken by the Magistrates direction, and that the whole countrie, and the people adjoining, were raised, and out in armes. Moreover, That the Privernats, Fundanes, and Formians were without all dissimulation sollicited and moved to rebell. Vpon which causes, it was advised by the Senat, first to send Embassadours to the Samnites, before they made warre: and from them they had an insolent answere. And they themselves made quarrell, and charged the Romanes with wrongs offred first: and neverthelesse they justified themselves for any thing by  them done, and answered all objections that were laid against them full stoutly.
Namely, that the Greekes were not aided by any publicke counsell or order of theirs, nor yet were the Fundanes and Formians, by them sollicited, as who need not to bee ashamed of their owne power, but thought themselves sufficient ynough to warre if they listed. Thus much moreover, they could not dissimule, but speake it out in plaine tearmes, That the Nation and State of the Samnites take it in ill part, that the people of Rome had reedified and repaired Fregellae, a town by them conquered, and woon from the Volscians, and by them laid ruinate: and not onely so, but they had placed a colonie also in the Samnites countrie, which the inhabitants called Fregellae. Which contumelie and reprochfull injurie, unlesse they that were the authors thereof would do their best to abolish and cancell, they would with all their might and maine repell it from them. And  when as the Romane Embassadour made a motion, and would have had them to put the matter for to bee decided unto the common confederates and friends of both parties; What double and indirect dealing is this (quoth the Samnites?) What frapling is here to no purpose? As for the quarrels and differences betweene us (o yee Romanes) neither the babling words of Embassadour, nor yet any daief-man or arbitrator, but the very Campaine filed, wherein wee must encounter

earnest, even dint of sword, and thespeares point, and the doubtfull chaunce of  battaile, shall determine. And therefore encampe we betweene Capua and Suessula, in the fight one of another, and let us then trie the issue, whether Samnite or Romane shall be lord of Italie. The Embassadours of Rome made answere, that they were not to go whether the enemie called them, but whether their Generall and Captaines led them. In this meane while Publius had alreadie gotten a convenient peece of ground betweene Palaepolis and Naples, and thereby empeached the enemies of the mutuall entercourse of succours from the one to the other, which they had used reciprocally, as either place had need, and was distressed. Therefore, when as the time of Election of Magistrates at Rome drew on apace, and expedient it was not for the Commonweale, that Publius (now approching neer the enemies wals, and readie to assault) should be called away from the hope which daily hee had of winning the cittie; the Tribunes were dealt  with all, to propose an Act unto the people, That when the time of Pub. Philo his Consulship should be expired, he might in qualitie and name of Proconsull, remaine in governement, untill the warre with the Greekes were fully ended. And unto L. Cornelius were letters sent, implying thus much, That whereas it was not thought good, that hee now being entered into Samnium, should be called away from the cheese push of the warre, he should nominate a Dictator to bee President of the Election of Magistrates: Who named M. Claudius Marcellus, and by him was appointed for Generall of horse Sp. Posthumius. Yet for all this, was no assemblie for the said Election, holden by the Dictator. For it came in question, Whether hee were rightly created or no. And the Augurs being hereabout consulted with, pronounced, that the Dictatour seemed not created aright.
But the Tribunes discredited and made suspicious and infamous, by their accusatorie  speeches, this their sentence and declaration, saying, That neither it was easie to know the fault and error in the creation, seeing that the Consull nominated the Dictator in the beginning of the still night, neither had the Consull written to any man publickely or privatly thereof, nor yet was there any person could come forth and say, that he either saw or heard ought, that might marre and interrupt the Auspices, ne yet could the Augurs sitting at Rome, areed and divine, what errour had happened to the Consull in the campe so farre off. And who saw not (say they) that the Augurs found fault herewith, because the Dictator Elect, was a Commoner? These and other such allegations were (to no purpose) by the Tribunes given out. For the matter grew to an Interreigne, and the foresaid Election being still put off and adjourned for one cause or other, at length the foureteenth Interregent, L. Aemylius, created Consuls, C. Petilius, and L. Papyrius, surnamed  Mugillanus or Cursor, as I find in other Chronicles.
In that yeare it was recorded, that the citie Alexandria in Aegypt was founded: and that Alexander the King of Epirus was murdred by a certaine Lucane, a banished person, to verifie the Oracle of Iup. Dodoneus, which had foretold his death. For when he was sent for into Italie by the Tarentines, he had warning given him, TO TAKE HEEDE OF THE ACHERUSIAN VVATER, AND THE CITTIE PANDOSIA, FOR THERE IT VVAS HIS DESTINIE TO END^ HIS DAIES: and therefore, with more speede he passed over into Italie, to be as far off as might be, from the citie Pandosia in Epirus, and the river Acheron; which issuing out of Molossis into the lower Meeres and Lakes, dischargeth it selfe, and falleth into the Thesprotian gulfe. Howbeit (as commonly it is seene when men seeke most to flie and avoid their fatall death, they run  headlong and plunge themselves into it) he, having oftentimes vanquished and overthrowne the legions of the Brutians and Lucanes; woon by force Heraclea a Colonie of the Tarentines, and Consentia in Lucania, and Sipontum, and also Acerina a Colonie of the Brutians, and other citties afterwards of the Messapians and Lucanes: sent into Epirus three hundred noble houses and families, whom he meant to keepe as hostages: he encamped not farre from Pandosia, a citie situate neer to the confines of the Lucanes and Brutians. And there he held three hils somewhat distant asunder, from whence hee might make excursions and rodes into every part of his enemies countrie: and he had in ordinarie about him almost 200. banished men of the Lucans, for his sure trustie guard: who notwithstanding (as the natures are of such for the most part) changed with every winde, and carried mutable minds according to the varietie of fortune. Now it fell  out so, that the continuall raines which overflowed all the fields, had foreclosed and stopped the passages three waies betweene his armies, so as they could not help one another: wherby those two garrisons where the King was not in person, were surprised by the unexpected comming of the enemies: who having put them al to the sword, turned their whole forces to besiege the King.

 From whence, there were by the Lucane exiles, messengers sent to their own countrimen: who in the name of the rest capitulated, that if they might be restored againe, they would deliver the K. either dead or alive into their hands. Howbeit he himselfe with an elect number of men, made a noble and hardie adventure, and brake through the midst of the enemies: and encountring the chiefe Commander of the Lucans hand to hand, killed him outright: and having rallied his men neare together, who were scattered a sunder in sight, he came at length to a river, which by the fresh ruines of a broken bridge, that the violence of the water had borne downe, shewed passage. Which as the armie passed over at an unknowne and blinde foord, one souldiour wearied with feare and travaile, cursing and detesting the unluckie and abhominable name of the river, fortuned to say, Thou hast not thy name A river of anguish and paine. Acheros for nought: which word when it came once  to the Kinghis eare, he presently began to thinke and muse of his finall end; and there staied stil, in a deepe suspence whether he should passe over or no. Then Sotimus, one of the Kings servitors and Henxmen, asked him why he lingered and made delay, being in so great a perill and jeopardie as he was? and shewed him withall, how the Lucanes intended to plaie false with him, and sought opportunitie to forelay and doe him a mischiefe. With that the King looked behinde him, and espied them a far off in a troupe comming against him: whereupon he drew his sword, put his horse to it, tooke the river, and rode through the midst thereof: and when he was now so far passed that he was readie to take the land, one of those banisht Lucanes launced a dart a loose at him and strake him quite through. Whereupon he fell downe dead with the dart sticking in his bodie, and the streame carried it downe as farre as to the corps de guard of the enemies.  Where his breathlesse corps was shamefully misused and mangled. For they having cut it crosse the middle, sent the one halfe to Consenza.Consentia, and kept the other with themselves still, to practise a thousand villanies upon it. And as they shot and slung stones at it a far off, a certaine woman being amongst this outragious multitude (faring beyond all measure of anger and malice that mans heart can devise or beleeve) after she had besought them to forbeare a while, with her eies gushing out tears said unto them, That her husband and children were prisoners, and in the hands of the enemies: but she hoped with the Kings bodie, howsoever it were abused and martired, to redeeme them againe. This staied them from farther mangling thereof: Thus all that was left of the Kings bodie, by the meanes of one onely woman, was burnt at Consentia: and his bones sent back afterwards to the enemies unto Torride Mar. `Metapontum, and from thence conveighed to  Epeirus, unto Cleopatra his wife, and his sister Olympias; whereof the one was sister, the other mother to Alexander the Great. Thus much concerning the wofull and unhappy end of Alexander the K. ofAlbania. Epeirus. Whose fortune albeit was such, that he came short, and was cut off before he intermedled in the Romane war, yet because he warred in Italie, let it suffice that briefly by the way I have touched his storie.
The same yeare was there a Lectisterne at Rome, (which was the fist after the foundation and building of that citie) for the pacifying of the same gods as heretofore. Afterwards, the new Consuls by the ordinance and direction of the people, sent defiance and proclaimed war against the Samnites. And as they themselves made greater preparation every way than against the Greeks, so they had besides new aides, whereof (as then) they least thought of. The Lucanes and the  Apulians (nations which to that day had no dealing nor commerce at all with the Romanes) became their liege and loyal Allies, offering men and munition toward that war. Wherupon they were by forme of covenant and league interteined and received into their amitie. At the same time also the Romanes had good successe in the Samnits quarters: for three townes there, yeelded unto them, and they became Masters thereof, to wit, Allife, Callife, Ruffrium: all the territorie besides at the first comming of the Consull, was pilled and spoiled far and neare. These exploites thus prosperously atchieved, the other enterprise also of besieging the Greekes, was well followed and at the point of an end. For over and besides, that by certaine skonces and bloccuzes betweene the enemies sortes and forces, one part was cut from the other; they endured also within their owne wals, much more miserie and calamitie, than the enemie menaced and threatned without:  and as if they had been captives to their owne garrison souldiors, whom they had called to them for their defence, they suffered infinite villanies, and indignities, in the persons as well of their wives as of their children, and even the hardest extremities, that follow upon citties forced by the enemie. And therefore when it was noised abroad, that there were new succours comming from Tarentum and the Samnites: they supposed that for Samnites, there were alreadie

die within their wals more of them than they would: mary, as for Tarentines, they looked willingly  for their helpe, as Greekes both the one and the other, hoping by their meanes that they might as well withstand the outrages of the Samnites and Nolanes, as the Romanes, their open and professed enemies. Last of all, of many inconveniences that they were driven unto, the least and easiest was thought, to yeeld simply unto the Romanes. Charilaus and Nymphius two great men and the chiefe personages of the cittie, having laied their heads and plotted one with the other, so parted the matter between themselves, that the one should slie unto the Romane Generall, and the other staie behinde, to finde some opportunitie, and minister readie meanes to render the cittie according to their designment.
Charilaus was the man who presented himselfe unto Philo, and said unto him, To the good and happie fortune be it said and done of the Palaepolitanes and the people of Rome, I am determined to deliver and surrender the cittie into your  hands: in which Action, whether I may be thought to have betraied or saved my countrie, it resteth only in the trust and fidelitie of the Romans. As for my selfe privatly, I am come neither to indent, nor yet to crave ought at all: but publikly in the behalfe of the cittie, I would rather by way of petition request, than article and capitulate, thus much, That if this enterprise intended, speed well and take effect, the people of Rome would thinke and consider, in what affection, endevour and jeopardie, our cittie returneth againe into their amitie, rather than upon what follie and rashnesse, it brake their allegeance and revolted. Then, after he had been bidden welcome by the Generall, enterteined with good and gratious words, and highly commended, he received three thousand souldiors, to keepe, surprise, and to seise that quarter of the cittie, where the Samnites were lodged, and which they held: of this regiment and garrison, L. Quintius a Colonell had  the conduct. During this time, Nymphius also did his part, and dealt so crastely under hand with the Pretor of the Samnites, that he induced and wrought him to this point, That for as much as all the Roman forces, were either about Palaepolis or in Samnium, he would permit him with the fleet to cast about to the Romane coasts, for that he intended to harrie and wast, not only the maritine parts, but the territories also adjoyning to the cittie: and the better to deceive the enemie (quoth he) I had need to go by night, and therefore the ships presently must lanch foorth, and be set afloat. And to effect this more speedely, all the youth of the Samnites besides the necessarie garrison of the cittie, was sent to the shore. Where whiles Nymphius in the darke, and amongst the multitude that hindered one another purposely, and spent time in setting confusedly, some to this and others to that, Charilaus, according to the complot set before, was by his  associates received into the cittie: and having filled the highest places of the towne with Romane souldiors, commanded to set up a shour, whereat the Greekes upon a secret token given them by their Chieftaines, kept themselves still and quiet. The Nolanes then, at the backside of the towne, escaped and fled by the high way, that leadeth to Nola. And the Samnites being excluded out of the town, as they had a more readier meane to flie for the present, so they found it, after they were past danger, a more shamefull disgrace. For, they were disarmed and naked men, they had left all the good they had amongst the enemies, and returned home spoiled, poore and needie, and served for a laughing stocke and derision, not onely to other nations, but also to their owne neighbours and countrimen. Albeit I am not ignorant that there is another opinion, whereby it is given out that Palxpolis was by the Samnites betraied: yet as I have credited  and followed herein such authors, as me thinkes it were hard if they should not deliver a truth; so I am induced the rather to beleeve that the Neapolitanes returned into amitie with the Romanes, because of the league extant in their name (for unto them afterwards the State and chiefe seate of the Greekes was translated.) Vnto Publius was decreed a triumph, for that it appeared clearely and was beleeved constantly, that by his siege the enemies were tamed, and so constreined to come to a composition and surrender. Two speciall favours hapned to this man above all others before him, namely, the prorogation of his government, not granted to any man aforetime; and triumph after his magistracie was expired.
Vpon the taile of this warre, arose another with the Greeks of the other tract or coast. For the Tarentins having born the Palaepolitans in hand a good while, and fed them with a vain hope of  help, when they heard once that the Romans were possessed of their city, complained themselves like men forsaken, and not as those who had forsaken others, much blaming the Palaepolitans, and with anger and envie raging against the Romans. Disquieted also they were, for that newes came that the Lucanes and Appulians (for both these nations that yeare began to contract alliances)

 were under the protection of the Romanes. For now (say they) they are welneere come unto us, and shortly we shall grow to this passe, that we must acknowledge the Romanes for our lords, or have them our heavie friends. And verily the triall and hazard of our estate, dependeth onely upon the Samnites warre, and the event thereof, which nation alone, and the same nothing mightie, remaineth now; since that the Lucanes are gone and revolted to the Romans: who yet might be reclaimed and moved to shake off the societie with the Romans, if any feat were wrought and practised to sow some discord and dissention between them. These devises and overtures tooke place and prevailed with such, as were desirous of change and noveltie: in so much as certaine of the Lucane youth (better knowhe, than trusted and reputed honest, amongst their countrimen and fellow cittizens, hired also for a sum of mony) whipped one another with rods, came  naked into the assembly of the citizens, and with open mouth cried out aloud and said, that for presuming only to come into the Roman campe, they were by the Coss, thus scourged, and escaped narrowly the loosing of their heads. The thing in it selfe pitteous and unseemly to behold, as bearing a shew rather of wrong done unto them, than of any malicious and subtile practise by them intended, stirred the people up, to force their Magistrats with their uncessant outcries to assemble a Councell. Some standing round about the Senat in counsel, cal hard for war against the Romans: others run up and downe to raise the multitude of peazants to take armes: and in this hurlie and uprore, which was able to disquiet and amase even those that were well minded, a decree passed; that the league with the Samnites should be renued, and Embassadours dispatched forthwith, to the same purpose. This was a suddaine change; and as it had no colour of cause, so it caried small  credite with it amongst the Samnites, who forced the Lucanian s to give hostages, and to take garrisons into their fortresses: and they, blinded with anger, and inveagled with faiterie, refused nothing. But shortly after began the fraud to appeare and shew it selfe, namely, after that the authors and devisers of these false surmises and slanders, were retired to Tarentum: but having put themselves out of all, and being not at libertie to dispose of their own affaires, they had nothing els left them, but like fooles to repent in vaine.
That yeare happened to the Commons of Rome another beginning of their libertie, in that they were no more either bound in chaines, or held in thraldome by their creditours. Which priviledge against poore debtours, was altered, by occasion of the filthie lust and notorious crueltie of one Vsurer. And L. Papyrius was the man, unto whome C. Publius for his fathers  debt, became bound, and consigned himselfe his prisoner: whose tender age and lovely favour which might and should have moved pittie, inflamed the mind of this Vsurer to unkind lust and shamefull contumelie: for making full account, that the prime and flower of his youth should satisfie and pay for the interest of the debt, he first began to allure and intice unto him the youth with wanton and unchast speeches: afterwards, seeing that his eares abhorred to hear such filthines, he fell to minatorie words, and ever and anon put him in mind of his present condition wherin he stood: but last of all, perceiving by him, that he stood more upon his honor and freedome by birth, than respected his hard estate by fortune; he caused him to be stripped naked, and whipping cheare to be presented unto him. The poore stripling thus pitteously tawed and torn, ran forth into the open street, complained of the filthie lust and crueltie of his creditour. Wherupon,  a number of people, enkindled as well with pittie and commiseration of the youngling, and indignitie of the injurie, as also in regard of their own case, and of their children; came running into the Forum or common place, and so from thence in a long traine to the court of the counsell. The Consuls upon this suddaine uprore were forced to call a Senate, and as the Senators entred into the counsell chamber, they lay all prostrate at their feet, as they passed by, one after another, and shewed unto them the yong mans back and sides in what taking they were. And that one day, by occasion of the outrageous enormiti^ of one person, brake the necke of that mightie bond, wherby, to that day, the creditors had their debtors in danger unto them. For the Consuls had in charge, to propose unto the people, that from thence forward, no person whatsoever, unlesse he had committed some hainous fact, and untill he were to suffer therfore, should  bee either kept in fetters and gives, or stretched upon the racke. Item, that for lent monie, the goods of the debtor and not the bodie should be obliged. So, they that were in bondage, became released and enlarged: and order was taken for the time to come, that none should be imprisoned by their creditours againe.
The same yeare, whiles the Samnites warre of it selfe alone, besides the suddaine revolt of the

Lucanes, together with the Tarentines the hatchers thereof, held the Senators of Rome in care  and perplexitie ynough: behold over and above all these, the Vestine people, as a surcrease to their troubles, joined and banded with the Samnites. Which new occurrent, as, for that yeare it rather maintained discourse amongst men in their ordinarie talke every where, than ministered cause of serious debating in publicke councell; so the Consuls of the yeare following, L. Furius Camillus the second time, and Iun. Brutus Sceva, thought no one thing more important than it, and needfull to be treated of in the Senate, with the first. And albeit the thing were but new, and a breeding, yet so greatly were the L L. hereabout troubled, that they feared no lesse to begin to take it in hand, than to neglect it altogether, and not to see it: doubting, least if they were let go unpunished, the neighbour nations would grow too lustie and prowd: and again, if they seemed to chastice them by warre, the rest for feare of the like measure, might bee provoked to anger, take armes, and enter into a generall rebellion. And all, and every one of them, namely, the Marsians, the Pelignians and Marucines, were in fears of armes comparable and egall to the Samnites every way: which nations they might be sure to have their enemies, if they medled with the Vestines, and touched them once never so little. Howbeit, that part prevailed and took place, which for the present, seemed to carrie more courage and valour, than sage advise and wisedome: but the issue and event shewed, that, Fortune favoureth Fortitude. So the people by authoritie and direction of the Nobles, decreed warre against the Vestines: the charge whereof light by lot upon Brutus, and Samnium fell to Camillus. To both places were the armies conducted: and by the care and industrie emploied in the defence of the marches and frontiers, the enemies were empeached for joining their forces together. Howbe it the Consull Furius Camillus, who had the  greater and weigh^^er charge laid upon him, fortuned to fall greevously sicke, and thereby could not follow the warres: who being commaunded to nominate a Dictatour, for to manage and conduct his affaires, declared the noblest warriour in those daies, L. Papyrius Cursor: by whome Q. Fabius Rutilian^s was named Generall of horsemen, a couple certes, of great name and highly renowmed for their worthie acts, atcheeved in this their governement; but yet more famous and voiced abroad, by ^cason of variance and discord which fell betweene them; whereby they grew welneare to the utmost tearmes of contesting one another in all extremitie. The other Consull warred with the Vestines many and sundrie waies, but evermore with like fortune and happie successe. For hee forraied and wasted their countrie: and by pilling, rifling, and burning their houses and corn, forced them against their wils into the field: and in one battell so enfeebled  and abated the forces of the Vestines (but not without bloudshead of his owne men) that his enemies not onely fled into their campe; but also as not trusting now to their rampiers and trenches, they were constrained to steale away into their townes, minding for to save themselves, as well by the naturall scituation of the places, as the strength of their good wals. In the end, he made assault upon those walled cities, purposing by force to win them. And first he gained Cutina by the skalade, either through the exceeding courage of his soldiors, or their anger, being so chafed as they were at their hurts received: for that s^arcely one escaped out of the medley and skirmish, clear and not wounded. Then he likewise took Cingilia: and gave the pillage of both citties among his soldiors. Neither gates nor wals could stand in their way and keepe them out. But into Samnium the journy was undertaken by the Dictator with doubtful Auspices and  uncertaine knowledge of the will of the gods. The default and terrour whreof tooke not effect in the maine event and yssue of the war, (for it was prosperous and fortunate) but turned to the rage and anger of the chiefe leaders, who fell out deadly one with another. For Papyrius the Dictator, advised by the Pullarius [that had the custodie and charge of the sacred Pullets] went back to Rome to take the Auspicium [or the presage by the bird-flight] again: and straightly charged his Generall of horse to keep himselfe close within his hold, and in no wise to give the enemies battel during his absence. But Fabius after the Dictatours departure, advertised by the espials, that the enemies were even as carelesse, as loose and disordred, as if there had been no Romane in Samnium; whether it were, that being a stout and lustie young gentleman, he tooke foule sko^e and thought it an indignitie, that all should seeme to rest in the Dictatour onely: or that he was  induced with the good opportunitie of doing some brave exploit (I wot not:) but he went forth with an armie in order of battaile, to Imbrinium, (that was the places name) and there fought a field with the Samnites. But such was the happie yssue of this battaile, that if the Dictatour himselfe had been there in person, it could not have been better managed. For, neither captaine

 failed his soldiors, nor soldiors their captaine. The horsemen also under the leading of L. Ceminius a Colonell by his place, (who sundrie times charged and recharged againe, and could not with force breake the enemies arraies) unbridled their horses, and so ran them all on the spurre, that no strength was able to abide them: such an havocke, such a lane made they all about over armour and men. The footmen seconding this hote charge of the horse, advanced the ensignes against the enemies thus put in disaray: and twentie thousand men (by report) were that day slaine. In some authors I find, that twice in the Dictators absence hee fought, and twice had the upper hand. But in the most ancient writers I read but of one battaile. In some Chronicles the whole matter is passed over and left out clean. The General of the horse, having gained a mightie masse of spoile, as otherwise he could not chuse, upon so great a slaughter and massacre; gathered  together into one heape all the enemies armour, made a fire under, and burned them: were it that he had made some such vow to one of the gods: or (as I list rather to beleeve) it was a moti^e of Fabius himselfe, that the Dictatour should not reape the fruit of his glorie, and entitle his name thereto; or in pompe carie those spoiles before him at his triumph. Moreover, the letters of this victorie by him to the Senat, and not a word therof to the Dictatour, were some proofe, that he was not willing to impart and communicate his praises with him. But cerres, the Dictatour tooke the matter in so ill part, that when every man else was joifull for this noble victorie atchieved, he onely shewed anger and sadnes in his verie countenance. Whereupon suddainly he dissolved the Senat, and departed in great hast out of the court, giving out and often iterating these words; Then hath the master of horsemen in deed as well everted and overthrowne, both Dictatours  Majestie and Militarie discipline, as defaited the Samnite legions, if he can so go cleere away and escape unpunished, with so manifest contempt of my expresse commaundement. Whereupon, full of threats and indignation, he hastened to the campe, and tooke long journies: yet could he not prevent the bruit of his comming. For, there were Vantcurriers that posted from the cittie before, to bring word that the Dictatour was comming, full of revenge, and set upon punishment, and at everie second word almost, commending the late examplarie justice of T. Manlius.The Oration of Q. Fabius to his fellow souldior^s.
Then Fabius immediatly calling an audience, besought the soldiors, that with what valour and vertue they had defended the Commonwealth from most deadly and mortall enemies, with the same they would protect him from the outragious crueltie of the Dictatour, himselfe (I say) by whose conduct and fortune they had gotten so glorious a victorie. For now, comming  he is (qd. he) for envie out of his right wits, and beside himselfe: for anger at another mans manhood and felicitie, furious and horne-mad: and all is no more but this, that in his absence, forsooth we have sped well; who wisheth rather in his hart, if he could change the course of fortune, that the Samnites had won the victorie than the Romans: and nothing is so rife in his mouth, as, That his commandement was contemned: as who would say, he forbad not battaile with the same mind, wherein hee now greeveth that we have fought. For as then his will was good, even for verie envie to hinder and suppresse the proesse of another, and went about to take weapons away from most forward soldiors, desirous of fight, that in his absence they might not lay hand to their sword: so now, see how he fretteth and fumeth in great choler at this, that without L. Papyrius the soldiours were not disarmed, dismembred as it were, and maimed: and for that Q. Fabius  forgat not his place, but bare himselfe as Generall of the Cavallerie, and not as a Henxman and follower of the Dictator, standing atreceit, and waiting at an inch when some under-captainship would fall, that he might step into the place. What would this man (thinke ye) have done, how would he have frounced, if (as the fortune and doubtfull chance of warre oftentimes goeth) wee had been put to the worse and lost the day; who now that the enemies be vanquished, the field so well fought, the State so well served, as by the most singular captaine in the world, better it might not be, thus menaceth execution to me the Generall of the horse, even in the honour of my conquest? Neither is he (my masters) cruelly bent and set upon mischiefe against the Generall of the horse more than against the Colonels, the Centineres, and common soldiors: nay, he would (be ye sure) if he had been able, have raged and fared as bitterly, yea and executed his yre  and furious rage upon all. But because he cannot, now he dischargeth his gall upon me alone. For even as envie, like a flaming fire, sercheth and mounteth up to the highest, so runneth he upon the chiefe captaine, and aimeth at the head of this worthie exploit. If he had once extinguished him, together with the glorie of this brave service, then like a conquerour and lord over a poore captive armie, whatsoever he might by law execute against a Generall of the Cavallerie, he

would attempt and extend, upon the simple soldiors. Make reckoning therefore, that in standing  fast to me and in defence of my cause, yee uphold the libertie of all. For in case he shall perceive once, the same agreement of the armie in the maintenance of the victorie, which was wel seen in the battel, and that ye all have a care and regard of the life and safetie of one, his stomack wil come down, his heart will relent and incline to clemencie, and a milder sentence. To conclude, I recommend my life, and whole estate to your vertue and faithful protection. Then from all parts of the audience they cried unto him aloud, and bad him take a good hart! for so long as the Legions of the Romans were safe, there should no person do him harm or injurie. Soon after came the Dictator, and presently by sound of trumpet summoned a generall assemblie. And the publike crier after an oiez made, called by name for Q. Fabius Generall of the horse.
Who so soone as hee was come from a lower place where he was,(...) and approched neer the Tribunall, (then qd. the Dictator) I demand  of thee Q. Fabius, since that the rule of the Dictator is soveraine and highest above al others, whereunto the Consuls, endued with kingly puissance and goverment, do obey, yea and Prators created with the same authoritie that Consuls are; whether thou esteeme it meet and right, that a Generall of horse should bee obedient to his commaundement or no? I demaund likewise, whether I my selfe, knowing that I tooke my journey and went from home, with doubtfull and uncertaine Auspices, ought to have put the maine state of the Commonweale in hazard against the order and religious observation in that behalfe; and not rather, to go againe to take new Auspicia, that I might adventure and attempt nothing so long as I stood in doubt of the grace and favour of the gods? And withall, this I demaund, whether the Generall of the horsmen could be freed, exempt, and discharged of that scruple of conscience, which checked and staied the  Dictatour from execution of his charge? But what meane I to make these demaunds? seeing that if I had departed without saying one word, yet thou shouldest have framed thy opinion and applied thy mind according to the interpretation of my will and pleasure? Why saiest thou nothing? Answer me I say. Forbad I thee not expresly, to do any thing in my absence? Forbad I not thee to fight with the enemies? How durst thou in contempt of my commandement, whiles our Auspicia were uncertaine, whiles our consciences were unresolved and with scruples troubled, against all Militarie customes and statutes against the discipline of our ancestors, and against the will and direction of the gods: how durst thou, I say, be so hardie as to encounter with the enemie? To these interrogatories make answer directly. Answere I charge thee, to all these points, and nothing but these, and at the perill of thy life, not a word besides. Now come Serjeant and doe  thine office the while. To which severall articles, when Fabius could not readily answere point by point, one while complaining that he had him for his accuser, who was the judge of his life and death: otherwhiles crying out aloud, that sooner might his life be taken from him, than the glorie and honour of his acts: and as hee j^stified and excused his own selfe, so he began againe to challenge and accuse [the Dictatour.] Then Papyrius being in more heate of choler than before, commanded the Generall of the horsmen to be stripped out of his clothes and uncased, and the rods and axes to bee brought forth readie. With that, Fabius calling earnestly for the helpe of the souldiors, whiles the officers were a tearing and renting his clothes from his backe, made meanes to retire himselfe into the rankes of the Triarij, who began alreadie to make a mutinie and uprore in the assemblie. From whence there arose an outcrie over all the audience. Some were heard to intreat, others to threat. They who fortuned to stand next to the Tribunall, because that being within the veiw and eie of the Dictator, they might be knowne and noted, besought his Majestie to spare and pardon the Generall of the horse, and not with him to condemne the whole armie. They that were furthest off in the skirt of the assembly, and especially that plump and companie about Fabius, rated and cried out upon such a rigorous and mercilesse Dictator. And a little thing more would have made them mutinie: nay, within the very compasse of the Tribunall all was not cleare and quiet.
The Lieutenants or Coronels of whole legions, standing about his seat or chaire of estate, intreated him to put off the matter untill the morrow: to give his choler some time to coole, and allow space and respite to consider of it with advise and councell: saying, That if Fabius had plaied a youthfull part, he had paied sufficiently for it alreadie, and his  victorie had received disgrace and dishonour enough. Beseeching him not to proceed to these extremities of utmost execution, nor to set such a brand and note of ignominie and shame upon the young Gentleman himselfe, so rare and gallant a Knight; or on his father, a most honourable and excellent personage, ne yet upon the noble house and name of the Fabij. But when

 they saw how little they prevailed by their praiers, and as little by any reasons they could alleage; then, they admonished him to have a regard to the furious assem^^^ of the souldiors: and that it was not for a man of his years and wisedome, thus to put more fire to the hoat stomacke of soldiors enkindled alreadie, nor to minister more matter of mutinie: and if such a thing should happen, no man would impute the blame to Q. Fabius, who sought and humbly craved pardon of punishment, but to the Dictator; if he, overcome with choler, should blindly so far passe himselfe in wilfull peevishnesse, as to provoke the outragious multitude against himselfe. Finally, that he should not thinke, how they laboured thus for any affectionat favour they bare to Quintus Fabius; but were readie to take an oath, that they thought it not safe for the State and Common-weale, that he should proceed at such a time, to execute the rigour of Iustice upon Q. Fabius.  By these and such like remonstrances, when as the Lieutenants had stirred up the Dictator his bloud against themselves, rather than pacified his moode against Fabius, they were commanded to go down from the Tribunall. And when as the Crier had assaied to make silence al in vaine, for that by reason of the noise and tumult, neither the Dictator his voice, nor any of his apparitors and halbards about him, could be heard, the night came upon them and ended the hurley and garboile, as if it had been a battaile in field. The Generall of the horse was commanded to appeare on the morrow. Now when as every man gave it out and avouched unto him, that Papyrius would proceed more vehemently, for that contesting of the Lieutenants, and that the more hee was dealt withall, the worse hee was: Fabius privily stole out of the campe and fled to Rome. And by the meanes of his father M. Fabius, a man who had been alreadie thrice Consull  and Dictatour, the Senate was called together immediatly. And as he was in the midst of his grievous complaints before the Lords, touching the violence and wrong of the Dictatour, all of a sodaine, there was heard before the Councell house dore, a great noise and hurrying of the Lictours, whiles they made way and voided the preasse. And no mervaile; for the Dictatour himselfe was come with a revenging mind. For so soone as he had heard how Fabius was departed out of the campe, he followed after with his light horsemen. Then began the broile to bee renued afresh, and Papyrius caused Fabius to be attached. Whereupon the chiefe of the Nobilitie, and the whole bodie of the Senat began to interpose themselves by way of mediation: but all their intreatie notwithstanding,M. Fabius to the Dictatour. he persisted still in his implacable anger. Then stept foorth M. Fabius the father.
For as much as (qd. he) neither the authoritie of the Senat, nor mine old  age, whom you seeke to make childlesse, ne yet the valiancie and noble courage of the Generall of horse, by your own selfe chosen and nominated, can prevaile; nor any humble praiers, which are able to appease the furie of the enemie oftentimes, yea and to pacifie the wrath and indignation of the Gods: I implore the lawfull helpe of the Tribunes, and to the whole bodie of the people I appeale. And since that you challenge and except against the judgment of your own armie, and of the Senat, I offer and present unto you that judge, who onely is of more force and puissance, I am sure, than your Dictatourship. I will see, whether you will yeeld to this appeale, whereunto the Romane King Tull. Hostilius gave place. Then out of the Councell house they went straight to the Common place of audience: and when the Dictatour, attended with some few, was ascended up, and the Generall of the Cavallerie accompanied with all the whole troupe of the chiefe  of the cittie, Papyrius commanded that he should come downe or els be fetched, from the Rostra, unto the lower ground. The father followed after him. Well done (quoth he) in commanding us to be brought hither, from whence we may be allowed to speake our mindes, if we were no better than privat persons. At the first there passed no continued speeches so much, as wrangling and altercation. But afterwards, the voice and indignation of old Fabius, surmounted and drowned the other noise: who greatly blamed and cried out upon the pride and crueltie of Papyrius.
What man (quoth he) I have been also a Dictator of Rome my selfe,The Oration of old M. Fabius. and yet was there never so much as a poore Commoner, no Centurion, nor souldiour hardly entreated or misused by me. But Papyrius seeketh victorie and triumph over a Romane Grand-Captaine and Generall, as over the Leaders and Commanders of his enemies. See, see, what difference there is  between the government of men in old time, and this new pride and crueltie of late daies. Quintius Cincinnatus a Dictatour for the time, proceeded no farther in punishment against Minutius, when he was fain to deliver him lying enclosed and besieged within his own campe, but to leave him as a Lieutenant in steed of Consull, in the armie whereof he had charge. M. Furius Camillus, not only for the present tempered his choler toward L. Furius, who incontempt of his old

age and authoritie, had fought most untowardly and with dishonour in the ende; and wrate nothing  to the people or the Senat but well, of his Colleague: but also being returned, made a speciall reckoning of him above all the Tribunes consular, whom also of all his colleages, when as hee had the choise granted him by the Senate, he elected to be his coadjutour in the charge of his government. Neither the people verely, whose power is soveraigne over all, were ever more angrie against those, that through rashnes and want of skill lost whole armies, than to fine them at a summe of money. For the losse and miscariage of any battaile, that a Generall should be brought into question and answere for his life, was never heard of to this daie. And now, rods and axes, whipping and beheading, are prepared for the Commaunders under the people of Rome, and those, who are conquerours and have deserved most justly triumphs; which by no law can be offered to those that have been vanquished. What els Ipray you) should my sonne have  endured, if he had beastly suffered the field to be lost and his armie withall? If he had been discomfited, put to flight, and driven cleane out of the field, how far forth further would the Dictatour his yre and violence have proceeded, than to scourge and kill? And see how fit and seemly a thing it is that the cittie for the victorie of Q. Fabius, should be in joy, in processions to the gods, and thankesgivings, with congratulation and feasting one another: and he himselfe by whose meanes the temples stand open, the altars smoake with incense and sacrifice, and are heaped up againe with vowes, oblations, and offerings, to be stripped naked, to be whipped and tewed in the sight of the people of Rome, looking up to the Capitoll and the Castle, lifting up his eies to the gods, upon whom in two such noble battailes he called and invocated, not in vaine not without good and happie successe? With what heart will the armie take this, which under his leading  and conduct, and under his fortune, atchieved victorie? What lamentation will there bee in the Romane campe, and what rejoycing on the other side amongst the enemies?
Thus fared the good olde father, thus pleaded hee by way of expostulation and complaint, calling upon God and man for helpe, and withall embraced his sonne in his armes, and shed many a teare. On the one side, there made with young Fabius, and tooke his part, the majestie and countenance of the Senat, the favour and love of the people, the assistance of the Tribunes, and the remembrance of the armie absent. On the other side were alledged against him by Papyrius, the invincible governement and Empire of the people of Rome,(...) the discipline of warfare, the Dictators commandement (observed and reverence at all times, no lesse than the Oracle and will of the gods) the severe edicts of Manlius, whose fatherly love and affection to his deare son was  set behind the service and common good of the State. Also it was alleadged, that the same exemplary justice, L. Brutus the first founder of the Romane libertie, executed in his two sons: and now, mild and kind fathers, indulgent and fond old men, in the case of contempt of other mens commandement, give libertie to youth, and pardon as a small matter, the overthrow of militarie discipline. Howbeit, he for his part would persist in his purpose stil, nor remit one jot of condign punishment to him, who contrarie to his commaundement, and notwithstanding the trouble and confusion of religion, and the doubtfull Auspicia, had given battaile, saying, That as it was not in his power to abridge any jot the majestie of that State and Empire, for being everlasting: so, L. Papyrius would diminish nought of the authoritie thereof, wishing, That neither the Tribunes puissance sacred and inviolable it selfe, should by their opposition and interposing of  their negative voice, violate the Empire of Rome: nor that the people of Rome, should in him above all others abolish and extinguish both Dictatour and Dictatorship. Which if it did, the posteritie hereafter should lay the waite and blame (although in vaine) not in L. Papyrius, but in the Tribunes, and the perverse judgement of the people: when as the Militarie discipline being once polluted and stained, neither soldior would obey the Centurions commaundement, nor the Centurion the Colonels, nor Colonell the lieutenants, nor lieutenant the Consuls, nor yet Generall of horse, the Dictatour: whiles no man hath regard and reverence either of men, or of gods; no Edicts of Dictator, no flight of birds observed; but that without pasport, the souldiors may wander and rogue, either in their own ground or the enemies land, and unmindfull of their sacred militarie oth, may casse and discharge themselves from souldierie, through a  licentious libertie of their owne, whensoever they list; leaving their ensignes and colours not attended, not meeting at summons, not repairing to the Rendez-vous, according to proclamation: without all discretion, making no difference whether they skirmish by day or night, on even ground or uneven, with vantage or disadvantage, with direction of captaine, or without; observing

 no signals and watchword, no array. In summe, the whole course of militarie service henceforth, blind, rash, and inconsiderate, after the guise of robbing, to stand and goe currant for solemne and sacred warfare. With these crimes and absurd inconveniences (o yee Tribunes) charged you must be to the worlds end: lay down you must, and gage your own lives for the audacious disobedience of Q. Fabius, for whom ye are now answerable. The Trib. were astonied hereat, and for themselves now, rather carefull and perplexed, than for him who had recourse unto them for refuge and succor. But the generall consent of the people of Rome, turning to praier and intreatie, eased them of this heavie load and burden: and with one voice humbly besought the Dictator, to remit the punishment of the Generall of horse, for their sake. The Tribunes also, seeing that was the way, and all enclining and growing to Petition, followed after, and did the semblable; earnestly  beseeching the Dictatour to forgive this humane fragilitie, and youthfull folly of Qu. Fabius, saying, That he had suffered chastisement ynough. Then the young man himselfe, then his father M. Fabius, forgetting all strife, and laying aside debate, fell downe at the Dictator his feet, and besought him to appease his wrathfull displeasure.
Hereupon the Dictator after silence made, Yea marrie (quoth he) o Quirites, this I like well, and thus it should be; now hath militarie discipline got the victorie, now hath the majestie of your Empire prevailed indeed, which lay both a bleeding, and were in hazard to have been abolished and overthrowne for ever, after this day. Q. Fabius is not acquit of his offence, in that he fought against his soveraigns commaundement: but being thereof convicted and cast, is forgiven, nay is given rather to the people of Rome and the Tribunes power, whose assistance and helpe is graunted for their instant praiers,  and not of dutie. Well, Rise up Q. Fabius and live, a more happie man for this agreement of the cittie in thy defence, than for that victorie, upon which erewhile thou barest thy selfe so bravely. Live (I say) thou that hast been so bold to commit that fact, which thine owne father here, if hee had been in L. Papyrius his place, would never have pardoned. And as for mee, into my grace and favour thou maiest come againe, at thine owne will and pleasure: But to the people of Rome, to whom thou art beholden and obliged for thy life, thou shalt performe no greater dutie and service, than that the example of this daies work may be a teaching and warning to thee for ever, to obey, as well in warre as in peace, all lawfull hests of superiour Magistrates. After that he had pronounced the pardon of the Generall of horse, and discharged him of the court, and was departed himselfe out of the common place of audience: the Senat joyfull and highly contented,  and the people much more, came all about them, and on the one side bidding joy to the Generall of the horse aforesaid, and on the other side giving thankes to the Dictatour, followed after, and accompanied them both: and it was generally thought, that militarie government was no lesse confirmed and established by this perill and daunger onely of young Q. Fabius, than by the late pitteoous execution of young Manlius.
By chance that yeare it so fell out, that as often as the Dictatour absented himselfe from the armie, so often the enemies rose and raised troubles in Samnium. Howbeit, the fresh example of Q. Fabius was ever in the eie of M. Valerius, Lieutenant Generall and governour of the campe, who feared as well the dread wrath of the Dictator, as any violent attempts of his enemies whatsoever. Insomuch, as when purveiours for come being entrapped by an ambush were slaine, in a  place of disadvantage; commonly it was thought and beleeved, that they might have beene by the Lieutenant rescued and saved, but for feare of these rigorous and terrible edicts. For anger hereof, the Dictatour lost the hearts of the souldiours, who were alreadie male content, for that he was so inexorable in the cause of Q. Fabius, and had denied them that, at their instant intreatie, which afterwards hee yeelded unto and pardoned, at the suit and request of the people of Rome. The Dictator, after that he had left for the government of the cittie L. Papyrius Crassus the Generall of horse, discharged Q. Fabius, and forbidden him to administer any thing by vertue of that office, returned into the campe. Whose comming was neither very welcome and joyfull to his owne countrymen the souldiours, nor yet strucke any terror in his enemies the Samnites. For, the next morrow, were it, that they knew not that the Dictatour was come, or little cared and  weighed whether he were present or absent, they approched the campe in order of battaile. How beit, that one man, L. Papyrius the Dictator, was of such valour and importance, that if the love of the souldiours had seconded the policie and sage conduct of their commaunder, the warre with Samnites had that day been quite dispatched and ended, past all peradventure; so skilfully set he the battaile in array, so warily chose he his ground of advantage, so strengthened hee the

same with supplies out of the reregard, in all warlike skill and singular policie. But the souldiours  failed for their parts, and went coldly to their businesse, even of purpose, that the valiant and commendable parts of the captain might be discredited and depraved; and so the victorie was much hindered and impeached. Howbeit, many of the Samnites were slaine; and in exchange, as many of the Romanes hurt. But he like a wise and expert captaine, soon perceived, what was the cause that staied the victorie. He saw well ynough, that hee was to temper his own nature, and to allay that severitie of his, within mildnes and courtesie. And therfore, taking with him the Lieutenants, himselfe in person went about to visite the wounded souldiours, putting his head into their tents and cabbins, asking each one how they did; charged the Lieutenants, Colonels, Provost-Marshals, and other offices of the campe, to tend and looke unto the sicke souldiours, recommending their care unto them particularly by
name. This being a thing in it selfe popular, hee handled  and ordered with such dexteritie; that by curing their bodies, their minds also and hearts were much sooner gained and reconciled to their Generall. And nothing made more for the speedie recoverie of their health, than their thankefull acceptation of that care and diligence of his. When he had thus refreshed and repaired his armie, hee encountred once againe the enemie with assured hope of himselfe and his soldiours, to obtaine a finall victorie; and so discomfited and put them to flight, that the Samnites after that day, durst never fight againe with the Dictator. Then the victorious armie marched, as any hope of bootie and pillage guided and directed them: and as they overran their enemies countrie, they found no force nor resistance, either in open shew, or covert ambush. This also encouraged them the more, and cheered their hearts, for that the Dictatour had by proclamation given away the whole spoile among the souldiours: so that their privat gaine whet them on against their enemie, no lesse than the common anger and publicke quarrell. The Samnites tamed and subdued by these losses and overthrowes, sued to the Dictatour for peace: with whom they capitulated, and made offer to allow unto everie soldiour one liverie, and the full wages of one yeare. But being commaunded to goe to the Senate, they made answere, That they would accompanie the Dictatour, recommending and putting their cause and whole estate to his faithfull protection, to his vertue and goodnesse onely. Thus the armie was withdrawne from the Samnites, the Dictatour with triumph entred the citie: and when he would have resigned up the Dictatourship, the Senate ordained, That before hee gaue over, hee should create Consuls. So, C. Sulpitius Longus the second time, and Q. Aemylius Caeretanus were elected.
The Samnites not having concluded peace, (for that they varied about the conditions, and were to treat farther thereupon) yet brought with them from the citie of Rome, truce for a year. Which they observed not faithfully: so soone were their stomackes up againe to make warre, after they had intelligence, that Papyrius was out of government. Whiles C. Sulpitius, and Q. Aemylius (or Aulius as some Chronicles have) were Consuls, besides the revolting of the Samnites, there arose a new warre also from the Apulians. Both waies was there a power sent. Sulpitius his lot was to go against the Samnites, and Aemylius against the Apulians. Some write, that upon the Apulians themselves no warre was made, but contrariwise, that the confederate States of that Nation were defended from the violence and wrongs of the Samnits. Howbeit, the low estate of the Samnites, at that time, hardly able to maintain and defend themselves, maketh it more likely and  credible, that the Apulians, were not warred upon by them, but that the Romanes made war with both Nations at once. But no memorable act or exploit was there performed: onely the Apulian countrie, and Samnium was wasted: and the enemies no where at all to be found. But at Rome there happened a scare by night, which raised every man so suddainely out of their first sleepe, and so affrighted the citie, that presently at one instant the Capitoll and the Castle, the wals and gates were full of armed men. And when as from all places there was running, and crying al'arme, the morrow morning at the breake of day, there appeared neither authour, nor cause of this feare.
The same yeare the Tusculanes were judicially convented before the people of Rome by processe, and that, by a law that Flavius preferred. This M. Flavius, Tribune of the Commons, exhibited  a bill of enditement to the people that some punishment might be inflicted upon the Tusculanes; For that through their assistance and counsell, the Veliternes and Privernates had taken armes against the people of Rome. The Tusculanes with their wives and children resorted to Rome. Which multitude having changed their apparrell, and clad in poore array and habit, as prisoners

 at the barre, went about from Tribe to Tribe, falling downe upon their knees to everie man. Whereupon, pitie prevailed more to obtaine pardon of punishment, than the goodnesse of their cause to the purging of their guilt. So all the Tribes except Pollia, disanulled and made void the enditement aforesaid. But the sentence of the Tribe Pollia was, That as many as were of age and undergrowne, to wit, fourteen yeare old and upward, should be skourged and put to death. Item, That their wives and children, by martiall law, should be sold in open port-sale. And for certaine it is reported, that the Tusculanes tooke so deepe an anger against the authors of so hard a Censure and cruell doome, that they have caried it in mind even to our fathers daies. For in dispite thereof no candidate, or competitour for an office of the Tribe Pollia, was ever woont to get the voices of the Tribe Papyria. The yeare following, whiles Q. Fabius and L. Fulvius  were Consuls, A. Cornelius Arvina Dictatour, and M. Fabius Ambustus Generall of horse, having taken a streighter levie of soldiours than ordinarie, for feare of a greater warre in Samnium (for it was reported that the whole manhood and floure of the youth were taken up and waged out of the countries adjoining) lead forth a goodly and puissant armie against the Samnites. But they pitched their camp so carelesly in the enemies ground, as if the enemie had been farre of: and the Samnite legions came on a suddaine so proudly, that they set forward the trench and rampier, and encamped close to the Corps de gard of the Romanes. Howbeit they night approched so fast, that they were hindred for assailing the campe: but they gaue it out plainly, they would do it the morrow after by day light. The Dictator seeing that he must fight neerer than he expected or hoped; for feare least the streightnes and disadvantage of the ground,  might prejudice and hinder the valliancie of his soldiours, leaving fires thicke burning in the campe, for to disappoint the sight of the enemies, in the still night with silence leadeth forth his legions: but yet could he not for the neernesse of their camp escape, but be espied of them. The horsemen forthwith followed upon them in the taile, and preased hard upon the armie in their march, yet in such sort, that before it was day, they would not fight, nay the verie footmen were not all yssued out of the campe before day light. At length when it was broad day, the horsemen adventured to charge upon the Romanes, and partly by playing upon the taile of the hinmost, and partly by skirmishing in places that were hard to be passed over, they hindered their march and kept them behind. In the meane while their Infanterie also overtooke the Cavallerie, so as now the Samnites with all their forces came upon them. The Dictatour seeing he could  not go farther without his great losse and disadvantage, commanded his men to fortifie even in that very place where he stood: but for as much as the light horsemen of his enemies were ouerspred all about, they could not possibly go to provide stakes to make a parapet or rampier, nor begin to cast a trench. When he perceived therfore that he neither could go forward, nor stay and fortifie, he removed all his baggage out of the ranges, and set his men in battaile array. The enemies doe the like, and were not behind either in courage or in forces. But this most of all heartned and encouraged them, for that they being ignorant that the occasion of the enemies retreat was the disadvantage and straightnes of the place, presumed that they did it upon feare; and therefore they in terrible manner followed after them, as if the Romanes had fled and beene affrighted. And even that for a good while held the fight in doubtfull balance, albeit the Samnites  now a long time had not been used to abide so much as the first shout of the Romane armie when they give the charge.From nine of the clock in the morning, untill two after noone. But verily that day, from the third houre unto the eight, it is said that the battaile stood so equall and indifferent, that neither the shout and crie was redoubled, nor heard the second time, after it was once set up at the first buckeling: nor the ensignes were set forward, or withdrawne backward, but remained where they first were: ne yet of any part were they seene to retire or recule, but every man in his degree and place, bending forward and preasing with his shield, without breathing or looking backe, still fought a front: the same noise, one resolution to die or fight it out, and not to give over before utter wearines or darke night. Now began the strength of men to faile, now the speare point and edge of the sword, began to turne and loose their force, and now the captaines themselves  were to seek for counsell and what to doe: By what time all at once the Samnites horsemen, hearing that the cariages of the Romanes with onely Cornet were gone a good way off from the armed souldiours, without any other guard and fortification; for greedinesse of spoile set upon them. Which when a messenger in great hast and feare reported to the Dictatour, Let them alone (quoth hee) let them encomber themselves with the spoile, and spare not. Then

came others one after another, windlesse with running, crying out and saying, that all was  gone: and that everie where the soldiours goods were rifled, ransacked and caried cleane away. Whereupon he sent for the Generall of horsemen, See ye not (quoth hee) o M. Fabius, the battaile abandoned of our enemies Cavallerie? They stand still and are encombred and pestered with our cariages. Now therefore charge upon them, disbanded as they are, (which usually happeneth to any multitude, busie in pillage) find them you shall (no doubt) few on horsebacke, and as few with weapon in hand: and whiles they are loding their horses with spoile, kill them unarmed, and make it a bloodie bootie to them, and let them buie it full deerly: as for me, let me alone with the charge of the legions and footmen; have you the honour of the horsemens service. Then the Cavallerie raunged into a squadron, as exquisitly and skilfully as possibly might be, ran forcibly upon the enemies disarraied and clogged with cariage, beating them  down, and making a miserable massacre of them in everie place. For being (as they were) among packs and fardels which they cast from them suddainly, and now lay against their feet to stumble on as they fled, and in the horses way, that were maskered and affraid, they were not able well, either to flie or to fight, and so were slain. When as the enemies Cavallerie were thus defaited and welneere all come to nought, then M. Fabius wheeling about his wings of horsemen, for to fetch a compasse, set upon the Infanterie at their backs: Wherupon arose a new fearfull crie, which caused the hearts of the Samnits to tremble and quake. The Dictator withall, seeing formost of the enemies fighting in the front, looking back ever and anone, their ensigns out of order, and all their battailons waving and floting to and fro; called hard upon his soldiors, and exhorted them to fight lustily: cried unto the Colonels, the sergeants of Bands and Caporals severally by name, to reencharge  and renew the medley againe with him. Thus with a fresh and new shout, they advance the standerds, and set forward the ensignes: and the farther they march on, the more perceived they the enemies to be troubled, and in disaray. And now by this time, the horsemen also were within the sight of the formost in the vantgard: and Cornelius looking backe to the bands and companies of his footmen, making signe with hand and with voice as well as he could, shewed and made demonstration unto them, that they saw the guidons and targuets of their owne fellow horsemen. Which when they once heard, and saw withal; presently as if they had forgot the battaile which they endured almost a whole day, and felt no smart of their wounds, they bestirred themselves against the enemie as lustily, as if they had newly come out of their tents, fresh and in heart, and seene but now the signall, and heard the sound of trumpet, to a battaile. Now were the  Samnites no longer able to sustain the terror of the horsemen behind, and the violence of the footmen before: but were either slaine in the mids between, or skattered abroad in flight. Such as staied and were environed about, the footmen slew: those who fled, were trodden under the horse feet and killed: among whom, the Generall himselfe left his bodie on the earth. This battaile above all other, so quelled and daunted the hearts of the Sabines and crushed their forces, that in all their Diets and Councels they mutterered and gave out, That it was no mervaile that they sped so ill, in all their affaires of armes, the quarrell was so bad and ungodly, and the warre begun so contrarie to a covenant of truce, and having the verie gods, and that justly, more against them and greater enemies than men: and that such a warre must needs cost some great overthrow, and might not be expiate without some notable satisfaction. Here onely was the  difficultie and difference, whether vengeance and punishment should be taken of the guiltie bloud of some fewe, or the guiltlesse bloud of all. And even then, some there were, that durst nominate the very authors of this war. And one especially, to wit Brutulus Papius, whose name was by the common voice and consent heard above all the rest. A noble and mightie man he was, and without question, the principall breaker of this last truce. The Pretors being enforced therefore, to determine as touching him what was to be done; at length decreed, That Brutulus Papius should be delivered to the Romanes, and that together with him, all the Romane pillage and their prisoners should be sent to Rome: and that of all the goods, unto which according to the covenant and composition, the Fecials laid claime, there should, according to right and equitie, restitution be made. Then were the Heraulds, by vertue of the decree, sent  to Rome, together with the dead corps of Brutulus: for he to avoid shame and punishment, wilfully killed himselfe. It was thought good, that with his bodie all his goods also, should be delivered. Howbeit none of all these things but only the captives, and whatsoever could justly be owned out of the booty, was received: all the rest were offered, but in vain, for nothing was accepted.

 The Dictator by vertue of an act of the Senat, triumphed. Some write that this war was fought by the Consuls, and that they triumphed over the Samnites: and that Fabius also went forward into Apulia, and from thence brought away great and rich prizes. But without all controversie A. Cornel. was Dictatour that yeare: this onely was the doubt, whether he were created for the conduct of this war, or at the Romane games Circenses, (because L. Cautius happened to bee grievously sick) to give the signall when the chariots and steeds should be let out of the Barriers to run the race for their prize: and that having done that function of a charge (ywis not worth the remembrance) he should leave his Dictators place. It is not an easie thing to prefer either one matter, or one author before another. I suppose rather for my part, that the record and memoriall of these matters hath been depraved and cortupted, by these funerall Orations of praises, and by  these counterfeit and false titles of images: whiles every house and familie draweth to it, the honour and renowne of noble exploits, martiall feats, and dignities, by any untruth and lie, so it be colourable. And hereupon, certes it is, that both the deeds of particular persons, and the publike records and monuments of Actes, are confounded: neither is there extant any one writer, who lived in those daies, upon whom, as a true and certaine author, we might ground, and rest ourselves.


 THE NINTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

 The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the ninth Booke.
TItus Veturius and Sp. Posthumius Consuls, having engaged their armie so far, within the Gullet or streight of Caudium, into a place of great disadvantage, that they had no means nor hope to get forth againe, sell to capitulation with the Samnites, and compounded with them: and after they had delivered unto them 600 Romane horsemen for hostages, they went away with the rest of the armie, but so, as they were forced all of them to passe shamefully under the gallowes. The same Consuls (even by the motion of one of them, Sp. Posthumius, who persuaded the Senate, that by rendring of those into the enemies hands, through whose default  so shamefull and ignominious covenant was concluded, the citie might be delivered and discharged of the promise given in the name thereof) with two Tribunes of the Commons, and as many besides as had subscribed to the foresaid accord and agreement, were sent and yeelded to the Samnites: but they might not be received. Not long after, Papyrius surnamed Cursor, defaited the Samnites, and put them likewise under the gallows: and recovered again those 600 Roman horsemen aforesaid, that were left for hostages. By which meanes, the shame and disgrace of the former beastly Act was cancelled and abolished. Two Tribes were added to the rest, Vsentina and Falerina. New inhabitants were sent to people Suessa and Pontiae. Ap. Claudius being Censor, brought a chanell of water to the cittie, called of his name Claudia: and paved the highway, named after him likewise, Appia. He admitted also into the raunge of Senators the sons of Libertines. But for as much as this state and degree of Citizens, seemed as it were polluted with these unworthie persons among them, the Consuls of the yeare following, in the review of the Senatours, and chusing new, held-themselves to the order that other Censors next before had observed. This booke conteineth moreover the prosperous wars against the Apulians, Tuscanes, Vmbrians, Marsians, Pelignians, Aequians, and Samnites: with whom was renewed the ancient  league and amitie. Flavius the scribe or notarie, the sonne of a Libertine or enfraunchised Romane, was made Aedile Curule, by the faction of the base common people. Which faction, because it troubled and disquieted all the assemblies for Elections, and whole court in Mars field, wherein they bare a great stroke and ruled all by meanes of might and strong hand, were by Q. Fabius the Censor, reduced into foure Tribes by themselves: Which was the thing that purchased Fabius the surname of Maximus. [i. right. Great.]


AFter this yeare, immediately followed the peace made at Caudium, so memorable  for the Romanes foile and misfortune, which happened in the Consulship of T. Veturius Calvinus, and Sp. Posthumius. During which, the Samnites had for their Generall Conducter C. Pontius, the sonne of Herennius, a most prudent and politicke father, and was himselfe a worthie warrior, and a most excellent captaine. This Pontius, after the Embassadours aforesaid (who had been sent to yeeld and deliver the goods) were returned home without peace concluded, spake thus in a frequent assemblie of the Samnites,The Oration of C. Pontius to the Samnites. and said: Maisters and friends, thinke never, but good there hath ben done in this voiage, and our Embassage hath taken some effect.
For look what wrath the gods in  heaven conceived against us, by our breach of covenant and truce, is thereby wholly satisfied, and fully done away. This I know assuredly, that the gods above (whose pleasure it was, that we should be driven to this neere point and hard exigent, as to render the goods claimed of us, by vertue of an accord and covenant) were nothing contented and pleased, that this our satisfaction and recompence for the breach thereof, was so prowdly and disdainefully despised and rejected of the Romanes. For what could possiblie have ben done more, either to pacifie the gods, or to appease men, than that which we offered and performed? Whatsoever we won by way of hostilitie and spoile, from our enemies, and which by right of warre seemed to bee ours, wee sent backe againe: the counsellors and persuaders of taking armes, because wee could not send alive, wee delivered dead as they were: and their very goods also (because nothing might remaine with us, to bring us within the compasse of their guiltinesse) we brought to Rome. What owe I more to thee o Romane? what am I bound to performe besides, in regard either of covenant, or of the gods, the judges of the covenant? Whome shall I chuse and take for an indifferent arbitratour betweene thine anger and my punishment? No State and bodie of people in generall, no privat person in particular doe I refuse: and if no equitie and reason for the poore and needie, be reserved amongst men against the greater and more mightie, yet flie will I, and have recourse to the gods, the revengers of such intollerable pride: and I will pray them to turn their anger upon those, whom neither restitution of their owne goods, not the tendering of other mens withall to boot, will serve and content: whose fell crueltie, neither the death of the guiltie persons, nor the deliverie of dead bodies, neither the owners themselves yeelded, nor all they had in the world rendred  with them, can satisfie: breefely, who may not possiblie bee appeased, without wee should part with our hart bloud unto them, for to drink, and give our bowels and entrails to be torn in peeces. The war (o Samnites) is just and right on their behalfe, who have no way and meanes to avoid it: and ever lawfully take they armes, who have no other hope, but in force of armes. Since then, in all the affaires of this world, nothing is of more importance than this, That men weigh and consider, whither the gods be gratious or adverse unto their enterprises: be sure of this, that as wee made our former warre not so much against men as the gods; so, wee shall fight that which is now in hand, in the name of the gods, and under their conduct and guidance. Having spoken by way of prophesie these wordes, (which as they were right pleasant and plausible in the hearing, so they proved as true and were verefied in the successe ensuing) he lead forth  an armie into the field, and about Caudium he encamped himselfe, as covertly as he could. From thence, he sendeth toGaiazzo Calatia (where he heard that the Romane Consuls and their forces lay in camp) ten souldiors disguised in the habit of Heardmen, and commanded them to keep their cattell grasing apart, some in one place and some in another, but never farre from the Romanes fortes and guards: with this instruction, That when they hapned upon any of the Romane foragers and vantcouriers, they should agree all in one tale, and say, That the Samnite legions were in Apulia, besieging Luceria with all their forces, and were at the point of winning it by assault. This rumour also was for the nonce by others before, set abroad and spread of purpose, yea and came to the Romanes eares: but these captives made it sound more credible and like to be true, for this especially, that all their words agreed one with another. No man doubted but that the  Romanes would aide the Lucerines, their good and faithfull Allies, and the rather for feare least all Apulia would upon this present trouble and fearfull example revolt, and band with the Samnites: and the onely thing they stood upon was this, Which way to go unto them. For twaine there were leading to Luceria; the one, broad and open, along the coast of the Adriatick sea: but as

 it was the safer, so it was the farther about. Another shorter cut there was through the streights or guller of Sucttode Arpaia (...) Iugo ^ S. Maria, and Valle de Caida^o. Caudium called Furculae Caudinae. But the naturall situation of the place is thus: There are two deepe, narrow, and wooddie pases, or dales, one in the taile of the other, with continuall crestes and ridges of hils round about them: betweene them lieth enclosed in the midst, a good large plaine or meadowe, greene of grasse and full of waters, through the midst whereof, there lieth a direct passage. But before yee come to that greene, yee must enter into that first streight aforesaid, and returne againe either the same way that ye went in, or if yee proceed to go forward, ye must pasie through another such passe or streight, but narrower and more combersome than the other. Into that plaine aforesaid the Romanes marched downe with their armie another way, through an hollow rocke, but when they went on forth to the other  streight valley, they found it stopped and made up with the fall of trees, one crosse over another, and likewise with an huge heape of mightie stones, laied full against them in the way. And they had not so soone discovered this guilefull practise of their enemies, but they might descrie withall, a power of them also on the top of the hill. Then with all speed they seeke to go back again the same way they came; but it they found also dammed up in like sort, and beset with armed men. Whereupon they made a stand, without any mans commaundement: and as their minds were all amased and astonied, so their bodies also were possessed as it were with a strange and extraordinarie nummednesse in their limmes: and whiles they looked one upon another, each man thinking his fellow to bee more wittie, and have better understanding than himselfe; for a good while they stood still, and said not a worde. But afterwards, when as they sawe the  two Consuls pavillions a setting up, and some making readie things necessarie to fortification; although they saw well enough, that in this desperate case, past all hope of recoverie, for all the defences they could devise, they should but loose their time and travaile and proove fooles in the end: yet neverthelesse, because they would not seeme to encrease their distressed fortune, and double it with their owne default and negligence, everie man what hee could, to his power, without the direction of any leader, setled himselfe to worke, and to fortifie along the water side their campe, with a trench and rampier. And besides the insolent and proud scoffing and derision of their enemies, everie man with pittifull confession scorned and checked his owne worke and travaile, as vaine, and to no purpose. As the Consuls then were pensive and discomforted, and called none about them to counsell, (for that in deed they supposed they were past  all advise and helpe) the Lieutenants and Colonels came unto them of their selves unsent for, and the soldiors turning to the Praetorium or Consuls Quarter, cried to their captaines for helpe and succour, which hardly the verie immortall gods could afford and give them. But they, rather made their mones and complaints one to another of their misfortune, than sat in sage counsell to give or take advise, until the night came upon them: whiles ech man according to his naturall humour and fancie, muttered diversly.
One said, let vs breake though the stoppages opposed against us in the way: another, let us passe over the mountaines and woods before us, what way soever we may be able to carie armour; for so we get to the enemie once, whom we have almost for these thirtie yeares vanquished and chased before us; all will be plaine, even and easie unto us Romanes fighting against these faithlesse, perjured, and disloiall Samnites. Tush, saith another,  whether should we go, or which way? What? Are we about to remove mountaines out of their places? So long as these tops of hils are over our heads, how will you possibly come to the enemie? Armed or unarmed, couragious or cowards, all is one, entrapped we are and undone everieone. Our enemie will not so much as offer us the sword, wheron we may die like men with honour: he will sit still and end this warre. Thus passed words too and fro, and thus passed the night away: unmindful were they of taking repast, never thought they of taking repose and sleep. The Samnites on the other side, in this so fortunate and happie opportunitie presented unto them, were as much to seeke what to doe, and what course to chuse and follow. Whereupon, they all in generall were to dispatch letters to Herennius Pontius, the father of their Generall, and to know his opinion. Now this man beforetime, by reason of his great age, had given  over not only Militarie affaires, but also all civile businesses: howbeit in that old crasie and spent bodie of his, he bare the fresh vigour of the mind and a pregnant wit to give counsell.
When hee vnderstood that the Romanes armie was shut up fast within the two forrests, at the Caudine Gullets, and that his advise was asked by his sonnes messenger: hee gave presently this counsell, That with all speed they should bee let goe from thence every one, without

any harme at all done unto them. Which opinion of his being rejected [of his sonne and the  armie] his mind was demaunded a second time, by the same courrier sent againe unto him of purpose. And then he gave advise, that they should bee all killed, and not one left alive. Vpon which answers so farre disagreeing, and thus delivered, as it were out of a doubtfull Oracle: albeit his sonne himselfe imagined, of all others most, that his fathers wit was in the wane, and aged as well as his feeble wasted bodie: yet by a generall consent of all he was overcome, to send for him in person for to declare his meaning by word of mouth.
Neither thought the olde man much thereof, but was brought (by report) to the campe in a chariot: and beeing called to counsell, he was in the same tale still, so as he nothing changed of his former advise, but alleaged onely causes and reasons thereof. Namely, that in his former resolution (which he tooke to be simplie the best) his meaning was, by a singular benefit and good turne, to confirme peace and  amitie for ever, with a most mightie and puissant people: in the second his purpose was, by the utter losse of two armies, whereby the state of Rome would not easely recover their strength againe, to differre the warres for many a yeare. And as for a third counsell, he had none at all.
When his sonne and other chiefe captaines, by questioning inquired of him, what if a middle course betweene both were taken, namely to dismisse them safe, and according to the law of armes and conquest to impose upon them, hard lawes and conditions? Marie (quoth hee) this is the way indeed, that neither winneth you friends, nor yet riddeth you of your foes: save them whom ye have provoked with shame and disgrace; and see what ye get therby. The Romanes are of this nature, that they cannot be still and quiet so long as they have the worse; it will never die in their hearts, but will be alwaies fresh whatsoever shame this present extremitie shall brand them with: and never will it give them any rest, before they have beene by manifold and sundrie waies revenged of you. So his advise was not accepted, neither the one nor the other, and old Herennius was carried home againe from the campe. The Romanes likewise in the campe, after many attemps (but all in vaine) for to breake foorth and escape away, being now in great penurie and scarcetie of all things, for verie necessitie were driven to send Embassadours unto the enemies: who first should crave an equall and indifferent peace: and if they might not obtaine it, then to bid defiance and challenge them to a battell. Pontius made answer, that there was no talking of battaile; for that the field was woon alreadie: and because they being vanquished, and as good as taken captive, knew not how to come downe and confesse their poore estate; hee gave them to understand, That he would put them under the gallows, despoiled of their armour, and stript into  their shirts: and as for other conditions of peace, they should be such, as were meet to passe betweene men conquered, and conquerours: namely, if they would depart out of the Samnites countrie, withdraw their colonies, and so both Samnite and Romane in equall alliance live under their owne lawes and customes: upon these articles and capitulations, he was content to come to some point of accord with the Consuls. If any of these covenants disliked them, then he forbad the Embassadours to repaire againe to him any more, but at their perill. When relation of this answere was made in the campe, there arose suddenly such a sighing and groning amongst them all, and so great pensivenesse and anguish of heart seised upon them, that it seemed they could not have taken it more heavily, and to the heart, if word had been brought that they must all have died in the place.
After long silence, when as the Consuls wist not how to open their  mouth, either for the accord and composition so shamefull, or against it so necessarie: then L. Lentulus, who as wel in regard of his vertue, as of his dignities, was chiefe of all the lieutenants, said: I have heard my father (quoth he) o ye Consuls, oftentimes make report, that he was the onely man in the Capitoll, who persuaded the Senat not to ransome and redeeme with gold, the cittie from the hands of the Gaules; at what time as, they were not inclosed either with trench or rampier by their enemies, (a nation to say a truth, of all others most idle in such works, and fortifications) but might have broken through them, if not without great danger, yet without evident ruine, and assured destruction. Were the case so now, that as they then, being armed might have run downe out of the Capitoll upon their enemies under them (in which sort oftentimes the besieged have sallied out upon them that lay in siege) so we might but fight with our enemies  in any place (it skilleth not) good or bad, even or uneven: I would not in giving counsell, be any jot behind my father in courage and valor. For I confesse verily, that to die for our countrie is a brave death: and for my own part, readie am I even to offer my bodie as a sacrifice to present death, yea and it were, to engage my selfe among the thickest of my enemies, therby to save the

 people of Rome and the legions: But alas, heere I see my countrie, heere I see all the Romane regiments and legions that are, who unlesse for their owne selves they will run upon their death, what have they else to save by their death? Why? will some man say, the houses and buildings of the cittie, the wals, and that multitude that inhabit the citie. Nay rather, if this armie fortune here to miscarie, they are all clean betraied into the enemies hand and not saved. For who shall defend them? Peradventure, the weak and unarmed multitude: even as well surely as they defended it against the violence of the Gaules: Or will they send for an armie from Veij, and beseech the helpe againe of captaine Camillus? Even the one as well as the other. But heere in this place is our whole hope, here is all our power and puissance: in saving it, we preserve our countrie; in offering it to die, we abandon and betraie our countrie. To yeeld and render ourselves, is a foule  and shamefull thing;true: but such is the love of our countrie, that we ought to preserve it, as well with our utter shame, if need require, as by our death. Let us undergo then, and abide this shamefull indignitie whatsoever, and obey that fatall necessitie, which the verie gods themselves connot overcome. Go to then, Consuls, a gods name, redeem the cittie with your armour and weapons, which your forefathers ransomed with their gold. Then went the Consuls to Pontius for to parle. And when as he began like a conquerour to debate about the capitulations of Covenants, they denied plainly that any league could be made, without the privitie, will and authoritie of the whole people: nor without the Fecials, and other solemne and usuall ceremonies. So that this Caudine accord was not (as commonly it is beleeved, and as Claudius also writeth) concluded by forme of absolute covenant, but by way of stipulation and promise. For what  needed either sureties in a perfect agreement and league, or hostages to be given when the matter is passed by this forme of praier, BY VVHOSE DEFAVLT IT HAPNED THAT THE CONDITIONS AGREED VVERE NOT OBSERVED, THAT PEOPLE IVPITER VVOVLD SO SMITE, AS THE SVVINE THERE VVAS BY THE FECIAL SMITTEN? The Coss. Lieutenants, Tresurers, and Colonels, who undertooke as sureties, subscribed and signed; and the names yet are extant of them all: where, if the matter had passed by way of an absolute league, there should have been subscribed no more but the names of two Fecials only. Moreover, by reason that the conclusion of this accord was of necessitie deferred, there were required also 600 horsemen hostages, who should loose their heads, in case the covenants of the agreement were not observed. And thereupon was the time appointed and set downe of delivering the said hostages, and yeelding the armie  without their armour. Now the comming of the Consuls renewed againe the sorrow in the campe, that hardly they could hold their hands from those, through whose rash conduct they were come to that place of disadvantage: and through whose cowardise they were to depart from thence more shamefully than they came: complaining that they had not so much as a guide to direct them, nor an espiali to discover the coast: but like beasts were driven blinded into a trap or pitfall: and one looked upon another; beholding the armor that within a while they were to deliver up, viewing their right hands, which anone should be unarmed, their naked bodies exposed to the mercy and devotion of the enemie. They set before their eies, the gallows prepared by the enemie for them to passe under, the skornes and reprochfull taunts of the Victor, his proud and disdainefull lookes, and how they (disarmed) should passe in a long train and go through the armed  enemies: then afterwards, the piteous spectacle of the way which they must go, and the shamefull dismarch of their disgraced armie: briefly, their foule and dishonourable returne through the cities of their allies unto their countrie and parents, whether they themselves and their ancestors often times had gone in triumph. They, were the onely men, which without wound, without dint of weapon, without battaile fought, were discomfited and vanquished: who might not so much as draw their sword, and never came to joine or encounter with their enemie; having armour, having strength of limme, having hearts given them in vaine. As they braied out with great discontentment and anguish, these words, the fatall hour of their reproch and shame was come; which by proofe and sensible experience, was to make all matters more heavie and wofull, than they conceived and imagined in their mindes aforehand. First and foremost were they commanded  all, to goe forth without the trench disarmed, and in their single garments: then were the hostages presently delivered, and had toward: after this, were the serjeants and officers willed to depart from the Consuls: whose rich coats of armes, when they were plucked from their shoulders, mooved such pitie and compassion even in them, who a while before with all cursing and banning, judged them worthie to be delivered bound hand and foot into their enemies hands, for to

be mangled despiteously and cut in peeces; that every man forgetting his own estate, wherein he  stood, turned away his eies, as it were from an abhommable spectacle, and could not indure to behold that disgracing and disfiguring of so great state and ma^estie. The first that were put under the gallows, were the Coss. welneere halfe naked: and according to their degree and place, so was everie one in order put to the shame: and afterward, the legions one after another. The enemies in their armor stood all the while about them, scorning, mocking, and making a game of them: many had swords and daggers set against their hearts, in menacing wise, some were hurt and stabbed to death, namely, such as with stern countenance and grim looks above the rest, for the indignitie of these things, offended the conqueror. Thus were they sent with shame inough under the gallows, and (that which was more grievous than the thing) even in the sight and view of their enemies, they were not so soon gotten outofthe forrest, but although they semeed but then as plucked out of dark  hell to see the day, yet the very light it selfe was worse than all kind of deaths, when they beheld so ill favored an armie and unseemly. And therfore, albeit they might have reached to Capua before night, yet being doubtfull of the faithfulnes and protection of their allies, or els dismaied for very shame, they cast their poore and silie bodies upon the ground, about the high waies not far from Capua. Wherof, when news, came to Capua, the just and due pittie which they took of their allies, overcame the inbred arrogancie and pride of that people by kind. Immediatly they sent unto the Coss. the ensigns and ornaments belonging to their place of authoritie, the lictors and serjeants with their rods, they sent armor and horses, apparell and victuall also for the soldiors bountifully: and as they came neer to Capua, the whole Senat and people went out to meet them, and performed all duties of kindnes and hospitalitie, both privat and publick, that could be devised, and as meet was  and requisite. And yet neither the courteous usage, the pleasant countenances and lightsome speeches of their allies, could draw from them any words, no, nor so much as make them to hold up their heads and eies, and to looke again upon their friends, when they yeelded them all these comforts they could. So as, besides their greefe and sorrow of heart, a certaine bashfulnesse and shame forced them to shun all communication and conversing with men. The morrow after, when as certaine young gentlemen of the Nobilitie were returned, who had been sent in convoy from Capua, to accompanie them and bring them on their way, as farre as their liberties and confines; they were sent for into the Senate house, and being demaunded by the auncients and elders, what news: they reported, that they seemed unto them much more heavie and cast downe than before, so silent and in manner dumbe, they marched along: that noble mind and courage  of the Romanes was now mute and mum, their hearts cleane done and gone, together with their armour, not able to greet againe, no nor to give a word to those that saluted them, not one of them for feare able to open his mouth, as if still they bare that yoke and gallowes upon their neckes, under which they went. That the Samnites had indeed not onely a brave victorie, but also a perpetuall over them, and the hand of them for ever; and had now woon not Rome, as the Gaules aforetime, but also (which was a more hardie and warlike exploit) had conquered the Romans courage, stoutnesse, and valour. As these newes were reported, and audience given thereto, with such assent, that every man lamented now the Romane name, as desperate; and concluded generally it was in the counsell of these their faithfull confederats, that they were past recoverie; one Osfilius Calavius, the son of Ovius, a man right noblie borne, renowned for his valiant Acts, and besides, very grave and reverend for his age, spake by report in this manner and said, That he took the matter far otherwise than they all did: for that stubborn and resolute silence, (qd. he) those eies fastened so wistly on the earth, those deafe ears to admit all solace and comfort, that shame of theirs to look up and behold the light, were expresse and certain tokens of them that tossed and rolled from the very root and bottome of their heart, a huge heap and masse of anger and despite. Either (qd. he) I know not the nature of the Romans, or els that stilnes and silence will shortly cost the Samnites, wofull cries and dolefull grones: and the remembrance of this Caudium accord, wil be more heavie and dolourous a good deale to the Samnites than to the Romanes: for, as for them, they wil every man find their hearts and courages again, whersoever they shall hap to encounter; but the Samnites shall not meet every where with the Caudium streights for their purpose.
And now by this time was this shamefull overthrow and disgrace knowne at Rome. Intelligence they had before, how they were beset and enclosed about: but afterwards arrived a messenger with news more heavie and sorrowfull for that ignominious peace, than for any perill and danger otherwise. At the first noise and bruit that they were besieged, they began to muster; but

 after they heard, that they had so shamefully yeelded themselves, all that preparation of aid and succour was discharged and sent away: and presently without any order from publicke authoritie, they gave themselves everie one to all manner of mourning and lamentation. The shops all about the market place were shut up. A generall vacation began of it selfe, and pleading in all courts ceased, before proclamation made: the purple and skarlet robes were left off, the golden rings laid away, and the whole cittie in a manner more sorrowfull and heavie, than the very armie. Neither were they angrie and offended with the captaines onely, with the authours of the peace, with the cautions and sureties for the same; but hated also the guiltlesse souldiours, denying flatly, that they were worthie to be received into cittie or house. Which heat of stomacke and wrathfull indignation, the first arrivall of the armie, utterly allaied; which even to angrie persons  was pittifull and lamentable. For they returned not as men that escaped safe, alive, and unlooked for into their countrie, but like captives in habit and countenance, they entred late into the towne, and hid their heads, every man within his owne house: so as the morrow after, and for certaine daies following, none of them would come into the market place, nor put his head out at dores to looke into the streets. The Consuls likewise for their part, kept in, as private men, and would exercise no function pertaining to their charge, but onely that which thy were forced unto by an act of the Senate, namely, to nominate a Dictatour to be President at the Election of Consuls. So, they elected Q. Fabius Ambustus for Dictator, and P. Aelius Paetus, Generall of horse. Who being wrong created, and without the approbation of the Auspices, there were chosen in their roume, M. Aemylius Pappus for Dictatour, and L. Valerius Flaccus Generall  of the horsemen, and yet by them was not the assemblie holden for the Election abovesaid. And for as much as the people were even wearie againe of all that yeares Magistrates, as unluckie and unfortunate, it grew at length to an Interreigne. So Interregents there were, Q. Fabius Maximus, and M. Valerius Corvinus, who created Consuls, Q. Publius Philo, and L. Papyrius Cursor the second time; with the whole consent, no doubt, of the citie, for that in those daies there were not two more noble and renoumed captaines to be found.
The same daie they were created, they entred their Magistracie (for so the LL. of the Councell had decreed:) and after certaine solemne and ordinarie actes of the Senat passed, they went in hand to consult about the treatie of the Caudine peace. And Publius, whose course it was then to have the soveraigntie of rule, Speake (qd. he) Sp. Posthumius, to the matter propounded,  and let us heare your opinion, and what you can say. Who after hee was risen and stood up, with the very same countenance and cheer that he went under the gallowes;The Oration of Sp. Posthumius late Consull in the Senate. I am (notquoth he) o yee Consuls, ignorant, that I am first called forth, not for honour, but to my disgrace; and commanded to speake, not as a Senatour and Counceller, but as a man culpable and accused, both for an unfortunate warre administred, and a shamefull peace concluded.
Howbeit, seeing that ye have not propounded and touched ought, concerning either our trespasse or our punishment, (setting apart all kind of excuse and defence, which would be no very hard matter to maintaine, before men that are not ignorant of humane fortune, and of necessities, whereto men may be driven) I will in briefe deliver my mind concerning that, which you have moved and propounded. Which sentence of mine may sufficiently witnesse and testifie, whether I meant to spare  mine owne life, or save your legions, when as I became bound to that dishonest or necessarie stipulation and promise, call it whether ye will. And yet, seeing it was made without the peoples privitie and grant, the State of Rome is not obliged thereto, and thereby nothing due to the Samnites but onely our bare bodies. Let us therefore be rendered by the hands of the Feciales and Heralds, in our shirts, and fast bound: let us deliver and rid the people of all scruple and trouble of conscience, if we have entangled them with any; that there be no let in lawe of God or man, but that both justly and lawfully ye may begin the war a new. In the meane while my mind and advise is, that the Consuls levie, enroll, arme, and lead forth an armie: but not to enter within the enemies marches, before all things duely belonging to the deliverie of us into their hands, be fully accomplished. Now, I pray and beseech yee, o immortall gods, that seeing it was not  your good will and pleasure, that Sp. Posthumius and T. Veturius Consuls, should with fortunate conduct fight against the Samnites, yet yee would be satisfied herewith, That ye beheld us put under the gallowes: that ye saw us obliged in an infamous and shamefull bond of covenant: that ye now view us naked and delivered bound into the enemies hands, readie to receive upon our heads even with the losse of our lives, all their anger, malice, and despight: and that it would please

you, that the new Consuls and Legions of the Romanes, may in that sort war with the Samnits, as evermore the wars before us Consuls have been conducted, managed, and performed. When he had spoken these words, all men both so wondered at this man and pittied him too, that one while they would not beleeve he was the same Sp. Posthumius, who had moved and persuaded so soule and dishonest a treatie of peace: otherwhiles they lamented that so brave and noble a personage, should suffer any especiall torment above other, at the enemies hands, for anger and despite of reversing and breach of that accord. When as now they all after singular praises of the man, condescended to his opinion; the Tribunes of the Com. L. Livius and Q. Melius, attempted for a while to oppose themselves against this proceeding: saying, That neither the people could be acquit and assoiled in conscience, by their deliverie, unlesse every thing were againe restored to the Samnits, in the same estate wherein they stood at Caudium: nor they themselves (in  that they subscribed and became bound for the accord of peace, to save the host of the people of Rome) had deserved any punishment: ne yet, last of all, ought they being sacred Magistrates and Inviolable,The Oration of Sp. Posthomius to be yeelded to the enemies, and exposed to any outrage and violence.
Then (quoth Posthomius) in the meane while deliver us up that are but lay and profane men, whom with safe conscience and without offence ye may. And as for these, so sacro-sainct as they now be, ye shall hereafter render them likewise, so soone as they are out of their charge. But if ye will be ruled by me, let them before they be thus yeelded, here in this common hall bee whipped and scourged, for the usury and interest of their punishment, which they would seeme to deferre and put off so long. For whereas they alleage and say, That by the deliverie and yeelding of us, the peoples consciences cannot be cleered and assoiled; who is so ignorant in the Feciales and Heraulds  law, that knoweth not that these men spake this, for this end rather, that they themselves might not be rendred, than for that the truth requireth so. Neither doe I denie my Lords, that bare promises and stipulations are unviolable, and to be kept as well as covenants and obligations with those men, amongwhom both religion to godward, and faithfulnesse to men is in regarde and estimation: but I denie again, that without the peoples assent and grant, any thing can be established good and effectuall, to bind the people thereunto. What lif the Samnites, in the same pride and insolencie, wherein they obtruded and forced upon us this stipulation, yea and wrung it from us, would also have urged us to utter and speake, the solemne forme of words, which they use to doe that surrender up citties; would ye (my Masters that are Tribunes) infer and say, that by vertue thereof the people of Rome is surrendered into their hands? and that this cittie, with the  temples, chappels, limits, and waters, by strength thereof, are the Samnites possession? Well, I let passe to speake of dedition, because the matter in question is touching onely a stipulation. What, I pray you, if we had promised and undertooke, that the people of Rome should forsake and abandon this cittie? or set fire on it? or not have Magistrates, Senat, or lawes any longer? or to be governed againe by Kings? God forbid and forfend that, say you. Well, it is not the indignitie of things, that easeth the bond of Stipulation. If there be any one case, wherein the people may bee obliged, then in truth may they be in all as well: neither skilleth it any whit, (whereat happely some will make a stay, and thinke it is materiall) whether Consull, Dictator, or Pretour, enter into bond and become suretie. And even this it was, that the Samnites themselves judged so to be, and stood upon: thinking it not sufficient, that the Consuls became  bound, but they put the Lieutenants, the Treasurers, and the Colonels there, to the same. And now, let no man demaund of me, why I entred so into stipulation, being a thing not incident to the Consull his charge and right, neither was I to undertake unto them peace, which was not in my power to effect: nor in your name to promise it, from whom I had no commission and warrant. Certes my Lords and Senators, there was nothing at Caudium done at all by mans pollicie and councel. The immortall gods berest both your Generals and the enemies too, of all their sense and understanding: for neither we, in the conduct and ordering of our service, stood warily enough upon our good guard: and they againe, as they gat the victorie full badly, so they lost it as lewdly: whiles they hardly trusted the strength of those places, by meanes of which they had gained the vantage and better hand of us: and while they made such hast, upon what agreement  they cared not, to disarme men that are born martial, and naturally made for wars. For, if they had been in their right wits, what an hard matter was it for them, in the time that they sent for olde aged men from their home, to come to Councell, for to have dispatched their Embassadors to Rome? and so to have dealt and treated with the Senat and people, about a perfect peace and finall

 league in deed? It had been but three daies journey for men not encombred, but lightly appointed. All that meane while, there might have been truce, until the Embassadours from Rome, had brought them either certaine victorie or assured peace. For that had been a covenant and stipulation good in law, the which we should have agreed unto, by warrant of the peoples wil and approbation. But ye would never have granted and allowed it: no more should we have entred into any such stipulation. Neither was it Gods will and providence, that there should be any other issue and end of things, than this: that both they, should vainly be deluded, and feed themselves as it were, with the fancie of a more joyfull dreame, than their mindes could well conceive and apprehend: and also that the same fortune, which had entangled, snared and brought into danger our armie, should losen the same, and rid it againe out of perill: that as their victorie  was frivolous and vaine, so a vainer and more frivolous peace, should make it frustrate and worth nothing: and that such a stipulation and promise should be interposed and come between, which might oblige and binde no person, but the very makers themselves. For what dealing hath there been with you my Lords of the Senat? or with the people of Rome? Who can challenge you? Who can call you into question? Who can come forth and complaine that he is by you deceived? enemie? or cittizen? To enemie ye have passed no promise: cittizen to undertake for you and in your name, ye commaunded none. Therfore yee have nothing to doe to meddle with us, to whom ye gave nought in charge: and with the Samnites as little, with whom ye had no treatie at all. To the Samnits, wee are sufficient pledges enough, and answerable to performe that which is our own: for that, I say, which we are able to make good and yeeld; even our bodies and lives:  upon these let them exercise their rage, upon these let them whet their swords and their spightfull malice. And as for the Tribunes of Commons, consult ye together, whether they may be rendred presently, or ought to be reserved and put off to an other daie: let us in the meane time (o Veturius, and yee that are the rest) offer these wretched heads and lives of ours, like caitives to discharge our bonde, and by our punishment and execution, deliver and set free the Romane armie.
Both the cause it selfe, and the advocate also, moved the Lords of the Senat: and wrought so much not only with the rest, but also with the Tribuns themselves [of Commons] that they promised to be at the Consuls ordring and appointment. Whereupon immediatly they gave up their offices, and were delivered into the Fecials hands with the other, to be led all, to Caudium.  There was not so soon an act of the Senat passed hereof, but it seemed that the very light and raies of the sun shone upon the citie againe. Posthumius was in every man his mouth, him they praised and extolled to the heavens: comparing him with the voluntarie offering of P. Decius the Consull, for the safetie of the armie, and other worthie and noble actes of others: Saying, that by his ouverture, by his meanes and travaile, the cittie was delivered from a servile, dishonourable and unhonest peace: He (say they) hath offered himselfe to all the torments, anger, and vengeance of the enemies, and made full satisfaction therby for the people of Rome. Nothing now but war, war: Al'arme, now cried every man: and, oh, that ever they might see the day, to encounter once again with the Samnits, in their armour and with weapon in hand. So, whiles the cittie was thus inflamed and boiled with hatefull yre and indignation, there was an armie levied, well neare all of voluntaries.  New legions were mustred and enrolled againe out of the same souldiors, and a puissant armie set forth to Caudium. The Fecials marched before, and when they were come to the gate of the citte, commanded the Suerties, such as had subscribed and signed the accord aforesaid, to be despoiled and stript out of their clothes, and their hands to be pinnioned behind them. And when the Lictour or serjeant, for very reverence of Majestie in Posthumius his person, bound him at large and at ease, Why doest not thou (qd. he) draw and pull the cord streighter, that the rendring and delivery of us may be according to lawe and as it ought to be, and no fault to be found withall? Afterwards, when they were come into the assembly of the Samnits, and before the Tribunall judgment seat of Pontius; A. Cornelius Arvina one of the Feciales or Heraulds thus spake: For as much as these persons, without commandement and commission from the Quirites  and people of Rome, have undertaken by stipulation, That there shall a league and peace be made with you; and in so doing have offended and trespassed against the State, therefore, to the end, that the people of Rome might be freed and assoiled from a detestable and heinous offence, Here I deliver and yeelde unto you, the selfe same men.
No sooner had he uttered these words, but Posthumius with his knee smote the Feciall his thigh, with all the might he could: and with a loud

voi^e said, That the being now a Samnite cittizen, and the other an Embassadour and an Herald  of the people of Rome; had against the law of nations injured him and offered him the abuse: ???whereby the Romanes might more justly make warre. Then quoth Pontius. This deliverie neither will I accept of and admit, neither shall the Samnites hold it good and lawfull. But why doest nor thou Sp. P^sthumius, if thou beleeve there be any gods, either undo and cancile all, or stand to thy bargaine and covenant? For by right either are they all due unto the Samnites, whom they once had in their power; or els peace, in liew of them. But why speake I thus, and challenge thee, who doest yeeld thy selfe againe prisoner to the conqueror as faithfully and loially as thou canst? The people of Rome I challenge, who, if they repent of the promise and bargaine made at the streights of Caudium, let them bring againe the Legions into that gullet, wherein they were environned, enclosed, and compassed. Let no man deceive and delude other. Let all  be undone againe, and everything as it was: let them take againe their armour, which by covenant they yeelded up: let them returne into their owne campe, and have whatsoever they had the day before the Parle. Then let them please themselves with war, with valiant and magnanimous deeds: refuse they then, and spare not all covenant: reject they then all treatie of peace. Let us have the same fortune, the same oportunitie and vantage of the places, which we had before the mention of peace: and so make warre, and trie the issue. So shall neither the people of Rome, blame the Consuls stipulation, nor wee find any lacke and default in the faithfulnesse of the people of Rome. And will yee never have done, but alwaies find shifts and excuses, and not stand to your covenants, when yee are overcome, and have the worse of your enemies? Yee gave sometimes hostages to King Porsena; and when yee had done, afterwards stole them away. For a  summe of gold you bought againe your citie of the Gaules; and as they were receiving the same gold, murdered they were by you and hewen in peeces. Peace ye have covenanted with us, upon condition that we should restore again your legions unto you; that peace you cancell and make void, and evermore ye set some colour of right upon your cautelous and fraudulent dealing: Well, aloweth not the people of Rome of the saving of their Legions, by a dishonorable and shamefull peace? Say it is so. Let peace goe whether it will: but give you againe to the Victor, your Legions captivate. Is this your faithfull dealing? are these your covenants, and ceremonies of Fecials and he ralds? that thou, according to the agreement and accord, shouldest have that desire of thine, even so many citizens lives saved? and I not have the peace (which by letting mine hold go unto thee an enemie) I bargained for? What Iustice is this, that thou o Cornelius, and yee that are heralds, prescribe to Nations abroad? Nay verily, I neither will accept of those persons whom ye make a shew to deliver, neither can I beleeve, that they are yeelded in veritie and good earnest. Nay, I passe not at all, whether they returne again into that cittie, which is obliged by a covenant made, attended upon with the wrath and displeasure of all the gods, whose heavenly power and deitie i, thus deluded. Now go and make warre, seeing that Sp. P^sthumius erewhile josteled and pushed an Embassadour herald with his knee; and so the gods will beleeve no doubt, that Posthumius is a Samnite citizen, and no Romane; and that by a Samnite, a Romane Embassador hath ben abused: and thereupon you may take a just occasion and good quarrell to make warre upon us. Are you not ashamed, and bash you not to broach and set abroad, in the view and face of the world, such mockeries of religion? What? old and auncient grave personages, and such as have been  Consuls, to seeke such suttle devises (not fit for verie children and babes to play with) and all to shift off and falsifie their promise made by covenant. Go Lictor, loose the Romanes of their bands: and no man so hardie as to stay them, but that they may depart when they will at their owne pleasure. So they, having thus perhaps discharged the publicke fidelitie, or at leastwise quit themselves undoubtedly of their owne, returned from Caudium, unhurt, to the Romane campe.
The Samnites seeing that in lieu of a proud and unreasonable peace, there was a most cruell warre new sprung up againe, not onely forecast and apprehended in their minds, but well neere saw evidently with theireies, all that ever ensued after. Then, all too late and in vaine, God wot, they praised the two-fold counsell of old Pontius: and how they taking the middle way betweene, were deceived, and had exchanged the certain possession of victory, for an uncertaine and doubtfull peace: and having lost the opportunitie both of gratifying the Romanes, or doing them harme any more, were now to fight and wage warre with them, whom they might either have dishabled for being hurtfull enemies, or made their fast and assured friends for ever. And

 so without any weakning of their power and forces of either side by battaile: their hearts after this Caudine peace were so changed, that Posthumius by his voluntarie yeelding was more honored among the Romanes, than Pontius his bloodless^ victorie among the Samnites: and the Romanes made this reckoning, that the possibilitie of making warre was to them as much as undoubted victorie: and the Samnites beleeved verily, that the Romanes had at once made warre againe and gotten the upper hand.
Whiles these things thus passed, the Satricanes revolted to the Samnites: and the Colonie at Fregellae, by the suddaine and unlooked for arrivall of the Samnites (with whom it is certaine the Satricanes were banded) in the night was surprised and taken. But the mutuall feare one of the other, kept them in on both sides that they stirred not out untill the morning. Then began  the sight, which for a certain time was equall and indifferent: yet, for that the Fregellones within fought for their Church and chimney (as they say) and by reason that the multitude, unmeet for armes, stood them in good steed in annoying their enemies from off their houses; they held out and found them play a long time. But afterwards, a wilie and deceiptfull pollicie turned all backwards and was their undoing: for they suffred the voice of the crier to be heard through the town, who proclaimed, That whosoever laid down weapon, should depart alive and safe with bag and baggage. The hope whereof, caused them to slack somewhat of their fight, and therewith they began to cast away their armour in everie place. But the resolute sort armed still, brake away through a posterne gate, whose venturousnesse proved to them more safe, than the inconsiderate feare of the other which made them credulous and too light of beliefe. For the Samnites compassed them  about with fire, and for all they called upon the gods for their helpe, and to the^^ enemies for performance of their promise, yet they burned them most pitteously.
The Consuls parted betweene themselves, their provinces. Papyrtus tooke his way to Luceria in Apulia, where the Roman horsmen given for hostages at Caudium were kept in ward: but Publius staied in Samnium to make head against the Caudine legions. Which thing much troubled and distracted the minds of the Samnites: for neither their hearts would serve them to go to Luceria, least the enemie should come on their backes; nor yet to stay behind, for feare least in the while, Luceria should be lost. They thought it best therefore, to put all in hazard of a battaile, and to trie it out with Publius. Whereupon, they bring forth their power into the field: with whom when Publius was minded to joine in fight, he thought it not amisse, first to make some  speech unto his men, and so commanded them to assemble unto an audience. But, as they came running to the Praetorium, with exceeding great cheerfulnes, so by reason of their noise that called hard for battaile, no exhortation of the Generall could be heard: ech man his owne heart mindfull of the former disgrace, served well enough to encourage and animate them. So they march out to battaile, putting forward the standerd-bearers and port-ensignes. And because they would loose no time, they first charge with launcing their javelins and shooting darts, and after that, in drawing their swords, they threw away their javelines, as if they had had a signall given them so to doe, and with naked drawne sword, they ran upon their enemies. No cunning was there to bee shewed of warlike captaine, no skill to be shewed either in setting in array the files and ranks, or placing of the rereward for supplies: the soldiors furious anger, with raging  violence, marshalled and managed all. So, the enemies were not onely discomfited and put to the rout, but also because they durst not hinder their flight by retiring to their owne campe, they made all the hast they could, disbanded as they were, toward Apulia. Howbeit they were rallied together in one companie, and so came to Luceria. The Romanes, in the same boiling heat of blood that they peirced through the mids of the enemies battaile, entred also into their campe: where was more bloudshed and execution than in the battell: and the greater part of the pillage was in their choller marred and cleane lost.
The other armie commanded by Papyrius the Cos^marched along the sea coast to Arpi: and all the countrie they passed thorow, shewed them friendship and courte^ie, more for the outrages and losses sustained by the Samnites, and the hatred they bare them, than for any love to the people  of Rome, or good received at their hands. And now the Samnits at that time dwelling upon the hils in villages, being mountainers and wild people, and as it is commonly seen, of like disposition to the places which they do inhabit, wasted the plaine Champaine and sea coasts, despising indeed their more civile life and conversation. Which countrie, if it had ben true to the Samnits, either the Roman armie had not ben able to come to Arpi, or els the penurie and scarcitie of all

things between Rome and Arpi, would have consumed them, being cut off from all provision of victuals. For even then, being gone from them, and lying encamped before Luceria, as wel they without in the leaguer and those that were within the citie besieged, were nipped and bitten with hunger. The Romanes were served all from Arpi, but so slenderly and skantly, that whiles the footmen were occupied in their guards warding, watching, and working uncessantly; the horsemen, were faine to bring come from Arpi, in little leather bagges: and otherwhiles, if they met the enemie, were forced to cast the corne from off their horse backes, to fight more nimblie. They that were within besieged, before the other Consull came with his victorious armie, had both from the mountaines of the Samnites, victuals brought vnto them, and succours also of men let in to them. But the comming of Publius made all provisions more streight: for, leaving the charge of the siege to his brother Consull, he rod lightly appointed without cariage, all over the countrie, and so beat all the quarters, that they were too hoat for the enemies to forage and purveigh victuales. Then the Samnites, seeing that they within the citie besieged, were past all hope to abide the famine any longer, encamped about Luceria, and were forced to gather all their forces together from all parts, and to give Papyrius battaile. At which very instant, when they were on both sides preparing to fight, the Tarentine Embassadors came betweene, discharging and forbidding, both Samnites and Romanes to fight: professing withall, that whosoever they were that ref^sed to give over war, against them they would fight in defence and favor of the others. Papyrius having heard that embassage, making semblance, as if he had greatly regarded their speeches, answered that he would conferre with his brother Consull; and having sent for him, and bestowed all the meane time in preparation to fight, when hee had talked with him  as touching the execution of matters alreadie resolved, he presently gave the signall, and set out the bloudie banner of battell. Now as the Consuls were busie in sacrificing and performing duties belonging to God and man (as their manner is when they purpose to go to a battaile) the Tarentine embassadours aforesaid, encountred them and expected an answere. To whom Papyrius, The Chick-master (qd.he)oye Tarentines, sendeth mee word, that the birds feed right, and all is we^l; and besides that, the gods in our sacrifice seeme passing well pleased. And in the name of the gods, and under their conduct (as ye see) we are going to battel. Then commanded he to set forward the standerds, and led forth his power, mocking the foolish nation for their great vanitie, who, not able to manage their owne affaires by reason of home seditions and civill discords, thought it meet to be moderators betweene others, and to prescribe them warre or peace. The Samnites  on the other side, having slaked all their care and desire of war, for that they desired peace in good earnest, or els thought it expedient for them to make a semblance thereof, for to winne unto them the Tarentines; seeing the Romanes all of asuddaine arranged in battaile array and readie to fight, cried forth aloud, that they rested stil in the authoritie of the Tarentines, and were at their direction: neither would they come forth into the field, nor put themselves in armes out of their fort: choosing rather being thus disappointed, to abide the the chance of fortune whatsoever, than to seeme to have despised the Tarentines, who had interposed themselves as mediatours for peace. Marry (quoth the Coss.) we take that for a good osse and presage of luckie succusse^: and we would wish no more at Gods hands, but to put into their enemies heads that resolution, not to defend their trench and rampire. So the Coss. when they had parted between them their  forces, approched the very campe of their enemies, and set upon them with an hot assaulton every side. Thus while some filled and dammed up the trenches, others plucked up the stakes of the rampier, and threw the banke and all downe the diches under their feete: whiles not onely their owne inbred valour by nature, but also anger and choler provoked and pricked to the quick, their hearts alreadie fretted and cankered at the very roote, for the last disgrace received; they entred the campe. Every man for his part gave out and said, Here are not the the straight gullets of Caudium, here are not the impassable nor inaccessible passes, and forrests, where as proudfraud had gone beyond their seely errour and want of forecast: but Roman vertue and prouesse, which no rampier never so strong, no trench how deepe soever, is able to put by and withstand. So they killed all afore them indifferently, as well them that made resistance and stood to it, as  those that recuiled and gave way; armed and disarmed, bond and free borne, old and young, as well under age as undergrowne, man and beast, one with another: neither had there escaped any living creature drawing breath, but that the Consuls sounded the retreat, and with minatorie wordes commanded the souldiors, so greedie of murder and bloudthirstie, to go foorth of the

 campe. Whereupon when they were highly discontented and in great indignation, for that they were staied and interrupted in this sweetnesse of wreaking their anger, and satiating their revenge to the full; it was time to deliver this speech unto them, wherein the souldiors were given to understand, how the Consuls neither were behinde any of them in malice and harred to their enemies, nor would bee hereafter: but as they were their chiefe conductours to the war, so they would be their leaders and shew them the way, to unsatiable appetite of revenge and execution; had not the care and regard of those 600 horsemen, which were kept as hostages in Lucena, cooled their thirst and staied their stomackes; lest happely the enemies in despaire to finde pardon and mercie, should run upon them in a blind fit of furie and rage, and put them all to the sword; chusing rather to torment and kill them first, before they died themselves. The souldiors greatly  commended this course, and rejoycedthat thus their choller was allaied, and their furie bridled, confessing, That they were indeed to abide all whatsoever, rather than the life of so many of the forwardest and principall young gentlemen of Rome, should be betraied; or in danger. This audience being dismissed, they drew together to a counsell, whether with all their forces they should assaile and presse hard upon Luceria, or with one of the armies and cheefe leaders, give the attempt to sound the Apulians, a close and secret kind of people therabout, who ever to that day had stood in doubtfull rearmes with them.
Publius the Consull, who had taken this journey to overrun all Apulia, in that one voiage and expedition, either by force subdued and brought under his obeisance certaine States, or upon conditions entred league and societie with them, Papyrius also, who staied at the siege of Luceria,  within a short time sped according to his expectation. For having forelaid and beset all the waies, by which victuall was conveied thither out of Samnium, the Samnites who lay in garison at Luceria, pinched and tamed with famine, sent Embassadors to the Romane Consull, making offer to release and deliver up into his hands those horsemen, (the onely cause of the present warre) in case he would raise and levie the siege. To whom Papyrius made this answere, that they should have gone first to Pontius, the sonne of Herennius, by whose counsell they had put the Romanes under the yoke and the gallowes, to learne and know of him, what in his opinion they were to abide, who were vanquished and overcome. Howbeit, for as much as they had leifer, and chose rather to bee censured indifferently, and to receive equall conditions of their enemies, than of their owneselves, he willed the Embassadors to give them to understand in Luceria, that  they should leave their armour, their bag and baggage, their beasts of cariage, and impotent multitude not fit for the watres, within the wals. And as for the fighting soldiors, he would put them to pasie under the gallows in their single shirts, for to revenge the shame first offered them, and not to inflict any new ignominie upon them. Nothing was denied and refused: seven thousand men of warre were put under the gallowes, a rich and huge pillage raised within Luceria, all their owne ensignes and armour regained, which they had lost at Caudium: and that which surmounted all other joies, they recovered again those gentlemen of armes, whom lying for pledges and securitie of the peace aforesaid, the Samnites had sent to Luceria to be kept in safe custodie. There is not lightly to be found a victorie more noble, and of greater consequence to the people of Rome than this, in regard of the suddain change of fortune, in case (as some records beare  witnesse) Pontius also himselfe the sonne of Herennius, and Generall of the Samnites, to make satisfaction and quittance for the Consuls disgrace and shame, was put under the yoke, as well as all the rest. But I lesse marvell, that it is not cleare, but left uncertaine, that the enemies Generall was rendred, and went under the gallowes: this rather I woonder at, that doubted it is, whether Lucius Cornelius Dictator, with L. Papyrius Cursor, Generall of the horsmen, managed these acts first at Caudium, and then afterwards at Luceria: and being the only revenger of that disgrace of the Romans, triumphed most worthily (I dare be bold to say) of any man before that time, next to Furius Camillus: or whether the cheefe honour hereof pertain by right to Papyrius as Consull. Vpon this errour followeth another in the necke of it, whether Papyrius, surnamed Cursor, for his good service at Luceria, in the next Election, continued in Magistracie, and were made third  time Consull with Q. Aemylius Caretanus, the second time: or whether it were L. Papyrius Mugillanus, and the error grew upon the surname. But it is agreed upon by all writers, that from this time forward all the reliques of the warres, were performed and finished by Consuls. Aemylius in one prosperous battel made a finall conquest of the Ferentanes, and upon composition had the cittie delivered up unto him, whither they had retired their forces for succour, after their defeature

in the field, and hostages were imposed upon them. With like good successe fought the  other Consull with the Satricanes, who being Romane cittizens, had revolted to the Samnites, after the losse at Caudium, and had received into their cittie a garrison of theirs. For when as the Romane armie approched under the wals of Satricum, and that the cittizens within (after Embassadours sent to treat by way of humble petition for peace) had received this hard and heavie answere from the Consull, That unlesse they would kill the garrison of the Samnites, or deliver them into his hands, they should come no more againe to him: the Coloners and inhabitants were more frighted and terrified with that speech, than at all the forcible attempts of their armie. Whereupon the Embassadours followed their suit hard, and continued still, demaunding eftsoones of the Consull how hee could beleeve, that they being but few, feeble, and disarmed, should be able to force a garrison so strong and well appointed, againsttheir wils? being willed to  aske counsell of them, by whose means they had received the said garison into the towne, they departed their waies: and having hardly obtained leave and licence at his hands, to consult with their Senat, and to bring answer, they return home again. Their Senat was divided into two factions, which distracted and held them in suspence, that they could not soone resolve. The one, consisting of the cheefe personages and head men, who had sollicited them to revolt from the people of Rome; the other of true hearted and loyall citizens. Howbeit, both sides strove in the end, and endeavored to labour the Consull for reconciliation of peace. The one part thought it sufficient (because the Samnits garison having not provision enough aforehand to hold out the siege, was to depart the night following) to give notice to the Consull, what howre of the night, through what gate the enemies would go forth, and which way they would take: the other, namely against whose will they  were revolted to the Samnites, the verie same night, opened another gate besides to the Consul, and privily let their enemies armed into the cittie. So by a twofold complot of treason, they were surprised unawares and all their throts cut, not onely the garison of the Samnites (by reason that the woods all about the high way were laied for them and beset) but also at one instant there was a shout and al'arme raised by the enemies, within the cittie, which was ful of them: and thus in the space of one hower both the Samnites were slaine, the Satricanes taken, and all they had in the world seized into the hands of the Consull: who after diligent inquisition by torture, Who were the principall authors of this revolt? whomsoever he found guiltie, those he skourged and beheaded: and setting there a strong garison, he tooke from the Sa^^icanes all their armour. From thence Papyrius Cursor departed to Rome for to triumph (as they write, that say, by his leading  Luceria was recovered, and the Samnites put under the yoke). And without question, a man he was worthie of all commendations of a warriour, surpassing not onely in fortitude and courage of spirit, but also in force and naturall strength of bodie, and namely for his good footmanship: wherevpon he got his surname An excelllent (...). Cursor. For in running (they say) he had not his peere, but went away with pricke and prise before all other in those daies: and were it by reason of his bodily vigour and strong constitution, or his much exercise, a stout and mightie eater he was, he dranke as liberally to his meat, and could carie it as well. Never had foot or horse under any captain more rough and harder service, for that himselfe was of so tough mettall and steele to the verie backe (as they say) that he could abide any paines and travaile whatsoever. His horsemen upon a time were so bold, as to request him in liew of their good service in some exploit, to ease them a little  of their ordinarie toile and labour: yes marie will I (quoth he) and that yee shall not complaine that ye have no easment at all, I will ease you of this paines, That when ye alight from your horses, ye shall not need any more to stroke their shoulders, backe and buttocks. He was a man besides for severitie streight, and of right great command, as well over his allies and confederates as his owne citizens. The Pretor of Preneste, for verie feare chanced once to be somewhat behind, and slacke in bringing forward the rereward, into the vantgard and front of the battell: as he walked before his pavilion he commanded him to be called unto him: when he was come, he willed the serjeant to bring forth his axe immediately: at which word when the Prenestin stood amazed and well neere dead, Dispatch Lictor (quoth hee) stocke me up and grub this root that hindereth them that walke this way: and when he saw him astonied and his heart in his heeles  for feare of death, he set a good round fine upon his head, and so let him go. Doubtlesse in all that age (than which there was never any more fertile and fruitfull for vertue and valor) there was no one man, upon whom the state of Rome rested and relied more: In so much as men had destined, and in their minds appointed him to have matched and made head with Alexander the great,

 if after the conquest of Asia, he should have bent his power hitherward, and warred in Europe.
Albeit it may well appeare that I have nothing lesse sought, ever since I began this worke, than to digresse and de^line more than was needfull,(...) Alexander the great and the Romanes. from the order and course of mine historic, and by extravagant garnishing and mingling my writings with varietie of matters, both to seeke for the readers pleasant starts and diverticles to repose themselves, and for my selfe some e^se and recreation of my spirits: yet the mention of so mightie a king and renowmed captaine, maketh me to thinke upon, and to u^^er abroad the secret conceits and discourses, which often I have cast and tossed in my mind: and which induce me now to serch and examin willingly, what event would have happened and befallen to the Romanes, in case they had waged warre with Alexander. First and foremost, the things that seeme to beare sway and prevaile in warre, be these (to wit)  number of soldiours, valour, and courage withall, wit, sufficiencie and dexteritie of their chefe leaders, and lastly, fortune, which as in all other humane and worldly affairs beareth a great stroke, so in war most of all. Which points, if a man consider either severally by themselves, or jointly altogether, do prove that the Roman Empire and government had stood as well against him, as other princes and nations invincible. And first, to begin with comparing of the captains themselves; I doe not denie, but that Alexander was a noble and singular warriour: and this maketh more for his fame and renowme, that he was a sole commaunder of himselfe, that he was a yoong man, and died in the grouth of his prosperous affaires, before he had felt and tasted of adverse fortune. For to let passe other glorious Princes and brave captaines, (the great mirrours and examples of humane changes and varieties of this world) what was it that exposed Cyrus, whom the Greeks  commend and magnifie above all other, as also of late time, Pompeie the great, to disfavor and the turning wheele of fortune, but onely this, that they lived long? Let me but rehearse and recken up the Romane captaines, and those not all, nor in everie age, wherein they flourished; but even them only, with whom being either Consuls or Dictators, Alexander should have warred, if he had come: namely, M. Valerius Corvinus, C. Martius Rutilius, C. Sulpitius, T. Manliu Torgu^^us, Q. Publius Pbilo, L. Papyrius Cursor, Q. Fabius Maximus: the two Dec^, L. Volumnius, M. Curius: Besides other brave men and valiant personages that followed after, in case he had fought the Carthaginian were first (for if he had lived he ment to have warried there) and then passed over into Italie, when he had been well stept in years. In everie one of these, there were the same good parts, the like towardnesse of nature, as much forwardnesse of courage and spirit, as in Alexander,  yea and as good Militarie discipline, which even from the foundation of the cittie, passing from hand to hand, grew at length to the forme and perfection ofan Art, framed and compiled of continual rules and precepts, and confirmed by experiments. For so, after one course the Kings conducted their warres: even so, next unto them the banishers of the Kings, (to wit the unij and Valerij) so, consequently the Fabij, the Quintij, and Cornelij: so did Furius Camillus, whom those two Romanes in their youth (Manlius Torguatus and Valerius Corvinus) with whom Alexander should have encountred, saw an aged man in the latter end of his daies. And whereas Alexander ventured his own proper person in battaile, and performed all Militarie dueties with other soldiors, (which was not the left part of his praise and glory) would Manlius Torguatus have given him one ynch of ground, thinke ye, ^she had met with him in the medlie equally matched? or Valtrius Corvinus  either, both of them braveand doutie soldiors before they were leaders and captaines? Or would the Decij have given him place, who with devoted bodies to death, cameamong the thickest of their enemies into present danger? Would Papyrius Cursor have given him way, a man of that incomparable strength of bodie, and invincible courage of hart? And (not to name every one particularly) would that Senat and Counsell have been overwrought with the stratagems and pollicies of that one yong man? which, who soever he was that said, it consisted and was composed altogether of kings, was the only man that conceived and comprehended the true image and Idea of the Romane Senat. Mary heere was all the doubt (forsooth) least that he knew not how to chuse out a convenient plot of ground, to pitch a camp in, more wisely and cunningly than any one of those before named, to make provision for victual, to foresee and beware of ambushes, to picke out and  take a meet time for to fight a battail, to set his battaillons in array, and to strengthen the same with sufficient succors and supplies from the reregard. Certes, he would have said himselfe, that he had not now to deale with Darius, which Monarch carrying with time a traine of daintie women, and tender Eunuches, weakened and made effeminate with wearing purple and gold, with all his rich furniture, for shew and ostentation of his wealthie and superfluous fortune, Alexander without

any bloodshed, with doing nought else, but knowing well how to contemne such toyes and  vanities conquered as a prey and bootic rather than an enemie and warriour. He would have thought verily that the situation and nature of Italy farre differed from that of India, through which hee marched at his ease with his dronken armie, feasting and banketting all the way; but specially, when he should have beheld the woody forests and vnpassable streights of Apulia, the high hils and mountaines of Lucania, and the fresh marks and tokens of the losse that happened in his owne name and house, namely, where not long before his Vnkle Alexander late King of Epirus miserably perished. Our talke all this while is of Alexander, not drowned yet with the overflow of prosperitie; wherein no man had ever lesse rule of himselfe than he. Whome if we consider, as he was arraied in the habite and attire of his new fortune, and (if I may so say) of a new nature, whereinto after his conquests and victorieshe was transfigured; surely he would have come into Italy more like a Darius than an Alexander, and brought a  bastard armie with him, nothing at all resembling but quite forgetting their native countrie of Macedonie, degenerated alreadie, and growing out of kind, into the manners and fashions of the Persians. It greeveth me, and I am ashamed, in so great a Monarch as he was, to report the proud changing and varietie every while of his apparell, his excessive vainglory and desire of being courted and crowched unto (as he was) in flattering manner, by men lying upon the earth groveling and prostrate at his feete. Such abiect basenes should have bene hardly endured of Macedonians conquered and subdued; much lesse then, being conquerours as they were. Abashed I am to recount the foule and horrible torments and executions, the murders of his well deserving friends, even in the midst of his cups and deintie viands: last of all, his vanitie, his overweening, and forging to himselfe a divine race and pedigree from the gods. But what if his dronkenne^se and unmeasurable love of wine, were every day more than other? what if his fell anger and exceding heat of choler increased daily? (for I report nothing, but that which al writers agree upon) recken we not these infirmities for great blemishes, and wonderous hinderances, to the vertues and perfections of a warrior and generall commander? But here is all the danger and feare (which some are wont to give out and alledge, even the vainest persons of all other Greekes, who favour and magnifie the glory of the very Parthians in comparison of the Romane name) that the people of Rome had never bene able to abide the very majestie and name of Alexander the great. (And I thinke verily, that even themselves that talke so much of him, never heard the truth, so much as by the bruite and fame) and that against whom in Athens, a Citie mightily decayed by warre with the  Macedonians, and even then, when as they might see before their face the ruines of Thebes in manet smoking full in their eyes, the Oratours durst freely make publike invectiues (which appeareth by the very records of their Orations now extant) against him: I say, not one of so many States and noble personages of Rome durst have opened his mouth, and given one word againe frankly and boldly. How much soeuer the grandeur and greatnesse of this man may be conceived and imagined in the mind, all that, shall be but one onely man, rising, growing, and come to his height with the felicity of little more than ten yeares. Which happinesse of his, they that extoll in this respect, that the people of Rome, although in no war they were subdued, yet in many battailes had the foyle and lost the day; whereas Alexander neuer fought feeld but he woon the victorie; little understand, that they compare the exploits of one person, and him a yong man, with the  deedes and acts of a State, which had now warred eight hundred yeares. And can we meruaile, if when on the one part there maybe reckned more ages, than yeers on the other, that in so long a time, fortune should varie more, than in the space of thirteene yeares? But why compare you not man with man, Captaine with Captaine? and lay their fortunes together? How many Romaine Chieftaines and Generals, in this case am I able to name, who never lost field? Yee may turne every leafe and page of the yerely annales of Magistrates, of day-bookes and journels of those Consuls and Dictators, whose valour and felicitie, the people of Rome had never cause to repent of and be discontented for, so much as one day. And that which maketh them more wonderful, and to be admired above Alexander or any other king in the world, some of them bare the Dictatorship but ten or twentie dayes; and none the Consulship longer than a yeare. Their levies and  musters now and then were letted and impeached by the Tribunes of the Com. The due and best time for warre otherwhiles overslipped them, and yet they went forth. Before their terme expired, they were often called home, for to be presidents of the Magistrates Election. In the very midst and busiest time of their affaires, the yeare eftsoones turned about. The inconsiderate

 rashnesse one while, and the peevish crookednesse another while of a Collegue and companion in government, was hindrance and harme both. They succeeded sundry times after the losse and overthrow of their predecessors, and received an armie either of raw untrained souldiers, or such as were in ill discipline nuzelled up: whereas Kings and Monarks contrarywise, not only freed and exempt from al such obstacles and inconveniences, but also Lords and Maisters, and of absolute commaund, over their enterprises, over times and seasons fit for execution, give direction to others, draw all after them to their advise and counsell, and are themselves directed and overruled by none. Say now, that Alexander were invincible, and delt with these Captaines as invincible as himselfe, he should likewise have hazarded as great pawnes and fauors of fortune as any of them; nay rather he should have adventured and incurred more jeopardie; in that the Macedonians had but Alexander  alone, a man not only subject but also exposing himselfe; to many perilous chances: but many Romanes there had bene egall to Alexander, either for glorie or greatnes of their worthie deeds: who every one should have lived and died according to the fatall course of his owne severall destinie, without the hazard of the whole and maine chance. It remaineth now that forces be compared with forces, and armies to armies, either in number, or in qualitie of souldiours, or multitude of Allies, from whom they had their aides. There were esteemed by computation in the Taxing yeares, and Surveies taken by the Censors of that age, two hundred and fiftie thousand polls Citizens of Rome. And therefore in all the revolts and rebellions of their allies the Latins, they were able to levie and enroll ten legions complete, of Romane citizens well neere and none else. And for many yeares often times, there were foure and five armies employed at once,  which maintained warres in Tuscane, inHetruria, in Vmbria, take also the Gaules with you their enemies, likewise Lucania in Samnium. Besides al these, Alexander should have found all Latium with the Sabines, Volsciens, and Acquians; all Campania, part of Vmbria and Hetruria, with the Picentes, the Marsians, Pelignians, Vestines and Apulians, and all the cost adjoyning thereto of the Greekes, along the nether Tyrrhen sea, from the Thurians to Naples and Cumes, and from thence, the Samnites, as farre as to Antium and Hostia. All these he should have met with, either mightie and puissant allies and friends to the Romanes, or if they were enemies, vanquished and subdued by their armes. He should have passed the seas himselfe, having of old Macedonian bands, not above thirtie thousand foote, and four thousand horse, and those, most of them Thessalians; for this was all his power. And in case he had joyned thereto, the Persians, Indians, and other  such nations, he should have drawne along after him, more let and encombrance, than help and succour by them. Take this over and besides; The Romanes had fresh supplies alwaies readie and neere at hand, at home in the Citie: whereas Alexander his armie (as afterwards it happened to Annibal warring in a strange countrie) would have waxed old and decayed. They had for their armor and weapons, a shield or buckler, and a speare in manner of a pike. The Romanes had a target of larger capacitie to cover the whole bodie, and a javelin, being a weapon much better and more forcible than the pike, either to strike and push withall neere hand, or to be launced a far off. The souldiers, I confesse, both of the one side and the other, stood their ground surely, kept their place and array still, within their severall rancks. The Macedonian massive Phalanx moved not, was stedfast, and alwaies after one sort: but the Romanes battaillon  more distinct, and consisting of many parts, easie both to divide and display, or to joyne and reunite upon any occasion. To speake now of painefull worke and travaile, what souldier is comparable to the Romane? who better able to endure all sorts of labour? Alexander by the losse but of one battaile, had bene cleane done, and his warre at an end for ever. But the Romanes, whose harts, neither the shameful disgrace at Caudium, nor the wofull defeature at Cann^^, could mate and daunt; what power would have discouraged? what battaile in the world would have broken their backs? Certes, Alexander, although he had great prosperitie and good successe in his first beginnings and enterprises, would oftentimes heere, have missed his Persians and Indians, and desired with all his heart to have had dealing with them againe, and other cowardly and dastardly nations of Asia: nay, he would have sayd, that he had warred before but with women, as Alexander king of Epirus (by report) gave out, when he was wounded to death, conferring the easie occurrents of war which this yong Prince his nephew, met withall in Asia, with the difficulties of his owne, that he found here in Italie. And verily, when I call to mind and remember the conflicts and fights at sea, in the first Punick warre, for the space of xxiiij, yeares, with the Carthaginians, I suppose the whole age of Alexander would hardly have brought about and finished

that one warre, and against one of those two States. And peradventure, when both Carthaginians  and Romanes had beene combined, either according to the auncient leagues, or for equall feare of a common enemie, and those two cities most puissant both for men and munition, had taken armes at once against him, he would have been overwhelmed with the Punicke and Roman warre together. Moreover, the Romanes have made good proofe of the Macedonians as enemies, if not when they had Alexander to be their Captaine, nor whiles the Empire of Macedonie was at the best, and stood upright unfoiled: yet tried them they have, and made head against them under the conduct of Antiochus, Philip, and Perses: and it never cost them the losse and overthrow of their owne part, no, nor so much as any apparence of danger at all. I would not bee thought to speake a prowd word, but be it said without arrogancie, and setting all our civile wars aside; never were wee distressed, either byhorse or foot, never in open field and battaile ranged, never on even and plaine ground, never in unequall places of disadvantage, were wee endangered. The soldior in heavie and complete harneis, I confesse, may fear the Cavallerie in the plaines: may fear shot of arrowes, combersome forrests and woods, streight gullets, and unpassable wilds, without waies forward or backeward: but let there bee a thousand armies greater and stronger than the Macedonians or Alexander, so long as we hold together, and continue still in this love of peace and care of civile concord, wherein we live at this present, wee are able, and ever shall bee, to discomsite and put them all to flight.
After this, were M. Follius Flaccina, and L. Plautius Venox Consuls. The same yeare there came from sundrie Nations of the Samnites Embassadours, to treat for the renuing of the league, and moved the Senat, most humblie kneeling prostrate upon the ground: but being put  off and referred to the people, their praiers availed not to such effect: for as touching a league, they had a flat nay. And after they had for certain daies together, importuned them one by one apart, with cap and cursie: at length after much suit, they obtained truce for two yeares. And out of Apulia the Theanenses and Canusines wearied with rodes and spoile made in their territories, after they had put in hostages to Lucius Plautius the Consull, yeelded themselves to his protection. The same yeare first began Provosts to bee created at Capua, to governe under certaine lawes given unto them by L. Furius the Pretor: after that themselves had made suit for the one and the other, as a remedie for their state, greatly decaied through civile discord. And at Rome were two more Tribes added to the rest, Vtentina, and Falerina. When Apulia began once to shrinke and go backward, the Theatines, being also Apulians, presented themselves unto the new  Consuls, C. Iunius Bubulcus, and Q. Aemylius Barbula, and sued to enter into a league with the Romanes. And since they were the men that led the way first, and by their example and persuasion induced all Apulia to be in peace with the Romans, and had confidently undertaken, as sureties and pledges to bring it to passe, they obtained their request. Yet was not the league indifferent and formall, with equall conditions, but so, as they should be in subiection to the people of Rome. After that Apulia was conquered (for Iunius had woon also Tarentum, a strong town and a rich) they marched forward against the Lucanes. Then upon the suddain comming of Aemylius the other Consull, Nerulum was by force taken. And after that it was noised abroad amongst the allies of the people of Rome, that the state and weale publicke of Capua were established by Romane discipline and governement; the Antiates also, who made mone and plained, that  they lived without positive set lawes and magistrates, obtained of the Senate certaine advocates or Commissioners, to ordaine statutes likewise for that Colonie. So, that not onely the Romane armes, but also their law and jurisdiction extended farre and neare, and was of great request. C. Iun. Bubulcus, and Q. Aemylius Barbula Consuls, in the end of the yeare, delivered their legions not to the Coss. by them created, Sp. Nautius, and M. Popilius, but consigned them to L. Aemylius the Dictatour. Who with his Generall of horse, L. Fulvius, began to lay siege to Satricula, whereby he gave the Samnites occasion to rebell. Which brought upon the Romanes a double feare two waies. For of the one side the Samnites having assembled a mightie armie, to deliver their allies from the siege, pitched their campe not farre from the Romanes leaguer: on the other side, the Satricanes set open their gates suddainely, and with a great tumult brake into the  wards and corps de guard of their enemies. And so both parts, relying rather upon hope of succour and helpe elsewhere, than trusting upon their owne strength, within a while began to charge the Romanes in full battell, with banner displaied, and distressed them. And although the Dictatour was assailed both waies, yet was hee sure and safe on either side, because hee

 had gotten a plot of ground, not easie to bee compassed, and made head both against the one and the other, advauncing his ensignes accordingly. Howbeit, hee charged more hotely upon them that fallied foorth, and without much adoe beat them againe within the wals. Then turned he the whole battaile upon the Samnites. Where there was hard hold, and more to doe. The victorie, though long first, was neither doubtfull nor variable. The Samnites being chased and driven into their campe, having in the night put out all their fires, dislodged and departed privily away: and being past all hope of desending Satricula, they besieged Plistia, a town confederate to the Romanes, to requite their enemie with the like displeasure. The revolution of the yeare being gone about, the warre continued under the conduct of Q. Fabius Dictatour: and the new Consuls, like as the former, remained still at Rome. And Fabius came before Satricula  to receive the armie of Aemylius, bringing with him anew supplie to make up the broken bands: for the Samnites made no stay at Plistia, but having levied and sent for fresh souldiours from home, presuming upon their great numbers, encamped in the very place where they lay afore: where by braving the Romanes, and challenging them with many skirmishes, they would have forced them to raise the siege. But the Dictator so much more earnestly, bent his forces against the wals of the enemies, thinking it the best peece of service to assaile the towne, as being of such importance to the rest of the warre, which depended thereon: and was more carelesse therefore of the Samnites, and onely opposed against them certaine guards both day and night, along the trench and rampire, to keepe them from making any assault upon the campe. But the Samnites on the other side, so much the more fiercely skirmished on horsebacke about the fortifications,  and never gave them rest. In so much, as when the enemie now was at the point to enter the gates of the campe, the Generall of the horse. Q. Aemylius Ceretanus, without advise and direction of the Dictatour, riding forth in a great noise with all his cornets of Horse, repelled the enemie. But even in that light manner of skirmish, and no set battell of any long continuance, Fortune so plaied her part, and shewed what shee could doe, that on either side there besell a notable losse, with the glorious death of both the captaines. For the Generall of the Samnites first taking it to the heart, to see Aemylius so fiercely ride and give the charge, and himselfe to bee disarraied and driven out of his place, with much intreating and exhorting his horsemen, renued the fight. Against whom, as he advaunced himselfe, bravely to be seene amongst his men, and fought most valiantly, the Romane Generall of the horse, with speare in rest, so galloped his  horse, that with one push he unhorsed him and left him for dead: and yet for all this was not the whole troupe besides (as commonly it is seene) at the fall of their captaine so much amazed, as provoked rather to fight. For they that were about him, charged Aemylius hard, as hee rashly rode without heed, and engaged himselfe too farre within the thickest of the squadrons of his enemies, and launced their javelins at him: but they gave the especiall honour to the brother of the Samnites captaine, to bee revenged for his death. Hee, full of anger and sorrow, plucked Aemylius from his horse, and slew him in the place, even in the middest of his victorie: and for that hee fell among the troupes of his enemies, hee had like to have left his dead corps among the Samnites. But presently the Romanes alighted on foot, and the Samnites were forced to doe the same: and thus being raunged suddainely in great hast into battaillons,  there began a cruell fight on foot about the bodies of the captaines. Wherein the Romanes went cleare away with the better, and having recovered the corps of Aem
ylius, in great joy, entermingled with sorrow, they returne winners into their campe. The Samnites thus having lost their captaine, and tried their strength what they could doe in fight on horsebacke, left Satricula, which they supposed could not possiblie be defended, and so returned againe to the siege of Plistia. After fewe daies, Satricula was rendered by composition to the Romanes, and the Samnites by assault wan Plistia. Then chaunged they the seat towne of the warre. For out of Samnium and Apulia, the Legions were remooved to Sora. This Sora was revolted to the Samnites, and had slaine all the inhabitans therein that were Romanes. Against which place, when the Romanes were come first by great journeies to revenge the losse of their countrimen,  and to recover the Colonie, their espials and vaunt-couriours whome they had sent out dispersed along the high waies, brought word, that the Legions of the Samnites followed, yea and one after another gave advertisement, that they were not farre off. Hereupon they went forth to meet with the enemie, and neere to a place called Lautulae, there was fought a doubtfull and dangerous battaile: for no slaughter it was, nor flight of either part, but the verie night that

parted them, and they knew not whether they had the better or the worse. In some Chronicles  I find, that the Romanes lost the day, and that there died in this battaile Q. Aemylius Generall of the horse. C. Fabius chosen into the roume of Aemylius, came with a new and fresh armie from Rome, and having dispatched messengers before to the Dictator to know his advise, where he should stay and rest, at what time, and on which side he should set upon the enemie: after he was well enformed and instructed in all points what to doe, he put himselfe close in ambush, The Dictator himselfe, who had for certaine daies after the last skirmish, kept his soldiors within trench, more like one beseeged, than beseeging; all on a suddain, put forth the signal and token of battaile: and thinking nothing more effectual to animate and kindle the courages of hardie men, than to know of no other helpe or hope, nor to trust upon any man but in themselves, he conconcealed from his soldiors the comming of the Generall of horse and his fresh forces; and as  if there had been no other way but one,The Oration of (...) to his (...). even to breake forth and fallie with violence: We being (quoth hee) my soldiors, pent here and taken tardie in these streights have no other yssue but that (...) by victorie we shall make open.
Our hold wherein we lie is fortified sure enough, but the same for scarcitie of all things noisome, yrksome, and hurtfull to us: for all parts heere about are revolted, from whence we should have convoie of victuals: and were it that the people were disposed to help us, yet the advenues and passages are hard, and the place of our abode, incommodious. Therefore will not I deceive and abuse you any longer, by leaving heer your tents into which ye may after (ye have missed the entier victorie) betake your selves for safetie, as ye did the otherdaie: for our fortifications and holds, ought to be defended by force of armes: and not our armes by sensed forts. Let them have their campe well fortified, to yssue forth and to retire  thither againe at their pleasure, who have a purpose to make a long warre of it. But let vs cut off all regard of other matters, but onely of a present and finall victorie. Advance then your ensignes directly against the enemie: and so soone as our armie is once without the trench and rampiers, let them set the tents a fire, that have the charge so to doe: you shall make up your losses againe, my soldiors, with the spoile of all the nations hereabouts, that have revoked. At this speech of the Dictator, which shewed no other semblance but of extreame necessitie, the soldiors tooke heart and were hote set to march streight to the enemie. And the verie sight of their tents burning behind them (albeit those onely which stood next were set on fire, for so the Dictator had given commandement) was no small provocation and pricke unto them. And therfore they gave a charge like mad men, and at the first push and brunt they brake the array  of the enemies: and withall, in good time, the General of the horse, when he saw a farre off the tents on fire (for that was the signall agreed between them) came hastely upon the backe of the enemies and assailed them. So the Samnits being environed round about, made everie
man what shift he could to get forth and escape, and so fled. But the maine multitude that were thrumbled together all on a round heap, for feare, being an hinderance one to another in the prease, was slaine in the mids and cut in peeces, the enemies camp woon, and ransaked: with the pillage wherof the soldiors were loden, and the Dictator brought them back unto their own camp: who were not so joious for the victorie, as for that they found (besides a little part thereof disfigured by fire) all the rest safe and sound, beyond their expectation.
From thence they returned to Sora, where the new Consuls M. Petilius and Caius Sulpitius, tooke the armie at the handes of Fabius the Dictatour: who discharged many of the old soldiors, and brought certaine new cohortes for supply in their steed. But when by reason of the difficult and unaccessible site of the towne, they knew not well which way and by what meanes to make assault, and seeing that the winning of it would either aske long time, or be exposed to manifold and present dangers: a certaine runaway traitour of Sora who was closely stollen out of the towne, gat to the Romane Sentinels, and required forthwith to be brought to the Consuls: who beeing presented before them, promised to betray the towne: and being questioned withall, how and by what meanes he would performe that which he undertooke, seemed unto them to alleage some reasons to good purpose, and prevailed so farre with them, that he caused the Romane campe, which lay in a manner close under the wals, to be removed fixe miles off the towne, saying, that thereby, the wards by day, and the watch by night, would be neglected, and lesse carefull and diligent to keepe the citie. Himselfe the night following after he had willed certain cohorts of footmen, to lye in ambush within the woods neere the towne, tooke with him ten elect and chosen souldiers; and through steepe places, and such as

 were not well passable, conducted them into the Castle, having brought thether more shot and darts to throw, than to serve so small a number of men: besides, there was good store of stones at hand, which lay there, either scattering by chaunce (as commonly in such craggie and rockie ground) or els heaped together by the townesmen of purpose, for the better defence of the place. Where, after he had bestowed the Romanes, and shewed them a narrow and steepe pathway out of the towne into the Castle, From getting up heere (quoth he) there needes no more but three men onely well armed, to keepe backe the greatest multitude that is: yee are in number ten, and more than that, Romanes; and of Romanes the most hardie and valiant: the place will steed you, I know, the darkenesse of the night will be for your purpose, the night, I say, which by reason of uncertainties, maketh all things seeme much more than they are, to men affrighted  and amazed alreadie. I will for my part set all presently in a hurrie, looke you in the meane time that yee duly keepe the fortresse. This sayd, he runs downe with as great a noyse and showting as he could,So^a surprised by neason. crying Al'arme, help help citizens, the Castle is taken by the enemie, come away to defense. These words he resounded ever, as he rapped at the gates of the principall citizens and noblemen: these words he redoubled alowd, to all that he met, and to as many as ran forth affrighted into the streetes. This fearefull alarme received from one man, was set abroad by many more all over the citie. The Magistrates quaking for feare, sent certaine to the Castle in espiall to discover the truth: and advertised by them that the Castle was surprized indeede by armed men, and full of armour (for they made the number and everything els more than it was) were cleane put out of all hope to recover their fortresse. So every where they fell to running  away: the gates were broken open by them that were not well awake, and those most part unarmed. At one of the gates, those companies of the Romanes aforesaid, who lay in ambush, and were raised with the noyse and clamor, brake in, and killed all that in this affright ran headlong in their way. Thus was Sora woon, against the Consuls should come in the morning betimes by breake of day: and looke whose fortune it was to scape out of the massacre made in the night, and to flye away, those they tooke to mercie upon their submission: whereof 225. euen those who by the generall voyce of all were pointed at, and reputed above the rest the principall actors in that horrible massacre abovesayd, of the Romaine Coloners, inhabitants, and the authors of the revolt, they had away with them to Rome, bound hand and foote. The other multitude they left at Sora safe and unhurt, and planted there a garrison. All they that were brought  to Rome, were in the market place skourged with rods, and beheaded, with the exceeding joy and contentment of all the commons, whom it concerned most, that the multitude which should be sent into sundrie Colonies, might in every place live in safetie, and securitie of their lives.
The Consuls being departed from Sora, marched forward to make warre upon the lands and territories of the Ausonians; for by the comming of the Samnites after the battaile of Lautulae, they were all out, full of insurrections and commotions, and many conspiracies there were in all places about Campania: neither was Capua itselfe without blame and faultlesse. Nay, this matter passed as farre as to Rome, where information was made against some of the Nobles, and warning given to enquire into them. But the whole nation of the Ausonians, by reason that the Cities were betrayed like as Sora, was reduced under obedience to the people of Rome.
Ausonia,  Minturnae, and Vestina were the Cities, out of which, twelve of the chiefe young Gentlemen having conspired and sworne together to betray their owne Cities,A Conspiracie of the Ausonians. presented themselves unto the Consuls; giving them to understand, that their countrymen wished long ago for the comming of the Samnites, and so soone as they heard of the battaile before Lautulae, made account that the Romanes were utterly vanquished, and helped the Samnites both with men and munition. But now, say they, that the Samnites were chased from thence, they lived unresolute in doubtfull termes of peace, and shut not their gates in dred upon the Romanes, for feare of bringing warre upon themselves, yet obstinantly bent to shut them, if their army approched toward them. In this wavering and doubtfull floating of their minds, they might at unwares be sodainly surprised. By this persuasion of theirs, they encamped neerer, and at one and the selfesame time  were souldiers sent about those three townes before named, some in armour closely to lye in ambush in convenient places neere the walles: others in side gownes with swords under them, who alittle before day, so soone as the gates were set open, should enter into those Cities. By whome the matter was so handled, that at one instant they began to kill the warders at the gates, and gave a signall to those armed souldiers who lay in ambush, for to rise all at once and come to

succour. Thus were the gates seized and possessed, and three townes in one houre by the same  stratageme surprized. But because this exploit was performed in the absence of the Captaines, there was no stay in execution and carnage, but beyond all measure, and without all mercy, no sexe nor age was spared: and so the whole nation of the Ausones, before they were detected for certaine of revolt, was destroyed and extinguished, as if they had warred mortally, and bene at deadly feawd.
The same yeare Luceria came into the hands of the Samnites, by reason that the citie had betrayed and delivered the Romaine garison to them; but the traytors went not long unpunished for it. The Romaine armie chaunced to be not farre from thence, and at the first assault, the citie standing as it did on a plaine, was woon. The Lucerines and Samnites both were put to the sword every one: and so farre forth procceded their furious rage, that when the Senat fate in  counsel at Rome, about sending men to inhabit Luceria, many were of mind, that the citie it selfe should be rased to the ground and destroyed: for besides the cursed and execrable hatred they bare against them being twise conquered, and as often revolted; the distance also of the place so remote, caused them to mislike greatly, and abhorre the confining as it were of their citizens, so far from home, to live amongst such a kind of people so cruell and dangerous. Howbeit, their opinion tooke place and prevailed; who gave advise, that Coloners and inhabitants should thither be sent, and to the number of 2500. were there planted.
The same yeare when as the Romaines found all unloyall unto them, and nothing but falshood on all sides; at Capua also certaine secret conspiracies of the Nobles and best of the Citie were detected and revealed. Touching which, the Senates advise was asked, and the matter not  neglected by them, but commissions were appointed: and thought good it was that a Dictator should be nominate, for to fit upon the same commissions and inquisitions. And C. Maenius was created, who named M. Fillius Generall of Horse. Great was the terrour of that Magistrat, and thereupon, either for feare, or guiltinesse of conscience, the two Calavij, Ovius and Novius, who were the chiefe of that complot, before information was given against them by name to the Dictator, died: and questionlesse by their own hands shortned their daies, and so avoided the triall of justice and punishment accordingly. After that, when the inquisition wanted subject matter once about the Capuans, the Inquisitors (by interpretation of the words in the commission) proceeded to Rome, saying, that the Senate had good warrant to make enquirie and streight search, not by name and precisely, who at Capua onely; but generally, who in any place whatsoever, had  used conventicles, and conspired against the Common-wealth: and all secret meetings, say they, and packings together, for to get dignities and Offices, were directly against the State and Commonwealth: so that the Commission extended larger both for person and reall action. Yea and the Dictator himselfe nothing gainesaid, but that the vertue of his Commission was directed without limitation. Hereupon were certaine Gentlemen of the Nobility brought into question: and notwithstanding they called unto the Tribunes for to assist them, with interposing their negative, yet there was not one of them would succour and releeve them, but presentment was taken against them, and they indited. Then the Nobility, I meane not them alone who were in trouble, but generally the whole Gentrie of the City, at once, pleaded, That they were not the naturall and true Noblemen indeede, who were to be touched and charged with this crime: who if it were  not for sinister and indirect courses, had easie and open accesse unto all honourable places and promotions; but certaine new upstarts and Gentlemen of the first head: saying, That it was the very case of the Dictator himselfe, and his Generall of horse, who were rather parties guiltie, and offenders themselues, than sufficient inquisitors, and competent judges: and that should they well know and understand, when they were once out of their place and office. This made Manius to bestirre himselfe, who mindfull rather of his good name and reputation, than respectiue of his high place and absolute government, went up into the common place of audience before all the people,The Oration of Manius the Dictatour. and spake to this effect.
My maisters and friends all, Citizens of Rome, well assured I am, that privie ye are to the whole cariage and course of my former life; and besides that, even this very honor and dignitie which you have bestowed upon me, is able to testifie and  approve mine innocencie. For, to sit upon these inquisitions, there was not to be chosen now for Dictatour (as oftentimes heretofore, according to the dangerous occasions and necessitie of the time) a man reputed the best and noblest warrior of all other; but such a one, as throughout his whole life hath most of all misliked and condemned ambitious conventicles.

 Howbeit, for as much as certaine persons of noble linage, (for what cause, it is more meet for you to deeme and judge, than for me being a Magistrate, to speake without booke, as they say, and upon no sure ground) first have endevoured with all their might and maine to overthrow the processe of the inquisition it self; and afterwards, seeing they were not able themselves to bring that about (notwithstanding they were Patrity) have fled to the holds of their very adversaries, even the protection of the Tribunes and their negative, rather than to justifie themselves and stand to the triall of their cause: and at last having there also a repulse (thinking all meanes safer than to approve their innocencie) have fallen upon us, and bashed not (privat men as they are) to accuse and touch the person of him that is Dictatour: to the end therfore, that both God and man, and all the world may know, that as they have assaied to compasse that which they are not  able to bring to passe, namely, to avoid the rendering an account of their life and demeanor; so; I am readie (to set forward their accusations) to offer my selfe unto mine adversaries; and giving them meanes to call mee to mine answere, here I resigne up my Dictatourship. And I beseech you, o Consuls, if so bee this charge bee laid on you by the Senate, to proceed in examination against mee first, and this gentleman the Generall of horse M. Fellius: that it may appeare, how we, through our owne innocencie alone, and not by the countenance and priviledge of our dignitie and high calling, are protected and safe from these slanders and intended crimes. Herewith hee gave over his place of Dictatour: and after him incontinently, M. Fellius yeelded up his roume likewise of Generall over the horse. These persons were the first, who being charged and put to their triall judicially before the Consuls, (for to them by order from the Senate, was the  commission directed) notwithstanding all the depositions and testimonies of the Patritij, were in every point found unguiltie, and acquit. P. Philo also, albeit hee had so many times attained to the supreme dignities of state, after he had atcheeved so many worthie deeds, as well in peace as warre, yet a man malliced or envied rather of the Nobilitie, was put to plead for himselfe, and finally absolved. But this inquirie into such men of name and qualitie, lasted no longer in force, (as it is usually seene) than whiles it was fresh, and in the first heat therof. From them it began to fall to persons of lesse reckoning and baser account, untill such time, as by the same conventicles and factions, against which it was devised, it fell to the ground, and was troden underfoot.
The bruit of these things, and more than that, the hope of the Campaines revolt, whereto certaine had conspired and sworn (as ye have heard) recalled the Samnites backe againe to Caudium, who were turned and bent wholly into Apulia: that from thence, being so neer at hand unto  Capua, they might (if haply any insurrection and trouble presented the ouverture and opportunitie) seize upon it and take it perforce from the Romanes. Thither came the Consuls with a strong and mightie armie: and at the first they staied and lingered about the passes and streights, having on the one side and the other an ill way of passage unto the enemies. Afterwards the Samnites fetching a short compasse about, came downe with their armie through the open places into the plains, I mean, the champaine countrie and fields about Capua. And that was the first time that the enemies had a fight one of the others campe. Whereupon by light skirmishes, on horsebacke oftener than on foot, they tried maisteries on either side: neither were the Romans one jot discontented with the issue and event thereof, nor repented of the delay wherby they drew the warre alength. Contrariwise, the Samnite captaines perceived their forces to weare daily  by small losses, and their courage to coole and decay evidently by that lingering war. Wherupon, they came abroad into the field, and devided their Cavallerie into wings: with a speciall charge, to have a more carefull eie backward toward their campe (for fear of any impression and assault that way) than to the maine battaile: which would be guarded safe enough by the infanterie. The Coss.marshalled themselves in this manner, Sulpitius led the right point of the battel, and Petilius the left: the right side (wheras the Samnits also were arraunged in thinner ranks and files, of purpose to compasse and environ the enemies, or not to bee compassed and enclosed themselves) shewed itself more broad and open. They on the left hand, besides that they stood thicker and more close, were by occasion of a suddain policie of Petilius the Cos. further strengthened. For those cohorts and bands which were reserved apart in the rereward, for help at any need, and kept  fresh against all occurrents and hazards of long fight, he advanced presently to the forefront in the vaward, and with all his forces at once charged the enemie at the first encounter, and forced him to recule. When the footmen of the Samnites were thereby troubled and disarraied, the horsemen followed close and entred into the medley. But as they rode crosse and overthwart between

the two hostes, the Romane horsemen pricked and gallopped their horses to flanke them; and  disordred and hudled the ensignes, guidons, squadrons and troupes of foot and horse, pell-mell together, until he had caused the whole battaile of that side, to turne their backs. In this left point not Petilius alone, but Sulpitius also joined with him, and was present in person to exhort and encourage the souldiours: for he had transported and distracted himselfe from his owne men, who as yet were not come to joine battell at the crie and shout that arose first from the left side: and seeing on that part undoubted victorie, he went towards his owne charge, accompanied with a 1200 men: Where he found a change of fortune, namely, the Romans to have reculed and lost ground, and the enemie as victour, advancing forward his ensignes upon them sore dismaied and daunted. Howbeit, the Consull his comming made a present alteration: for both at the fight of their captaine were the souldiours hearts refreshed and comforted; and for to aid them, there came a greater supplie indeed, than in shew of number, of tall and lustie men. So when they heard first, and saw soone after, the victorie gotten of the other part, they renued the fight. After this on all sides the Romanes had the better hand, and the Samnites giving over fight, were either slaine or taken prisoners: saving only those, who fled to Maleventum a town now named Beneventum. It is left in record, that there were upon 30000 Samnites, either left killed in the place, or brought away captive.
The Consuls having obtained this notable victorie, forthwith from thence lead their Legions, to lay siege unto Bovianum: and there wintered before the towne, untill such time as C. Petilius (chosen Dictatour together with M. Fellius his Generall of the horse, by the new Consuls L. Papyrius Curser the fifth time, and C. Iun. Bubulcus the second time) received the armie at their  hands. Who hearing, that the castle of Fregellae was by the Samnites taken, left Bovianum, and went forward to Fregellae, which he recovered again without drawing his sword; for that the enemies had quit the place, and were fled by night: and when hee had placed a strong garrison there, he returned from thence into Campania, of speciall purpose to regaine Nola by force of armies. Thither were retired within the wals, a little before the Dictatour his comming, both all the whole multitude of the Samnites, and the rusticall peasants about Nola. The Dictatour having viewed the situation of the towne, to the end hee might have the more open accesse to the wals, set all the houses on fire that were in the suburbes along the counterscarpe (and there they stood thicke and were well inhabited.) And not long after, whether it were by Petilius Dictatour (I know not) or C. Ianius Consull (for it is reported as well of the one as the other) Nola was forced and won. They that would draw unto the Consull the honour of winning Nola, ad moreover and say, That he woon also Atina and Calatia: and that Petilius upon a pestilence that began, was made Dictator, for the setting or fastening of a spike or great naile. Two Colonies that yeare were conducted to Suessa and Pontia. Suessa belonged to the Aurunci. The Volscians inhabited the Iland Pontiae, situate over against their owne shore within a kenning. And a decree passed from the Senate, that to Cassinum also, a third Colonie, there should be sent inhabitants. M. Valerius and P. Decius, the Consuls that next succeeded, ordained three Triumvirs, for that purpose, and sent foure thousand to people those places.
The warre with the Samnites was in a manner now dispatched and brought to an end: but before that the Nobles and Senators of Rome had left the care thereof, a brute was blowne of the  Tuscanes warre. And there was not in those daies, another nation (setting the Gaules tumults aside) whose forces and hostilitie they more feared, for that their countrie was so neere a neighbour and so populous withall. Therefore, whiles one of the Consuls was occupied in dispatching the reliques of the warre in Samnium, P. Decius who staied at Rome grievously sicke, by authoritie of the Senate, named Dictatour C. Iunius Bubulcus. He according as the important affaires required, caused all the younger fort to take the militarie oth, and prest them for souldiours. Armour and whatsoever requisite besides, with great diligence he prepared. And albeit hee were thus furnished and well appointed, yet was hee nothing bold and forward to begin war, willing (no doubt) to be quiet and stand upon his guard, unlesse the Tuscanes shewed themselves first in armes. The same purpose had the Tuscanes also, both in preparing for warre, and in making stay to begin war. So, of neither side they departed out of their owne limits.
In that yeare was there a famous Censorship of App. Surnamed Cae^^ (...) Bli^ (...) Blind. Cladius and C. Plautius. But the name of Appius became more memorable of the twaine, and of happier renowne unto posteritie, for that hee paved with stone the causey or Appiae vis. Port-way (bearing his name) and conveighed a channell

 of Out of the river Anv, and (...) called Agua Claudia. water into the cittie of Rome. Which workes hee finished alone, for that his Colleague for shame of an infamous and odious choise of certaine Senators which he made gave over the office. But Appius having the stout stomack, engraffed in his name and house from the beginning, bare the Censourship alone. By the motion and meanes of the same Appius, the Potitij, to whose familie properly belonged the priestly service, at the alter of Hercules called Maxima, had taught certaine publicke servants (for that the function might be committed over to them as delegates) the solemne rites and ceremonies of that sacred ministerie. Hereupon is reported a wonder to be spoken, and that which might strike a scruple of conscience, and make men afraid ever after, to alter any thing in religion from the former state and first institution. For whereas at the same time, there were twelve houses of the Potitij, and in themupon a thirtie that were above  14 years of age; within one year it (is said that) they died all, with their whole issue and off-spring. Moreover, that not onely the name of the Potitij became thus extinct, but that Appius also the Censor, within certaine yeares (such was the ire of the gods, mindfull of revenge) fell stark blind. Therefore the Consuls that followed in the next yeare, C. Iunius Bubulcus the third time, and Q. Aemylius Barbula the second time, in the very entrance of their office framed a complaint unto the people: That by the leawd and corrupt Election of some new Senators, that honourable state and order was deformed, and namely, how some were over-hipt, who were of more worth than those that were taken in: And saying plainly, That they would not observe and have in any regard, such a choice, which without respect of good and bad, was made for favor and affection to some, and at the pleasure of the Censors: and immediatly they cited the Senat by name in that order  and forme, as had been used before the Censors, App. Claudius and C. Plautius.
And in that yeare were two places of charge and command, first given by the people, both pertaining to warfare: the one, that sixteen Colonels for foure A Legion consisted (...) of ^000 footmen: (...) as other (...) of 3000, 5000, sea, and 6000. and the Colonels fewer or more in a legion, according to the quantitie therof. There belonged besides to every legion ordinarily 300 Lose. With whom the Tribunes or Colonels aforesaid had nothing to do, being captaines of 1000 foot a piece. Legions, should from that time forward by the people be created, which before were in a manner the gifts and favours, conferred by the Dictatours and Consuls; and fewe or none of the people had any hand or voice therein. This Act and Ordinance was propounded by L. Petilius and C. Martius, Tribunes of the Commons. The other was, That the same people should have the appointment and ordaining of two Duumvirs at sea, for the rigging, repairing, and trimming of the navie. The maker of this Act was M. Decius, another Tribune of the Commons.
I would let passe one thing that happened this yeare, as of small weight and importance, and not worth the speaking, but that it seemed a matter pertinent to religion. The minstrels that plaied  upon the fluit and haut-bois, for that they were prohibited and debarred by the last Censors, to have their good cheare any more in the temple of Iupiter, according to an old custome and tradition; tooke snuffe thereat, and in a pelting chaufe all in one companie, went their waies to Tybur: so, as there was not one of them in the cittie left to sing and pipe before the pompe of sacrifices, and on their feastivall daies. The Senate made some conscience hereof, and were troubled in their mind. Whereupon they dispatched certaine messengers to Tybur, to travell with the townesmen, and endevour all they could, that these good fellowes might bee restored and sent home againe to the Romanes. The Tyburtines undertooke the matter, and promised right courteously to doe their best: and first they sent for these musicians into their towne hall, and persuaded  with them to returne againe to Rome: but when they could not bee brought to that, for any thing they could do, then they wrought another pollicie and feat with them, that sorted and fitted well the humour of such kind of people, and of their coat. Vpon a feastivall hollyday, under a colour of making merrie with minstrelsie and musicke about them, some invited one, and some another, to give them a fit of mirth accordingly. But they plied them so with wine (which all the sort of this profession love but too well) that they dranke untill they wincked, and winked so long, till they fell fast asleepe. And being found asleepe, the Tyburtines brought them gently to their beds in certaine waggons, and thus bestowed, conveighed them to Rome. Neither perceived they ought, senselesse druncken nols they, before that their waggons were left in the market place of Rome, Nay, before they had slept out and concocted their wine that steemed  up into their heads, and clouded there, the day light came upon them, and then they awoke. The people came running together from all parts to them, and after they had either gotten at their hands, or charged them to stay, and make no more such braides, it was graunted unto them that three daies every year, being disguised and dressed in a mask for the purpose, they might range and walke about the cittie, with singing, and founding their instruments, after this licentious maner

and joilitie, which now a daies is yearly used, and their priviledge of eating in the temple was  restored to them again, namely to such as sung and plaied in time of their divine service and sacrifices: and all was well. This ridiculous pageant hapned amid the care and preparation of two great and dangerous warres.
The Consuls parted their provinces betweene them: To Iunius fell by lot the Samnites, to Aemylius the new warre in Hetruria. In Samnium, Cluvia, a fortresse and hold of the Romanes being impregnable by any assault, was a long time besieged; and forced by extreame famine, was delivered up to the Samnits. After they were once masters of the fort, they tooke the garrison soldiors, and not withstanding they yeelded themselves, yet they whipped and tare their flesh most beastly, and in the end, without all mercy killed them. Iunius exceeding wroth at this crueltie, thinking nothing more needfull to be done first, than the winning againe of Cluvia, laid  all other matters aside, and the same day that he assailed the wals, tooke it by force, and flue all he could finde above fourteene yeare of age. In this traine of victorie the armie was brought against Bovianum. This was the chiefe place of the Pentrians in Samnium, the welthieft cittie, the best provided, and most furnished of all other with men and munition. The soldiors verie eager and sharpe set for hope of a rich pillage, wan the towne. But for that they were nothing so angrie and hote of revenge as before, they dealt not so cruelly with the enemies: but they got together and caried away more spoile and faccage from thence, than they ever had well neere, out of all Samnium; and as liberally was it bestowed everie whit upon the soldiors. And for as much as no pitched battaile in plaine field, no campe so well forrified, no citties and fortes howsoever sensed, were able to withstand the puissant Romanes in force of open  armes: all the Princes in Samnium studied and applied their wits, to find meanes of sleight and subtile pollicie; if haply, as they wasted and forreied the territories after a loose and licentious manner, the armie disbanded once, might be entrapped and enclosed within some ambush. Irsell out so, that certaine fugitive pezants of the countrie, and captives, some by
chance and other of purpose, comming in their way, made relation of tidings to the Consuls, well agreeing all in one tale, and the same founding of a truth indeed; namely that a great sort of sheepe, and other cartell were driven together into a by-forrest out of the way: and so induced them to lead thither the legions lightly armed, and to fit their hands with a fat bootie. Now the Samnites had privily foresaid all the high waies with a mightie armie, and after that they saw the Romanes to have entred and engaged themselves within the chase or forrest aforesaid, all of a suddaine they  rose up and with a great crie and shout ran upon them to charge them when they least thought of any such thing. At the first this so strange and unexpected occurrence, made them afraid, while they tooke them to their weapons, and laid their fardels and baggage together on a heape in the mids. But after that every man was eased of his lode, and had put on his armor, they rallied on all sides to their ensignes; and without the commaundement or direction of any man, they of themselves put the battaile in array, ech one knowing his raunge and place according to the accustomed order of the ancient Militarie discipline.(...) the Consull to his soldiours.
The Consull perceiving that hee was brought to a most doubtfull and dangerous battaile, alight from his horse; and protested before Iupiter and Mars, and the other gods whom he called all to witnesse: That he came not into that place to get glorie to himselfe by any enterprise, but onely a bootie for his soldiours: and that  no fault else could be imputed unto him, but an overmuch desire and affection of his, to enrich his soldiors by the spoile of the enemie. From which blame and shame both, nothing could free and acquitie him else, but the manhood and proesse of his soldiors: exhorting them with one accord, but to staie themselves and endeavour all together to set upon their enemie, defeated and vanquished in battaile, driven out of campe and field, bereaved of his townes and strong holds, and come now to attempt his last and utmost hope, of privie and theevish traines of forlaying, trusting vpon the vantage of the ground, and not pure force of armes. But whatplace is there now unaccessible or unpregnable to the valiant Romanes? Heerewithall he named the castle of Fregelle and Sora, and what place of disvantage and hard accesse soever, they had woon by force. With these words the soldiors encouraged and enflamed, forgetting all difficulties and dangers, marched apace and advanced forward up to the armie of the enemies that now approched them, and were over their heads. Where the Romanes found some difficultie, all the while they climed up the cliffe or ridge of the hil against them. But after that the formost ensignes were mounted up and had gained the plaine in the top, and perceived they were embattailed upon an even and

 equall ground, presently the terror turned upon those that lay in waite for them, and being disbanded, scattered, and driven to fling away their weapons, they fled and trudged as fast as they could, to recover againe those starting and lurking holes, wherein before they had hidden themselves. But even those difficult places which they had fought of purpose for their enemie, and their owne deceit and guile, encumbred themselves. For verie few of them could find the way out, and escape by flight. Insomuch as to the number of 20000 were slaine. And then the Romanes after this victorie, ran up and downe at their pleasure, to that bootie of sheepe and cattell, which was first presented unto them by the enemie, as a baite to catch them with.
Whiles these things thus went in Samnium, all the people of Hetruria by this time, but only the Aretines, were up in armes, and entred into a right great warre; beginning first with the  siege and assault of Sutrium: which cittie being allied to the Romanes, was (as a man would say) the verie Barriers of all Hetruria. Thither came the other Consull Aemylius with an armie, to rescue and deliver their allies, and to raise the siege. Against the Romanes comming, the Sutrines courteously brought victuals for the campe, lying before the cittie. The Tuscanes spent the first daie, in consulting whether they should make a short warre of it, by hot assaults, or temporise and protract the time by lingering siege. The morrow after, when as the captaines liked rather of expedition and hastie courses, than of more sage and safe proceedings, at the sunne rising they set out a flag of defiance and the signall of battel, and armed they go forth of their camp into the open field to fight. Which after it was told the Consull, presently he commaunded a watchword to be given, that the soldiors should take their breakfast: and after they had refreshed and  strengthned their bodies with food, go streight to arme themselves: which was obeied accordingly. The Consull seeing them well appointed in redinesse, commaunded the ensignes to advance forward out of the rampier, and not farre from the enemie marshalled his battailes. For a good while they stood on both sides, wistly looking, and waiting that the shout and charge should begin from the adverse part. But it was past noone before there was one dart flung or javelin lanced, either from the one side or the other. But then, because they should not go away without doing somwhat, the Tuscanes began to set up a crie, the trumpets sound the charge, and the standerds came forward. Neither were the Romanes any ot behind to begin battaile. Thus they ran to it, and encountred with exceeding animositie and furie; the enemies more in number, the Romanes better in hardines and vertue. The fight was doubtful, and dangerous, and cost  the life of many a man on both sides, and namely, those that were most forward and valiant: neither began they to shrinke on any part, before that the second battalion of the Romanes, fresh and lustie, advanced to the forefront of the vantgard, into the place of their wearied fellowes. The Tuscanes, for that their vaward was not supplied and reenforced by any new succours, both before and all about their ensignes were beaten downe and slaine everie man. Never in any one battaile had there been lesse running away, or more bloudshed, if the night had not protected the Tuscanes: so resolute were they all to die in the place: in so much as the winners gave over play before the loosers. After the sunne set, the retreat was founded: and by night both parts returned into the campe. After this, no exploit was performed before Sutrium that yeare, worth remembrance: both for that, the foreward of the enemies armie, was wholly in that one battaile  defaited and destroied; and they had none left but the Subsidiarie soldiors of the rereward, and those hardly able and sufficient to gard and defend the campe: and also, the Romanes were so hurt and fore wounded that there were more of them died after the battaile of their hurts, than were slaine in the verie medley outright. Q. Fabius Consull for the yeare following, succeeded and entered upon this warre at Satrium. And for his colleagne he had C. Martius Rutilius: and like as Fabius brought a new supply from Rome to furnish out the broken bands, so there came fresh forces also unto the Tuscanes, levied at home.
For many years there had been no jarres and debates, between the magistrates of the Nobilitie and the Tribunes of the Commons: but now there began a variance and contention, out of that familie and house, which even then was fatall (as it were) and born to do mischiefe to the Tribunes  and Commons both. Appius Claudius the Censor, after eighteen moneths expired (which by the law Aemylia, was the full terme of bearing that Magistracie) notwithstanding that C. Plautius his colleague, had given up his office; could by no meanes possible be forced himselfe to go out and give over the place. Then rose up one P. Sempronius, a Tribune of the Commons, who tooke in hand this matter, as touching the demission of the Censureship, within the time prefixed by

the law: an action doubtlesse, not more popular than just and rightfull, nor lesse acceptable to  the better sort, than pleasing to the verie Commons and base people. He having estsoones rehearsed and reiterated the law Aemylia, extolled with prayses up to the skye, the author and maker thereof, Mamercus Aemylius a Dictator; who had reduced the Censorship, an office aforetime of five yeares continuance (a puissance and authoritie, which by the length thereof favored of Lordship) within the compasse of a yeare and sixe moneths. Come on, quoth he Ap. Claudius, answere and say, what you would have done in case you had bene Censor, when C. Furius and M. Giganius were Censors? Appius answered and said, that this demaund and question of the Tribune, did not greatly touch or concerne his cause. For put the case, that the law Aemylia had obliged those Censors, during whose magistracie the Act was made, (for that after those Censors created, the people had graunted that law, and looke what they last allowed and  ordeined, the same was good, lawfull, and ratified) yet neither he nor any of them, who after that law enacted were created Censors, could be bound by vertue of that law.
Whiles Appius thus cavilled, and no man there present foothed him up, or gave applause and assent unto him:The Oration of P. (...) a Tribune of the (...) Behold Quirites, quoth Sempronius, againe, the progenie and race of that Appius, who being created Decemvir for one yeare, elected himselfe the second yeare: and in the third, being chosen neither by himselfe nor by any other, in qualitie of a private person, held the soveraigne dignitie and government, with all the regall marks and ensignes thereof: and thus continuing still in rule and dominion, would never give over, before that those usurped governments of his, ill gotten, badly borne, and naughtily kept and reteined, were his finall fall and utter overthrow. This is the same family and house, (my maisters and friends, citizens of Rome) by  whose violence, by whose wrongs and oppression, ye were driven like poore banished persons to forgo your owne deere native countrie, and to seise and hold the Mount Sacer; the very same, against which ye procured and purchased to yourselves, the support and helpe of Tribunes; the same, for which with two armies ye were faine to possesse your selves of the Aventine hill; the same; that alwayes withstood the Statutes devised against Vsurie; the same, that ever impugned the lawes for division of wast lands among the people; the same brake for the time, and interrupted the mariages betweene the Nobles and commons; the same kept out the commons so long from bearing any Dignities of the Chaire, and of State: finally, this name is much more spightfully and mortally bent against your freedome, than that of the Tarquines. And is it so indeede, o App. Claudius? would you have vs beleeve, that being now an hundred yeares since  Ma^ercus Aemylius was Dictator, there have bene so many Censors most noble and valiant personages, that none of them all ever read the twelve Tables? and none of them knew that to be law which the people last granted and allowed? Yes ywis, they all wist that well enough: and therupon yeelded they, and obeyed rather the law Aemylia, than the old and auncient Statute, (whereby at first Censors were created in the common wealth) even because the people approved it last: and by reason, that where there are two ordinances repugnant and contrarie one to the other, there the new, alwayes repealeth and abrogateth the old. And is this your saying, o Appius? That the people are not bound to the law Aemylia? or rather that they are tyed unto it, but your good selfe alone, is free and exempt therefro? Was the law Aemylia able to bridle and curb those violent Censors C. Furius, and M. Giganius, who shewed sufficiently what harme and mischiefe  this magistracie could do in a common-wealth, when for anger and despite that their terme was abridged and cut short, they disfranchised, and deprived of the right of voyce and Suffrage, yea and brought within the raunge of Tributaries, M. Aemylius the worthiest and most excellent personage of his time, both at home in peace, and abroad in warre?. This law tooke hold of all the Censors, one after another in order, for the space of an hundred yeares after; and bindeth now C. Plautius your Colleague, created with the same Auspices, and in equall authoitie with you. Tell me (I pray you) did not the people elect and make him with as good right and authoritie, as any Censor might be? Are you the only and speciall man amongst all others, to have this prerogative, this privilege and singular preeminence by yourselfe? Suppose a man should create the King Sacrificer, should he, having once gotten the name and title of a  King, give out and avouch, that he was a King indeede, of as great a prerogative as any King of Rome? Who, thinke you, will be content with a Dictatorship of sixe moneths, or with an Interreigne for five dayes and no more? Whom may a man boldly and confidently create Dictator either to fasten a spike or great naile? or for the stately playes and games, or horserunning, and

 such like? How foolish, thinke ye my maisters, how base-minded and simple were they in this man his conceipt, who within twentie dayes, after notable exploits done and achieved, gave over their Dictatorship? or they that being created, with some errour and default, went out of their place? But what neede I to rehearse examples of old date? Of late, even within these ten yeares, C. Menius Dictator, for enforcing a commission more severely, than stood with the safetie of some great and welthie persons, was charged by them with the guiltinesse of the same crime, wherupon he fate and made inquisition; who, to the end, that being a private person, he might answere the accusation of his adversaries, and justifie himselfe, resigned up his Dictatorship. But I would not, that you in any hand, were so modest: no, no, degenerate not a jote from that most imperious stock and prowd race: go not you forth of your office, howsoever you do, a day, no nor an  houre sooner, than you needsmust: but see then withall, that you exceede not the ordinary time limited and set downe. At lest wife, it might content you to draw out your Censureship a day longer, or to stretch it farther by a moneth. A moneth? what tell you me of a moneth? I will exercise my Censorship (quoth he) three yeares and sixe moneths, more than may be by the law Aemylia: yea, and by my selfe alone will I exercise it. Yea mary sir, this is somewhat like indeede, and spoken like a King. What? will you substitute unto you a Colleague in the roume of the other? will you so? whome lawfull it is not to be subrogated and chosen, no not in the dead his place? for you thinke it not enough, be like, that you (religious holy Censour that you be) have translated and transmitted, that most auncient solemnitie, and onely instituted by that good [Hercules] in whose honor it is celebrated, from the function of most  noble Sacrificers and Chaplaines, of that divine and sacred service, unto the ministerie of base servants, and abject slaves: and that a kinred and linage of greater antiquitie, than the very first foundation of this citie, so sanctified by interteinment and lodging of the immortall gods, by your meanes, and by occasion of your Censorship, within one yeare is rooted out and perished every mothers sonne: unlesse also by the same meanes, you hazard the whole commonwealth, and bring all into the same enormitie, and guilt of wickednesse, which even to osse and bode, my heart doth tremble and quake againe. In that Lustrum [or 5 yeares space] was the citie of Rome taken by the Gaules, wherein L. Papyrius Cursor, because he might not go out of his Censorship, tooke a colleague unto him, M. Cornel. Maluginensis, in the place of C. Iulius the Censor late deceased. And yet see, how much more sober and moderate was his ambitious humor  in that behalfe, than this of yours, o Appius. For L. Papyrius neither alone, nor yet beyond the just set time by law, administred his Censorship: yet found he never any one person after him, that would imitate and follow his example. All Censors from that time forward afterwards, upon the death of their fellow Censor, gave up the office. But as for you, notwithstanding that the date of your Censorship be fully out, and your companion in government departed out of the place; neither law nor shame, is able to rule and restraine. You suppose that vertue consisteth in pride, in audacius boldnesse, in contempt both of God and man. For mine owne part truly, o Ap. Claudius, for the reverence and majestie of this honorable place, which you have borne, I would not willingly enter into any such hard courses, as to touch your person by violence of hand; no nor so much as to offend your name with any soule or unkind  language. But as, these words that have alreadie passed, your own peevish and perverse frowardnesse, your opinative contumacie, and insolent pride, have wrung and forced from me: so unlesse you will obey the law Aemylia, by your leave, I will be so bould as commaund you to ward and prison. And since our forefathers and auncestors have so provided and ordeined, that in the Election of Censors, if either of the twaine come short of sufficient voices requisite for to choose him, the other can not be admitted and declared Censor; and so they must proceede againe to a new election, and the former Scrutinies are of no effect: shall I suffer you to exercise the Censorship alone, who may not lawfully be created alone? These and such like remonstraces after he had alledged, he commanded the Censor to be attached and committed. In these proceedings of his, sixe of his fellow Tribunes adhered unto him, and three onely assisted Appius;  who called instantly upon them for their protection and lawfull succour: and so with exceeding ill will, and highest discontentment of all states and degrees, he went cleere away, and bare the Censorship alone.
These matters thus passed at Rome, and Sutrium was besieged still by the Tuskanes: and as the Cons. Fabius was leading about at the foot of the hils, certain forces to succour his allies, and to assaile

saile the fortifications of the enemies what way he could, they with an armie in battaile array met  with him. Whose great multitude when hee might discover upon the plaines underneath, because he would helpe out the small number of his men by some advantage of the ground, he wheeled a little about, up toward the hill tops (which were rough and craggie places spred all over with stones) and from thence he turned his banners full upon the face of the enemies. The Tuscanes forgetting all things else, and thinking upon nothing but their multitude, whereof onely they presumed; gave battaile so hastily and in such greedinesse, that casting away their shot and darts from them, to the end they might the sooner come to hand strokes, they drew their swords, as they marched against the enemie. The Romanes on the contrarie side, laid load with shot, and plied them one while with darts, another while with the stones which the place plenteously affourded them. Which, as they thumped and clattered, andstucke upon their  shields and morions, although they hurt them not much, yet maskered them not a little: neither could the enemies easely come within them to fight neere and close, nor any dartes or javelins had they to fling and lance a farre off, and thereby to anoy their enemie. And whiles they stood stil exposed as buts, to receive all that came, and had nothing now to cover and protect them sufficiently; whiles some of them also gave ground and reculed, and the whole battell was wavering and unsteadie, the Roman Hastari and Principes, came forward with a new shout, and charged them a freth. This violent assault could not the Tuscans beare, but turning their ensignes, fled amaine in disaray toward their camp. But when as the Romane horsemen who were ridden over through the plaines and had gotten before, met them afront in the rout, they left their way unto the campe, and turned toward the mountaines: from whence with their whole companie in a manner  disarmed and sore wounded, they recovered the forrest Ciminia. The Romanes having slaine many thousands of the Tuscanes, gained thirtie eight ensignes of the field, and wan also their tents with rich pillage; began to consult about pursuing the enemie. The wood Ciminia was at that time more unpassable and to bee feared, than were of late daies the Germain forrests: for never to that day had it beene travailed and frequented so much as by merchants. And scarcely any one but the captaine himselfe durst venture to enter into it: for, all the rest had not forgotten as yet the unhappy lucke they had at Caudium. Then the Consul his brother, one that was there, (M. Fabius, as some say, as other, Caeso, and as other some C. Claudius, his brother only by the mother side) promised that he would go as a skout in spiall, to descrie the wood, and within a while bring certaine newes. He had in his tender yeares been brought up at Caere, among the  ancient friends of his house and familie, where afterwards he was taught the Tuscane learning and knowledge, and thereby was perfect in their toung and language. And I find some authors of credit that write, how in those daies the Romanes yoong children went to schoole for to learne to parle Tuscane, as now they do to speake Greeke. But it standeth more like a truth, that there was some speciall matter in this man, who with so bold semblance and dissimulation, durst intrude and insinuate himselfe amongst the enemies. It is said, that one onely servitour accompanied him, one who had beene brought up and nourced together with him, and thereupon not ignorant of the same language. And all the way as they went they did nothing else, but superficially and after a generall sort, learne the nature and site of the quarters which they were to enter into, and the names withall, of the chiefe rulers and principall personages of that countrie and nation: to the end that in their speech and talke, they might not falter and trip, and be taken tardie in any apparent thing, which might bewray and discover them. They went clad in pastorall weeds like heardmen, armed like countrie Kernes or peasants, ech of them with a faulchion and two javelins. But neither the familiar use and commerce of the toung, nor the fashion of apparrell which they ware, or weapons that they caried, saved them so much as this one thing, That no man would ever beleeve, that any foreiner and stranger durst enter upon those thicke Ciminian forrests. Well, forward they went (by report) as farre as to the Camertines in Vmbria. There, the Romane ventured to bewray who they were: and when he was brought into their Senat, he treated with them in the Consuls name, about a league and amitie. Whereupon, after he had beene courteously intertained and friendly intreated, he had his dispatch, and was willed to relate unto  the Romans, That there should be readie for their armie, sufficient victuals for one whole month, if they would come into those parts: Also, that the youth of the Camertines in Vmbria should be at their commaund, prest in armes at all times. These tidings being reported to the Consull, after that he had sent before his cariages at the first watch of the night, and commaunded the

 legions to goe after, himselfe staied still with the horsemen: and the morrow morning by daylight he began to skirmish with the corps de guard of his enemies, which were quartered without the forrest, and when he had long ynough kept them play, and amused them at his pleasure, hee retired into his camp; from whence he went forth at another gate, and before night overtaketh the main armie. The morrow after, at the point of day break, he was gotten up to the crest of the hill Ciminius: from whence, after he had beheld and viewed the goodly prospect of the rich grounds and fields of Hetruria, hee sendeth out his souldiours abroad to forage and fetch in prises, and by that time they had gotten, and were driving away a fat bootie, certaine tumultuarie bands of the rusticall peasants of Hetruria, gathered together in great hast, and of a suddain, by the States of that countrie, met with the Romans; but so out of order were they, that being come to rescue  a prey, they had like to have ben a prey themselves. A number of them were slain or put to flight, and the Romanes, having wasted and made spoile all over the countrie, enriched with store of all things, returned victorious into their camp. Thither were arrived (as it fel out) five messengers or pursevants with the Trib. of the Com. to warn and command Fabius in the name of the Senat; no^ to passe through the forrest Ciminius. But these messengers being glad that they came too late for to hinder and interrupt their enterprises, returned home again to Rome with news of the victorie.
By this expedition and journie made by the Cos. the war rather encreased and spread farther, than was dispatched and brought to an end. For all that tract lying along the bottome and foot of the mountain Ciminius, felt the smart of this rode: and provoked to anger and desire of revenge, not only the States of Hetruria, but also the borders and marches of Vmbria. Whereupon there  came to Sutrium, a greater power than ever afore: for not only they removed their camp forward out of the woods, but also for eager desire of fight with all speed, they come abroad into the plain field. Afterwards, they stood first embattelled in a plot, by them fitly chosen, leaving overagainst them a space of ground for the enemies to set themselves in order of battell: but perceiving the enemies to fall off, and no point fight, they approched the very trench and rampiers; but finding there, that the sentinels and guards were retired within their hold, al at once they began to crie with one voice to their captaines, for to give order, That the rest of their allowance of victuals for that day, should be brought them thither out of the camp; for they would stay in their armor and harnies, as they were, and either in the night, or els in the morning betimes by daylight, give the assault upon their enemies campe. The Roman armie was no more quiet than they, yet at their Generals  commandement kept in. Now it was welneer the Foure o clocke after noone. tenth houre of the day. When as the Consull willed his souldiors to take their refection, and warned them to be readie in armes at what hour soever by day or by night, hee should give them the signall of battaile. And in the meane time maketh a short speech unto them, praising highly, and setting out the Samnites warres, debasing the Tuscanes, saying, that there was no comparison betweene either enemie to enemie, or number for number: over and besides, he said that he had another seat and secret devise in store for them, which they should know when time served; in the meane while they must keepe silence of necessitie, and hold their peace. By these darke speeches and hidden mysteries, hee made semblance, as though hee had some privie intelligence, that one part of the enemies would betray the rest when time came: this did he, to the end, that the hearts of his souldiours (which haply  were dismaied and discouraged at their great multitudes) might bee comforted and refreshed: and for that the enemies lay abroad in field without any hold and fort, it was more likely and probable, which he pretended. The soldiours having taken their repast, they laid their bodies to repose and sleepe, and somewhat before the releefe of the Betweene two and three of the clocke in the morning. fourth watch, they were raised without noise, and armed themselves. The souldiors boies and lackies, and such as followed the campe, had mattockes and spades divided amongst them, to cast downethe rampire, and to fill up the ditches with the banke, whiles that within the compasse and circuit of the campe, they were marshalled in battaile array. The chosen A Cohorts is a regiment or band of 500 footmen commonly. Once in Li^ie we read of Quadringenta^^e cohortes, of 400 and no more. cohorts or bands were placed at the gates and passages forth. Then at the sound of trumpet, a little before day (which in summer nights, is the time of the deepest and soundest sleepe) the whole armie, when the rampire was laid along and levell, issued forth at  once, and charged the enemies on all sides, lying here and there scattered on the ground. Some before they were stirring, others halfe asleepe and halfe awake in their couches; but the greatest part, making hast in that suddaine fright to take armes, were slaine and cut in peeces. Few had time to put themselves in armour, and they having no ensignes, no colours to follow, and no captains to direct them, wereby the Romans soone discomfited, put to flight, and pursued in chase. Some

made hast to the campe, other to the woods, sundrie waies one from another. But the woods were  the safest place of refuge. For their campe pitched in a plaine, was the same day taken and woon. All the gold and silver there found, was by expresse commandement brought unto the Consull his pavilion; the rest of the pillage, was the souldiours share. Slaine and taken prisoners that day, there were of the enemies to the number of 60000. This so noble a battaile (some writers say) was fought on the other side of the wood Ciminia, before Perusia: who also report, that the cittie of Rome was in great feare, least that the armie being enclosed within so daungerous a wood, should have been surprised and defeated by the Tuscanes and Vmbrians, who were risen up in armes together from all parts. But whersoever it was fought, the Romanes had the day. Whereupon there came Embassadours from Perusia,(...) Cortona, and (...) Arretium, which were in manner the cheefe and principallcitties at that time of all Tuscane, treating and suing to the Romanes for peace, and a league: but they obtained truce onely for thirtie yeares.
During these affaires in Hetruria, the other Consull, C. Martius Rutilius, wan from the Samnites the towne (...) Allifas. Many other villages and castles were either utterly demolished and destroied by way of extreame hostilitie, or yeelded safe and whole unto their subjection. At the same time the Romane navie also, under the conduct of P. Cornelius, whom the Senate ordained Admirall of the seacoast, set saile for Campaine; and being arived at (...) Pompeij, the marriners and sea-servitours went a land to wast and harrie the territorie about (...) Nuceria: and after they had made spoile, and pilled by snatches the parts lying neerest unto the sea, from whence they might safely againe returne to their ships; they adventured farther for sweetnesse of gaine and bootie (as usually it falleth out) and so gave the al'arme to the enemies for to rise. As they stragled all over  the fields, no man madehead against them, at what time, as they might have beene soone slaine every one: but as they were returning with a disordered march, and stood not upon their guards, a troupe of the peasants of the countrie overtooke them, not farre from their ships, and ^ased them of their spoile and pillage, and slew some of them: the rest of the multitude, as many as escaped the sword, were chased to their fleet.
The journey of Q. Fabius beyond the forrest Ciminia, as it caused great feare in Rome, so it gave occasion of as joyfull newes in Samnium. For the rumour ran, that the Romane armie was shut up and besieged. And hereupon they called to remembrance, and alleadged the like example of a losse and shamefull disgrace at Caudium; reporting and giving forth, that these Romans being a nation greedie alwaies of encroching farther, and winning more ground, were through  the same rashnesse now runne headlong into the blinde forrests impassable, and environned not so much with the power and force of enemies, as the daungerous difficulties of those passages. In such sort as amid this joy of theirs, they envied also that fortune had turned the glorious honour of the conquest over the Romanes, from the Samnites to the Tuscanes. And therefore being well appointed with men and armour, they ran out from all parts, to tread down and confound C. Martius the Consull for ever: minding from thence, in case Martius would not abide a battell, to goe into Hetruria through the Marsi and Sabines. But the Consull met with them by the way; where was fought a sharpe and cruell battell with doubtfull event, and much effusion of bloud on both sides. And, as uncertaine as it was, whether part lost more bloud, yet the rumour went, that the Romans had the worse, by reason of the losse of certain knights and gentlemen of  Rome, and Colonels, and one Lieutenant; and that which made most, for that the Consull himselfe was hurt. Hereupon the brute (as commonly is seene) got more feathers still as it flew, and made every thing greater: so as the LL. of the Senat in Rome, were in great feare and perplexitie, and agreed to create a Dictatour. Neither was there any doubt at all, but that Papyrius Curfor should be the man, who in those daies was reputed the onely warriour above all others. But neither could they be assured of sending a messenger safely into Samnium (considering al the countrie was up in armes) nor that the Consull was for certaine alive. And as for the other Consull Fabius, upon an old secret and privat grudge, he malliced Papyrius: which quarell, least it might hinder the service of the Commonweale, the Senate thought good to send unto him certaine Embassadours (as it were) even such as had beene Consuls; who of their owne authoritie, as well  as by vertue of publick commission from the State, should admonish and counsell him to remit and forget all old displeasures and rancours, for his countries sake. When these personages were come to Fabius the Cos. and had delivered unto him the decree of the Senate, and used withall such speech and reasons of their own, as suted well to the errand they had in charge: the Cos. casting

 his eies downe toward the ground, departed from the embassadors without giving ever a word, and left them doubtfull what he would doe. But the night following, in the dead time (as the manner is) he nominated L. Papyrius for Dictator. And when these messengers or embassadors gave him great thanks for mastering and ruling his affections so exceeding well, he held his resolution still of silence, and without any answere given, or mention made of himselfe, dismissed them; that it might appeare, how upon a high mind and haughtie stomacke, he brideled and kept in that griefe of heart, and despiteous anger of his. Papyrius named C. Iunius Bubulcus commaunder of the horse. And whiles he proposed an act concerning the regiment and commaund of his armie, before the people assembled by the Curiae or wards, there hapned a matter of ominous presage, which caused that businesse to be put off until the next day: for that the ward Faucia,  which by lot had the prerogative now to give the first voices, was noted already for infamous and unhappie, in regard of two calamities which fortuned in both yeares, wherein the same Curiae likewise began the suffrages first; namely, the taking of the citie of Rome, and the Caudine peace. Macer Licinius maketh that ward ominous and unluckie, for a third losse and calamitie received at Cremera. But the next morrow, the Dictator, after he had taken new Auspices, went through with the act, and obteined his commission, and set forward with the legions lately mustered and enrolled upon the fearefull alarme given, that the Romane armie was passed the wood Cyminia, untill he arived at Longula: where, after he had received of the Consull Martius, the old bands of souldiers, he brought his forces into the field to give battaile. The enemies for their part seemed not to refuse fight: howbeit, as they stood armed and aranged,  and neither the one side nor the other would begin to charge, the night came upon them, and forced them to retire. Then they abode encamped neere together in rest and quiet for certaine dayes, neither distrusting their owne puissance, nor yet disdaining and despising their enemies. In this meane time there was some doings and war in Etruria; for both there was a battaile fought with the armie of the Vmbrians: howbeit, the enemies were rather discomfited and put to flight than slain, for that they were not able to hold out and maintain fight long with such courage and animositie as they began: and also neer the lake and Meer Lago di viterbo. Vadimon, the Tuskans had levied a new armie, according to a sacred law, wherby one man had chosen another (who as sworn brethren were to live and dye together:) where they fought a field, not onely with greater number, but also with more courage than ever at any time before; and with such heate of anger and malice one  against the other they encountred, that on neither side they thought of discharging shot and launcing darts, but began at first with their very swords to go to handstrokes: and the conflict being right fiercely begun, increased still, and waxed hoter in the very medley, and continued for a good while so doubtfull, that the Romanes thought they dealt not with Tuskanes so often by them defaited and vanquished, but with some new nation more warlike than they. No shew of flight on neither side; downe go the formost, and lay dead before their Standards: and least that the ensignes should be left naked and bare, and without defendants, the second raunge and ward of the battaillon came in place to supply the first: and so still new succours and fresh were set even as farre as from the rereward behind, destined for the last help and utmost refuge. And to that extremitie of travel and perill they proceeded, that the Romane horsemen abandoning their horses  alighted on foot, and were faine to go to the footemen in the forefront of the vaward, over armor, and over dead bodies, lying all spread upon the ground: which new troup and battaillon risen and sprung (as it were) afresh, to reenforce and strengthen their distressed fellowes, disordred the squadrons and ensignes of the Tuskanes. The other legionarie souldiours, wearied (as they were) followed hard, and seconded their violence and forceable charge, and at length brake through the ranks of their enemies. Then the Tuskanes as stiffe as they stood afore, began to have the worse, and certain bands gave side and reculed: and when they once turned back, they fell plainely to take their heeles and run away. This was the first day, that overthrew and laid along the puissance of the Tuskanes, who abounded so long in wealth and fortunate prosperitie. Their whole floure and strength which they had, was in this battaile slaine, and at the same vie  their camp woon and ransaked.
With like hazard and glorious successe in the end, was the warre managed with the Samnites soone after; who besides all other preparations and ordinarie furniture of warre, gave order that their armie should glitter and shine againe with a new kind of garnishing their harnesse and armours. For having divided their forces in two armies, the one had laied their sheelds with gold,

the other with silver. The forme and fashion whereof was this, that upper part wherewith the  brest and shoulders are covered, was broader, and the head of it of even heigth; but the nether end growing downeward to the bottome was more pointed wedgewise, for to weld it more nimbly: Their brest and stomack was fenced with spounges, the left leg armed with a good greeve, their morions with high crests made a shew of tall stature. The souldiers aforesaid with guilded sheilds, ware cotes of sundrie colours; the other with silvered, white linnen: and these had the leading of the right wing, or point of the battaile; but they of the left. The Romanes had a notice and knowledge alreadie what preparation there was of brave and goodly armour: and their Captaines had taught them afore, That a souldier ought to be dreadfull and terrible, not dight and decked in his damasked gold and silver, but trusting in the sharp edge of yron and steele, and a good heart and courage withall: and as for that other furniture, it was rather a good  bootie than armour of proo^e; faire and resplendent, before men come to the sharp, but foule and unseemely amongst bloudie wounds. The true ornament and beautie of a souldier, is valour and hardinesse; as for all those braveries, they went commonly with victorie: and to conclude, that a rich enemie would serve well for a good prize to the conquerour, were he never so poore and needie. With these speeches, after that Curfor had animated his souldiers, he leadeth them into the field: himselfe he put in the right wing: the left he committeth to the conduct of the Generall of horse. So soone as they charged one another, and buckled together, a great conflict and hardie had they with the enemie, and no lesse emulation there was betweene the Dictator and him; striving avie whether of them twaine should begin the victorie. But as hap was, first Iunius disordred the enemie, and from the left point which he commanded, he charged right  lustily the right wing of the enemies: saying ever and anon, That he offered and sacrificed unto the Devill and infernall spirits, those souldiers of theirs, consecrated alreadie unto them after the manner of the Samnites, and decked accordingly in white liverie, and bright silvered armour, suting in colour thereunto: and withall advanced forward his standerds, brake their araies, and made the battaile to shrinke evidently and recule. Which when the Dictator perceived, How now quoth he, shall the victorie begin at the left wing, and shall the right, wherein the Dictator fighteth in person, come behind and follow the battaile of another, and not cary away with it the greatest part of the victorie? Herewith he setteth on his souldiours, yet gave the horsemen no place in manhood to the footemen, nor the service of the Lieutenants was inferiour to the Captaines themselves and chiefe commaunders: M. Valerius on the right point, P. Decius on  the left, both Consular men, put themselves forward, and rode out to the horsemen aranged in the wings, exhorted them to take part with them in honor, and charged acrosse upon the sides and flanks of the enemies. Whiles this new terror upon the former, had on every side entred the battaile of the enemies; and the Romane legions, to terrifie them the more, had redoubled a fresh shout, and charged them with great furie, then began the Samnites to flie amaine. Now were the fields overspread with the bodies of slaine men, and strewed thick with armour, erewhile so brave and glorious: and at the first, the Samnites in great affright recovered their tents; but being there, were not able so much as to keepe them, for they were woon and rifled before night, and fire set upon them. The Dictator by a decree of the Senate triumphed: and the said armour which was taken from the enemie, made the goodliest pageant of all other, in the pomp of triumph: which caried so stately a shewe and magnificent, that the guilded shields were devided amongst the warders of the companie of Bankers and Goldsmiths, to the beautifying of their Hall and Market place. And hereof began first the custome of the Aediles, to adorne and set out the common place of the citie in their solemne processions, when the sacred images of the gods, and holie reliques were caried about for pomp in silver chariots. And the Romanes verily for their part put this goodly trim armour of their enemies to this use, namely, to honor their gods withall. But the Campaines upon a pride, and inveterate hatred that they bare against the Samnites, used to arme their swordplayers and fensers at the sharpe (which was a solemne sight and pastime they had at their greatfeasts) with this same attire, and termed them in mockerie, by the name of Samnites.
The same yeer Fabius the Consull fought with the rest of the Tuscanes at Perugia. Perusia (which cittie also had broken the covenant of truce) where neither doubtfully nor hardly hee obtained victorie. And the very towne it selfe he had forced and woon (for in the same train of his conquest hee approched the wals) but that their Embassadours came forth and yeelded the cittie. When

 he had placed a good garrison at Perusia, and sent before him to Rome unto the Senate, the Embassadors of Hetruria, who treated for peace; he being but Consull, made his triumphant entrie into the cittie, for a more magnificent victorie, than the Dictatour. And for that a good part of the honour of subduing the Samnites, was ascribed to the Lieutenants P. Decius, and M. Valerius, therefore at the next Election, the people with great assent declared the one Consull, and the other Pretour. Fabius for taming Hetruria so bravely and valiantly, continued Consull still, and had for his Colleague P. Decius. Valerius was created Pretour the fourth time. The Consuls parted betweene them the provinces, Hetruria fell to Decius, Samnium to Fabius. Who taking his voiage to Nuceria, laid siege to the citie of the Allifates, and woon it by assault: and notwithstanding they made suit for peace, hee rejected and despised them; for that when it  wasoffered, they would not accept it. With the Samnites he fought a battaile: but without any great conflict, the enemies were vanquished. Neither had the remembrance of that field ben left in record, but that the Marsians first tooke armes and warred with the Romanes. After the Marsians were revolted, the Valuenses. Pelignians did the semblable, and sped alike. Decius also the other Consull had good successe in his warres. He drave the Tarquinians for feare, to find the armie corne, and to sue for a truce of fortie yeeres. Certaine castles and holds of the Volsiniens, he forceably wan: some of them he utterly rased, for that they should not be any receptacle or harbor for the enemies. And with warring round about every where, hee became so terrible, that the whole Tuscane nation made sute to the Consull for peace and confederacie. It, they could not obtain; but truce for a yeere was granted. In regard whereof, for that yeere they satisfied the whole pay  for the armie, and a double liverie for every souldiour was exacted and taken of them. This was the pension and fine that their truce cost them.
But now when all was quiet among the Tuscanes, the suddaine revolting of the Vmbrians, a nation free, and saved hitherto from the calamities of warre, but onely, that the Romane armie passed through their territories troubled all anew: for they having raised the strength and flower of their youth, and sollicited also a great part of the Tuscanes to rebell, levied so great a power, that making no accompt of Decius, whom they left behind them in Hetruria, they gave out proud words of themselves, and spake basely of the Romanes, vaunting and boasting that they would march right forth to assault Rome. Which dessigne of theirs, so soon as it was reported to Decius the Col. he made speed, and by long journies departed out of Hetruria toward the citie,  and in the countrie of the Papinians, encamped himselfe; listening ever after the enemies, what they ment to do. Neither at Rome was the Vmbrians war neglected and set light by: for their verie threats and menaces scared them, as who alreadie hadseene by experience, by the soile they had at the Gaules hands, how unsure a cittie they inhabited and not unpregnable. Therupon messengers were dispatched to the Cos. Fabius, That if he had any breathing time, and rest from the Samnits war, he should with all speed lead his armie into Vmbria. The Cos. obeied, and by great journeis went forward to Bevagna. Mevania, where at that time the forces of the Vmbrians lay. This suddaine and unexpected comming of the Cos. whom they thoght verily occupied in Samnium far inough off from Vmbria, so terrified the Vmbrians, that some gave advise to retire backe to their walled townes, others to relinquish the war altogether. One canton or tract of their countrie (which they  themselves call Materina, not only kept the rest in arms, but also set them on to fight immediatly, so as they charged upon Fabius, as he was trenching and fortifying. Whom when the Cos. saw rushing upon his rampires in such heaps, he called his men from their work, and as the ground and time would give leave, he marshalled them in order of battel: and after he had encouraged his soldiors with a true report and discourse of many glorious and honorable journies atchieved as wel in Thuscia as also in Samnium; he willed them to dispatch this final residue of the Tuscan war, that hung by and remained behind, and to be revenged of that accursed and impious speech, wherby they threatened to assaile the citie of Rome. These words of his were heard by the souldiors with such alacritie and cheerfulnes of hart, that before their Generall had made an end of his speech, they set up a shout of themselves and interrupted him: and thus before commaundement and  signall given by found of trumpets and cornets, they ran amaine upon the enemies, and charged them as if they had not been men, and those also armed. For (a wonderfull thing to be spoken) at the very first they began to plucke the banners and streamers out of the bearers hands; after that, the ensigne-bearers themselves were led to the Consuls, and the souldiors armed as they were, transported out of one battaillon into another, and where there was any scuffling, they

fought not so much with sword, as buckler: and what with their bosses and yron pikes, and what  with justeling, shouldering, and striking the enemies about the arme-pits, they were overthrowne and felled. In which medley, more men were taken, than slaine: and no other crie was heard throughout the field, But down with weapon, down with weapon. So that in the very conflict, the principall authours of the war rendered themselves: and the morrow after, and other daies following, the rest of the people of Vmbria likewise yeelded. The Otriculanes by stipulation only and pledges given, were received into amitie. And Fabius having thus gotten the victorie in that war, which fell to another mans lot and charge, led backe his armie againe into his owne province. And in regard of his prosperous and happie exploits, like as the people the yeer past continued his Consulship: so the Senat against the year following, when App. Claudius, and L. Volumnius were Coss. proroged his martial rule stil, maugre the hart of Appius, who was greatly against it. In some  Chronicles I find, that Appius, whiles he was Censor, sued to be Consull, and that his Election was crossed and staied by L. Furius, a Tribune of the Com. untill he had resigned up the Censorship, Being created Cos. and the war with the Salentines (declared new enemies) allotted unto his Collegue, he remained at Rome; that by civile pollicie, and managing home-affaires, he might augment his owne state and authoritie, since that the honor of warre-service rested in the hands and conduct of another. Volumnius had no cause to repent of his charge and province: for many fortunate battailes he fought, and some townes of the enemies by force he woon. He was a bountifull giver of the spoile away unto his souldiours: and this bountie in it selfe alone acceptable, hee helped much with great courtesie and gentlenesse, by which vertues and artificiall meanes, he made the souldiours both venturous in perils, and tough in travell.
Q. Fabius on the other part, in qualitie of pro-Consull, gave battell to the Samnites neere the citie Allifa, where the day was nothing doubtfull. The enemies were discomfited and beaten into their campe: neither had they beene able to have kept the field, but that there was but a little day left behind: and yet before night, they were beset round about in their hold, yea, and watched with good guards all night long, that none should make escape. The morrow morning ere it was well day light, they began to yeeld themselves, and to capitulate, That as many Samnites as there were among them, should bee sent foorth in their single garments, and they all went under the gallowes. As for their confederates and allies, there was no such proviso nor composition made; but they all, to the number of seven thousand, were sold as slaves, and ware a garland. As many as advowed themselves to be Hernicks, were kept apart by themselves  to be forthcomming. All those Fabius sent to Rome to the Senat, and untill such time as enquirie was made, whether in a publicke muster they were pressed souldiours, or voluntarily served under the Samnites against the Romanes, they were committed to bee kept in ward among sundrie Nations of the Latines: during which time, the new Consuls, Publius Cornelius Arvina, and Quintus Martius Tremulus (for those were now created) had in charge to propose that matter anew unto the Senate. The Hernickes tooke that ill. Whereupon the Anagnines held a Diet or generall councell in the round Cirque, which they call Maritimus, of all the citties of that Nation, except the Alatrinates, Ferentinates, and the Verulanes. Where the whole State of Hernickes proclaimed warre against the people of Rome. In Samnium also, for that Fabius was departed thence, there arose newe troubles and rebellions. Calatia  and Sora were forced ^ and the Romane garrisons that there lay, were put to the sword, and upon the bodies of as manie as they tooke alive, they exercised much torture and crueltie. Whereupon Publius Cornelius the Consull was thither sent. And to Martius were the newe enemies appointed (for by this time decreed it was, That warre should bee made upon the Anagnines and the other Hernickes.) At the first, the enemies had so seised all the convenient advenues and waies betweene both the Consuls campes, that there could not readily passe a lackey or currier betweene, in so much, as for certaine daies both Consuls abode doubtfull how the world went, and uncertaine one of the others state. The feare wherof, spred to Rome, so as all the younger sort [from seventeen yeers of age to seven and fortie] sware to serve: and against all suddain occasions, and occurrents whatsoever, two full and complete armies were levied and  enrolled. But the Hernick war was nothing correspondent either to the present menaces, orto the ancient glorie and reputation of that nation: for having done no worthie adventures, and within few daies lost their campe thrise, they covenanted for to have thirtie daies truce; during which time, they might send Embassadours to the Senate of Rome; and in consideration hereof,

 they promised to lay downe two moneths pay and to find corne for the armie, and allow everie soldior one cote. But from the Senat they were put off and referred to Martius: unto whom by order from the Senat, a large commission was granted, to dispose of the Hernicks as he thought good: and so he tooke the whole nation as yeelded to his devotion. The other Consull in Samnium being in forces more puissant than the enemy, was notwithstanding encombred much with the difficultie of the ground. All the passages had the enemie stopped, and possessed himself of the forrests and woods which were thorow-fares, that no way victuals might be conveied unto him. Neither could the Consull, for all that daily he displaied banner in field, traine them forth to fight: so as it was well seene, that neither the Samnits could abide present battel, nor the Romans long delay of war. But the arrivall of Martius, who upon the subduing of the Hernicks, made hast  to aid his Colleague, caused the enemie to differre no longer the triall of the field. For, they who thought themselves not good enough to match so much as the one armie, knewfull well, that if they suffered two Consuls armies to joine together, there had beene no hope left. They therfore set upon Martius as he marched without order of battaile. Hereupon in all hast their trusses and fardels were brought together and laid in the middle; and as the time would permit, he set his soldiors in array. At the first encounter, the shout was hard into the campe of the other Consull. Afterwards the dust descried a farre off, gave an al'arme, and made a trouble and garboile there. Then the Consull presently commaunded to arme: and hastely bringing his soldiours forth into the field, entred upon the battaile of the enemies in the flanke, whiles they were busied in another skirmish. He, cried aloud to his men, that it were exceeding great shame, to  suffer the other armie to carry away double victorie, and not themseves win the honor of that war, which was their proper charge. Thus, wheresoever he charged, he brake in and made entrance; and having pierced and made a great lane through the midst of the enemies battaile, he passed on toward their campe; which finding void of defendants, he tooke and set a fire. Which when the soldiors of Martius saw burning before their faces, and the enemie likewise, as they looked behind: then began the Samnites on all hands to flie: but killed they were every where down right: all places full of murther and carnage: so in no part could they finde meanes to escape and save themselves. Now when there were a thirtie thousand of the enemies slaine, the Consuls founded the retreat, and gathered both their armies together, with great congratulation one to the other: by which time, behold, there were deskried a farre off, certaine new bands of enemies,  enrolled for a supply; and they gave occasion of a new and fresh slaughter. Against whom without commaundement of Consull, or any signall received from their leaders, the Romanes advanced lustily, crying aloud, that these Samnites were to be welcomed with an ill hansell, and this their first training should cost them deere. The Consuls let the legions alone in this ^heir furious heat, as who knew well enough, that these new commers seeing the old beaten soldiors so astonied alreadie and flying away, would soone have enough of it, and not once adventure fight. And they were not deceived in their opinion; for the whole forces of the Samnites as well old as new, fled apace unto the next mountaines: and thither the Romanes also make as great speed. But no safe place could those vanquished enemies find: for even from the verie hill tops which they held, they were beaten downe, so that with one voice they all craved peace. Then after the Consuls  had imposed upon them co^e for three moneths, and a years pay, and for everie soldior a liverie besides, they were permitted to send Embassadours to the Senat^ to treat and capitulate therefore. During which time, Cornelius was left in Samnium, and Martius returned into the citie, with triumph over the Hernicks. Moreover a decree passed, that his statue riding on horsebacke should remaine in the common place of assemblies, which was erected accordingly, even before the Temple of Castor. To three States of the Hernicks, to wit, the Alatrinates, the Verulanes and Ferentinates, their owne lawes, and ancient liberties were restored againe, because they made choise thereof, rather than to bee enfranchised cittizens of Rome: and permitted they were to marrie amongst the Romanes, which libertie they onely of the Hernickes for a good while enjoied. The Anagnines, and those that had borne armes against the Romanes, were incorporate  free denizens at Rome, but without the priviledge of giving voices and suffrages: debarred they were of holding any councels and making marriages with them, yea and denied at all to elect any magistracie, but onely the function and ministerie of divine service and sacrifices.
The same yeare the Chappell of dame Salus was by C. Iunius Bubulcus now Censor, set out at

a price to be built, which he in his Consulship had vowed, in the Samnites warre. By his direction  and appointment, together with his colleague M. Valerius Maximus, were the great high waies and causeys made, of all sides of the citie, through the fields, at the common charge and expenses. The same yeare also, was the league renewed now the third time with the Carthaginians: and their embassadors who came for that purpose, were courteously entertained, and rewarded liberally with rich gifts. In that yeare there was a Dictator P. Cornel. Scipio, with P. Decius, Generall of the horse: and these were Presidents at the election of Consuls, for to that purpose they were created, because neither of the two Consuls could be spared from the warres. Consuls were created L. Posthumius, and T. Minutius. But Piso sayth, that these Consuls immediatly succeeded Q. Fabius, and P. Decius: leaving out those two yeares, wherein we have written, that Claudius with Volumnius,and Cornelius with Martius were Consuls. Whether he forgat himselfe  in digesting his Annales and yearely records, or of set purpose overhipt two couple of Consuls, thinking that they were not in truth Consuls, I wote not.
The same yeare the Samnites made rodes into the territorie of Stella, within the liberties and appertenances of the Campanes, and therfore both Consuls were sent into Samnium: who when they were parted into divers wayes, for Posthumius tooke his journey to Tifernum, and Minutius to Bovianum: first there was a battaile fought at Tifernum, under the leading of Posthumius. Some make no doubt, but write, that the Samnites were discomfited, and put to the worse, and thirtie thousand of them taken prisoners: others say, that the conflict was equall, and that they departed on even hand: also that Posthumius making semblance of feare, journyed by night, and closely retired unto the hils adjoyning, and that the enemies followed after them, two miles, and  from thence encamped, and fortefied also themselves in strong places of advantage. The Consull because he would be thought to have fought and chose a safe place, and plentifully stored with all necessaries (as it was no lesse in deed) where he might keepe a standing camp; after he had fortified the same, and furnished it with all kind of provision, leaving behind him a strong garison for defence; at the relie^e of the third watch, leadeth the neerest way, his legions not encombred with cariage, to his Colleague; who also himselfe lay in camp over against another armie. There, by the persuasion and advise of Posthumius, Minutius gave battayle: and when as the conflict continued doubtfull untill it was farre on the day; then Posthumius with his fresh legions, on a sodaine charged the battailons of the enemies, now alreadie overtoyled: thus partly for weerinesse, and partly for wounds, they being dishabled for to flee away, were out of al measure slaine every one: and xxj. banners were taken: and so from thence they went forward to the camp of Posthumius. Where these two victorious armies, finding the enemie discouraged and amazed at the tidings of this overthrow, set upon them, discomfited, and put them to flight; and wan from them xxvj. ensignes: where the Generall of the Samnites Statius Cellius, with many a man besides, was taken prisoner, and both their camps woon. Bovianum also, which the morrow after began to be assaulted, was shortly after forced: and finally with great glorie of so noble acts atchieved, both Consuls triumphed. Some write, that the Consull Minutius being grievously hurt, was brought back into the camp, and there died: and that M. Fulvius was substituted Consull in his roume: and that it was he, who being sent unto the armie of Minutius, wan Bovianum. The same yeare, Sora, Arpinum, and Consentia were recovered from the Samnites; and the great image  of Hercules was in the Capitoll set up and dedicated.
When as P. Sulpitius Averri^, and P. Sempronius Sophus were Coss. the Samnites desiring either to see an end of warre, or els to delay it, sent embassadors to Rome pretending peace.
To whom as they pleaded and intreated most humbly, this answere was given; That if the Samnites had not so often treated for peace, when they intended and prepared warre, they might after certaine enterviews, and conferences passed betweene, obteine their suite: but since that evermore untill that time, their words were but wind; now they would trust to their deedes, and nothing els. P. Sempronius the Consull, shall shortly be in Samnium with an armie: who would not be abused, but soone see, whether their minds be enclined to warre or peace: and as he found and saw every thing, so would he bring word and make relation: and therefore their embassadors  were to attend upon the Consull when he departed out of Samnium. The same yeare, after that the Romane armie had passed peaceably too and fro, and visited all Samnium, having victuals by the countrie courteously allowed, the ancient league was granted again to the Samnites. From thence turned the Romanes their forces against the Aequians, their old enemies; but for many

 yeares making semblance of quietnes, whereas indeede their peace was little to be trusted: for that the Hernick nation was safe and on foote, they with them, had used oftentimes under hand to send aid unto the Samnites; and also after the subduing of the Hernicks, the whole nation in a manner without dissembling, and averring all they did by publick counsell and authoritie, had fallen away unto the enemie: and after that the Romanes had made league with the Samnites, and their heralds came to make claime for their goods tooke from them by way of hostilitie, they said, It was but a tempting of them, to see, whether upon feare of warre they would suffer themselves to become Romanes. Which, say they, how greatly it were to be wished, the Hernicks were able to teach them: for they, as many of them as had libertie to do what they would, chose rather to live under their owne lawes, than to be enfranchised citizens of Rome: but others, who  had not the same scope to choose to their liking, theywere constrained to accept of the Burgeoisie of their citie, by way of a punishment. Vpon these speeches and arguments commonly tossed in their assemblies and Counsels, the people of Rome decreed warre against the Aequians: to which both the Consuls went; and encamped foure miles from their enemies campe. The Aequians (who in their owne behalfe, and for any quarell of theirs, had many yeares sat still and made no warre) like as if their armie had bene leavied of a sodaine and in haste, without certaine Captaines appointed, and without any Generall to commaund, were afrayed. Some thought good to go forth into the field, others to defend themselves, and keepe within their campe: most of them were moved to thinke aforehand upon the wasting of their countrie afterwards, and consequently the destruction of their cities left but with slender garrisons. Therefore after that,  amongst many opinions, this only had audience, namely to abandon the care of publick weale, and every man to regard his owne private state, and at the first watch to depart divers waies one from the other, and quit the camp, and convey away all their bag and baggage, and to defend their cities within the walls: they all with one accord accepted thereof, and embraced it. Now when the enemies were thus scattered abroad about the countrie, the Romanes by daylight, with banner displaied went forth into the field: and when they saw no man come abroad to meet them, they marched in warlike order apace towards the enemies campe. But when as they could perceive there, neither warders before the gates, nor any man upon the trench and ramplers, nor so much as the usuall noyse of a leaguer; being moved with this unaccustomed silence, for feare of forelaying and treacherie, they stood still: but being gotten over the rampire, and finding the  tents voyde and emptie, they set forward to pursue the enemie by his trace. But when they found their foote tracks, leading to all parts of the countrie alike, as being slipt here and there, sundrie and divers wayes: at the first they wandred out of the way, and misled of them; but afterwards knowing by their espials the purpose and intent of their enemies, they went round about and besieged every citie, and in threescore dayes wan fortie townes all by assault: most part whereof were rased even with the ground, and consumed into ashes, and the nation of the Aequians utterly in a manner destroyed. Over the Aequians there was triumph. Whose calamitie and desolation was so fearefull an example, to the Marrucines, Marsi, Peligni, and Ferentines, that they sent Oratours to Rome to treate for peace and amitie: and to all those nations at their request, a league was graunted. The same yeare, C. Flavius a Notarie or Register by  profession, whose father ^nius was no better than of a slave made free, a man, thus descended of base and lowe parentage, howbeit otherwise craftie and eloquent withall, arose to be an Aedile Curule. I finde in some records, that when he gave attendance in his calling to the Aediles, and saw that his owne Tribe were willing to give him their voyces and elect him Aedile, but his name not accepted of among other competitours, for that he got his living by his pen; he cast aside his bookes and papers, and sware an oth, that he would no longer be a Notarie and use pencraft. But Macer Licinius avoucheth, that a good while before that, he gave over his writing, namely after he had beene Tribune, and borne two Triumvirships, the one for the night misrules, the other for the placing and transporting of a Colonie. But they all agree upon this, that he became verie stout, and in great contumacie opposed  himselfe and made head against the Nobles that contemned his base birth. The civile law, which before time was laid up in great secret by the Priests, and Prelats in their Arches, he published abroade; and set up a table in the great common place, in manner of a Calender, wherein all men might knowe worke-dayes from holy-dayes: when it was lawfull to pleade, and when not. Also in despite, and to the great heart-burning of the Patritij,

he dedicated the temple of the goddesse Concord upon the court of Vulcane: and by the gener^ll  consent of the people, Cornelius Barbatus the high priest was compelled to endite and pronounce the certain forme of words therto belonging; notwithstanding he contested and denied, that by the customes of their forefathers any could dedicate a Temple, unlesse he were either Consull or Generall of an armie. And therefore by the authoritie of the Senate, a law was preferred to the people, That no man might dedicate a Temple or Alter, without permission and consent of the Consull, or the more part of the Tribunes of Commons. I will report in this place a thing, of it selfe not worthie of remembrance, but onely for a proofe and example of the libertie of the Commons against the pride and insolencie of the Nobles. This Flavius, comming upon a time to visit his Colleague lying sicke, by a complot afore hand of certaine yoong gentlemen of the Patritians that sat by his beds side, had noreverence done unto him, nor any one  so much as rose up at his entrance into the chamber: whereupon, he commaunded his yvorie chaire of State to be brought unto him, and set himself upon it; and so he outfaced his adversaries, that were so vexed to the heart with envie of his dignitie. This Flavius was nominated and chosen Aedile, by the base faction of the commoners, banding together in the place of assemblies: who first tooke heart by the Censureship of Appius Claudius, the first that ever distained and polluted the Senate, by bringing in the sonnes of Libertines: and when he saw that no man accounted that election of Senatours good and lawfull, and perceived withall, that in the court he had not that backing of citizens which he sought for; he entermingled in every Tribe certaine of the most base persons of the Commons: and so hee corrupted both the common place and Mars field also. In so much as the Election of Flavius was reputed so unworthie an indignitie, that  most of the gentlemen of Rome laid away their gold rings and rich trapping of their horses, which were the ornaments and ensignes of their calling. And from that time forward, the cittie was devided into two partes. One side was maintained and upheld by the true hearted people, such as favoured and loved good things: the other by the faction of the riffe raffe and skum of the cittie: untill the time that Q. Fabius, and P. Decius were created Censors. Fabius to bring the cittie unto an uniforme accord, and to withstand this inconvenience, that the Elections of Magistrates should not be caried away by the strong hand of the vilest and most abject persons, made a separation of all that base rabble, and cast them into foure Tribes, and called them (...) Vrbana. Which action of his (men say) was accepted with so great contentment and thankfulnes, that upon this good temperature of degrees, he purchased the surname of Maximus, which in so many  victories he had not acquired and obtained. By him also (by report) it was ordained and instituted, that on the Ides of Iuly, the horsemen rode, as it were, in a solemne muster, and shewed their great horses to the Censor.



 THE TENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS  of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the tenth Booke.

TWo Colonies were planted in Sora and Alba. The Marsians of Carseola, were reduced under obedience. The fellowship of the Augurs was augmented to the number of nine, whereas as before they were wont to be but foure. The Law or Edict as touching the appealing to the people, was now the third time proposed by Valerius the Consull. Two Tribes more were added  to the rest; Aniensis and Terentina. Warre was denounced against the Samnites, and fortunately fought with them. What time as there was a battaile given to the Tuscanes, Vmbrians, Samnites, and Gaules; under the conduct of P. Decius, and Quintus Fabius, and the Romane armie was in great extremitie of danger, P. Decius following the example of his father, devowed and exposed himselfe to die voluntarily, for to save the host: and by his death obained the victorie of that iourney, to his countrimen and fellow citizens. Papyrius Cursor put to flight an armie of the Samnites, who were bound by a solemne oth, not to depart out of the battaile without victorie, to the end, that with more magnanimitie and resolution, they should enter into the field. The Cense was held, and the number taken of the cittizens, with the solemne purging and Lustration of the cittie. And assessed there were 262322 pols.


WHEN L. Genutius and Scr. Cornelius were Consuls, there was rest in manner from all warres abroad; in such sort, as they had leasure to place certaine Colonies at Sora and Alba: And for Alba there were enrolled 6000 inhabitants, to affront the Aequians. As for Sora, it had sometimes belonged to the Volscians territorie; but the Samnites usurped the possession of it, and thither foure thousand were sent to inhabite. The same yeare, the Arpinates and Trebulanes were infranchised free denizens at Rome. The Frusinates were fined with the losse of one third part of their lands: for they were evidently detected to have sollicited the Hernicks to rebellion: and after that the Consull by commission from the  Senate, had made due inquisition, the principall heads of that conspiracie, were scourged and beheaded. Yet because there should not passe a yeare cleane without warre, a journey was made (such a one as it was) into Vmbria; upon newes, that there used to yssue forth day by day, certa^ne men in armes out of a cave, and to make rodes into the countrie about. Into this cave or peake; the Romanes entred with their ensignes displaied: where, by reason that it was a blind corner, they received many a wound, and specially by throwing of stones; untill such time as they found the other mouth of the cave (for it was a thorowfare.) So they piled a deale of wood together at both endes, and set it on fire: with the smoke and vapour whereof, there were about 2000 armed men driven out of their hole, who rushing at last into the flame, desirous to escape, were smoudred and burnt to ashes.
 When as M. Livius Denter, and C. Aemylius, were Consuls, the Aequians began to warre againe: for they hardly could abide and endure, that a Colonie should bee planted upon their borders, as a frontier-fortresse to bridle them, and assaied by all kind of force to winne the same: but they were lustily repulsed by the inhabitants onely within the towne. Howbeit, such a feare they made at Rome, because it was not thought credible, that the Aequians

alone of themselves, so distressed as they were, would be so hardie as to take armes, that in regard  of that trouble, a Dictatour was named, to wit, C. Iunius Bubuleus, with M. Titintus Generall of the horse. Who at the first conflict subdued the Aequians, and upon the eight day of his governement returned into the cittie in triumph: and now Dictatour, dedicated the temple of S^lut, which hee had vowed being Consull, and had put out to workmen for to be builded, while hee was Censor.
The same yeare a fleet of Greekes, under the conduct of Cleonymus a Lacedemonian, arrived upon the coast of Italie, and wan Thuriae, a cittie of the Salentines. Against this enemie was the Consull Aemylius sent, who in one battell discomfited him, and drove him abourd. Thus Thuriae was rendered againe to the former inhabitants, and the Salentine countrie obtained peace and quietnesse. I find in some records, that it was Iun Bubulcus the Dictatour, who was sent  to the Salentines: and that Cleonymus before he was to encounter with the Romanes, departed out of Italie. From thence hee fetched a compasse, and doubled the point of Brundusium, and sailed with a fore-wind through the middest of the Venice gulfe: for that on the left hand the Haven-lesse and harbourlesse coasts of Italie, and on the right, the Illyrians. Liburnians, and Istrians, fierce nations, and for the most part, reputed infamous, for roving and robbing by the sea side, put him in exceeding feare. So he arrived at length upon the river of Venice, lying farre within the shore, and there, he landed a few to discover the coasts: but hearing that the strond that lay out against them, was not broad and spacious, and when they were past over it, there were behind them the plashes (as it were) overflowed with the sea tides, and that not farre off might bee seene the champion fields neere hand, and hils beyond; and discovering by this meanes the  mouth of a very deepe river, into which he saw, that the ships might be brought about as into a sure harbour (now that rivers name was Meduacus) thither hee commaunded, that the Armada should put in, and to make saile up against the streame. The heaviest vessels, the chanell of the river would not beare: but the soldiors were transported in lighter barkes and small pinnaces, and so fell at length with the levell and the plaine countrie, frequented with much people, by reason that three sea-townes of the Patavines, inhabited that territorie. Being once landed, and having left a slender guard for their ships, they take townes by assault, burne houses, harrie and drive away prises both of men and cattell: and when they had once tasted of the sweetnesse of bootie and pillage, they went farre from their ships. The al'arme hereof was given at Patavium (now the Patavines were alwaies in armes, because of the Gaules their borders.) Whereupon they devided  their fighting youth into two regiments: the one was led into those quarters whereas the report went, that the Greekes forraied here and there all abroad: the other, because they would not meet with the pillers and rovers, was conducted another way to the harbour, where the ships rid (about foureteene miles from the towne.) And after they had slaine the warders, they charged upon the small barks. Wherupon the mariners were afraid, and were forced to retire their vessels to the other banke side. Likewise upon the maine, they sped as well in fight against the stragling rovers: for when as the Greekes fled backe to recover the harbour, the Venetians encountered them afront, and made head against them. So the enemies were environned in the middest, and most of them slaine: some that were taken prisoners, bewrayed what their fleet was, and that king Cleonymus was three myles off. There, when they had bestowed the prisoners sure  ynough in ward within the next village; some, man with souldiours their river vessels, made fitly and framed with flat bottomes, for to passe over the meeres and shallow washes; others embarke armed men in the small gallions taken from the enemies; and made way apace to give an assault upon the maine fleet, and beset those shippes which rid at ancker, and durst not weigh and remoove, fearing not the enemie, so much as the unknowne coasts. These, I say, they environned, and charged upon them: and when they made hast to gaine the deepe and open sea, without any resistance at all, they were pursued and chased unto the mouth of the river. Thus when they had taken the enemies ships, and fired others, namely, such as for feare and hast were driven upon the shelves, and run a ground, then they returned with victorie. Cleonymus hardly saved the fifth part of his fleet. And thus having had no good lucke in attempting to land  in anie coast of the Adriaticke sea, hee departed. The stemmes of the shippes, with their beakheads, and brasen pikes, together with the spoiles of the Lacedemonians, were set up in the old Temple of Iuno, and there bee manie at this day alive, which have seene them. The memoriall of this sea-fight, is celebrated yearely (upon the verie same day that it was fought) at Patavium,

 with a solemne skirmish and combate of ships represented upon the river, within the middest of the cittie.
The same yeare was a league made at Rome with the Vestines, who came to sue for peace and amitie. But from that time forward, there arose many and diverse fearefull occurrents. For newes came, that Hetruria rebelled, which troubles tooke their beginning by occasion of the civile dissention and discord of the Aretines: who began to expell by force of armes the house and familie of the Licinij (mightie and puissant above the rest) for verie envie and repine of their wealth and riches. Over and besides, the Marsians stood out, and by armes maintained their title to that part of their territorie, into which, there had beene a Colonie of Carseolanes brought, to the number of foure thousand men, enrolled there to inhabite.  Against which stirres and tumults, Marcus Valerius Maximus was created Dictatour, who made choise of M. Aemylius Paulus to bee the Commaunder of the Horse. Which I rather beleeve to bee true, than that Q. Fabius, a man of those yeares and that worth, after so manie honourable dignities, should bee under Valerius. But I would not denie, that the error might growe by reason of the surname of Maximus. The Dictatour having taken the field with his armie, in one battaile discomfited the Marsians: and after hee had driven them into their walled and fensed townes, Miloniana, Plestina, and Fresilia; within few daies, hee woon them also over their heads: and having fined the Marsians with the losse of some part of their territorie, hee received them into their auncient league againe. Then all the forces were emploied against the Tuscanes: and whiles the Dictatour was departed to Rome to take his Auspices anew, the  Generall of Horse, being gone out a foraging, was by a secret ambush entrapped. And having lost certaine ensignes, hee was forced into the campe, after a foule slaughter and shamefull flight of his men. Which fearefull cowardise is not like to have beene in Fabius, not onely, because if ever hee deserved his surname of Maximus by any commendable parts, it was especially for his prowesse in warre; but also, for that in remembrance of Papyrtus his crueltie toward him, hee never could have beene brought to fight, without the commaundement or permission of the Dictatour. This discomfiture and losse being reported at Rome, caused a greater terrour than there was cause. For no lesse than if the armie had beene utterly defeated, there was published and proclaimed a stay and cessation of all law-matters, warders bestowed at the gates, order taken for standing watches in every streete, and armour and darts carried  up to the wals: And after that all the younger sort were sworne and prest to serve, the Dictator was sent againe to the armie. Where, hee found all more quiet than hee looked for, through the carefull diligence of the Generall of Horse. The campe was remooved to a place of more strength and safetie, the bands and companies which had lost their ensignes, left on the bare earth without the rampires, destitute of tents and convert; and the armie eager and desirous of fight, to doe away and rase out the former ignominie and shame. Presently therefore, hee raised his campe, and remooved forward into the countrie of Rasella. Thither followed the enemies also hard at heeles. Who albeit, upon their late good speed, they were in right great hope and affiance to bee strong ynough even in open fight and plaine field; yet they assaile the enemie also by the same slights and traines which they had alreadie so fortunately tried. There fortuned  to bee in the countrie thereabout, not farre from the Romanes campe, certaine houses halfe pulled downe and ruinate, belonging to a village which was burned when the countrey was overrun: where, after they had bestowed closely certaine men in armes, they drave their beasts and cattaile in the very sight of the Romane corps de guard, commanded by C. Fulvius, a Lieutenant: at which bait, when as there stirred no man from the Romane wards, one of the Heardmen advaunced even under the very trench and fortifications of the Romanes, and called aloud to the rest (that seemed for feare to drive but slowly from the ruines of the village aforesaid) asking why they staied behind, seeing they might safely march, and passe forward still (and it were) through the middle of the Romane campe? These wordes, certaine Caerites interpreted to the Lieutenant Fulvius. Whereat, everie band or companie of soldiours tooke great indignation,  but durst not stir a foot without a warrant. Then he commaunded those that were skilfull in the tongue, to mark whether their language sounded neerer to the speech of peasants or to citizens: Who brought word, that both their voice, and also the habit and fresh hew of their bodies, was more elegant and civile than for countrie shepheards. Go your waies than (qd. he) unto them and bid them bewray and discover their ambush, which in vain they seem to hide: for that the Romans

were cunning in all things, and advertised of their dessignes, and could no more now be overtaken  with wiles, than overcome by armes. When these words were once heard and caried to those that lay in wait, presently they start up out of their lurking holes, and brought forth their ensignes all abroad into the open field. The lieutenant supposing they were a greater troupe than might be dealt withall and matched, by his corps de gard, with all speed sent for aide to the Dictator: and in the mean while himself received and bare off the brunt and forceable charge of his enemies. This message was no sooner brought, but the Dictatour commaunded the standerds to be advanced, and the soldiors to arme and follow: but every thing was done sooner almost than it could be commaunded: forthwith they caught up the ensignes, and tooke weapon in hand: and scarcely could they be held in, but that they would run amaine. For not onely the spitefull anger of the late received losse pricked them on, but also the shouts of their fellowes, which they might heare  more lowd, and to be redoubled thicker, according as the medley grew hotter and hotter. The greater hast therfore they made, whiles one putteth forward another, and crieth to the port-ensignes to go faster and mend their pace. But the more hast the Dictator seeth them to make, the more earnest was he to keepe them backe in their march, and to hold them in; willing them to go faire and softly. Contrariwise the Tuscanes, who rose up at the beginning of the battaile, were there readie with their whole forces to give the charge. Wherupon there came messenger after messenger to the Dictatour, bringing word that all the legions of the Tuscanes were entred into the fight, and that his men alreadie were not able to resist any longer. Nay himselfe also, from the higher ground, might see in what danger the corps de gard was. But presuming and resting upon this conceit, that the lieutenant was able yet to maintaine fight, considering that he was not farre  off himselfe to helpe and save him out of perill; he was desirous that the enemies might be weried and tired as much as was possible, and that his own forces fresh and in heart, should set upon them overtoiled. And albeit they went softly forward, yet by this time had the horsemen but a verie small ground to take their run with full cariere. Foremost marched the ensignes of his legions, that the enemie should not feare any couvert and privie stratageme, but leave good spaces and distances between the files of their footmen, through which the horses might have roume and libertie enough to gallop with ease. Then all the battaillon of the Infanterie set up a crie and shout when they charged, and withall, the Cavallerie, with reines at large entred within the rankes of the enemies, who being not marshalled and set in order against such a blustring storme of horsmen, were with a sodain feare astonied. Wherupon, the troupe of Fulvius  which erewhile was in manner environed and compassed about, and had helpe and rescue almost too late, nowe all in generall breathed themselves at ease, and were put to nothing. For these that came fresh and lustie undertooke the whole weight of the medley: which was neither long nor doubtfull. The enemies were put to slight, and in disaray made hast to recover their campe. And when as the Romanes advanced against them with banner displaied, they quit their place and reculed, gathering themselves round into heaps in the farthest part of the campe: and as they would have fled out, they stucke fast in the narrow gaps and passages of the gates: a great part of them leapt upon the banke, to climbe the rampier, if haply either from the higher ground they might defend themselves, or get over any where and escape. By chance in one place where the banke was not well rammed, the rampier was surcharged with the weight of  so many standing upon it, and so tumbled downe into the trench. Wherupon, they set up a crie all together, That the gods had made them way to escape, and by that meanes in deed they saved themselves, but more of them unarmed than armed. In this battaile, were the forces of the Tuscanes once againe utterly abated: in so much as, after they had capitulated and promised a years pay, and corne for two moneths, the Dictator permitted them to send Embassadours to Rome for a treatie of peace. Peace was denied, but truce for two yeares graunted: and the Dictatour with triumph returned into the cittie. I find in some writers; that Hetruria was by the Dictatour quieted, without any notable battaile, onely by composing the variance and debate of the Aretines, and reconciling the familie of the Licinij with the Commons.
M. Valerius upon his Dictatorship became Consull. Some have beleeved that he was created  without his owne suit, yea and while he was absent, and that the said Election was held by the Interregent. But how so ever it was, out of all question, he bare the Consulship with Apulcius Pansa. Whiles M. Valerius and Q. Apuleius were Coss. all was well quieted abroad: for the Tuskanes of one side, partly upon their ill successe in warre, and partly by reason of their truce, were

 forced to be still and in repose. The Samnites also on the other side, being well tamed with the overthrowes so many yeares together, repented not yet, and were not weary of their new league. At Rome likewise, the Commons were quiet, and found themselves much eased, and discharged of a great number of base and poore people, which were withdrawne and sent away into colonies. But because their rest should not be every where entire and perfect, there arose a quarell betweene the chiefe and principall men of the citie, as well the Nobles as Commons, and that by the suggestion and instigation of Q. and Cn. Ogulnij, Tribunes of the Com. Who having sought occasion and matter every way to accuse and blame the Nobilitie unto the Commons; when they ^aw all meanes assayed in vaine, at length entred into an action, whereby they kindled and set on fire not only the meanest, but even the chiefe heads of the Commons, such as had bene  Consuls, and triumphed: who wanted no promotions andhonors, but only Sacerdotall dignities and Prelacies, which as yet were not indifferently common to both States. They proposed therefore a law, That whereas at that time there were but 4. Augures, and as many Prelates or Bishops, and for as much as they thought it good, that the number of Priests should be increased, there might be chosen to the rest, 4. Bishops, and 5. Augurs, all out of the bodie of the Commons. But how this colledge or fellowship of Augurs, was reduced to the number of foure, but by the death of two, I can not find: since this is certaine, that among the Augurs the number must be od: namely, that the three auncient tribes, Rhamnenses, Titienses, and Luceres, should have each one their Augur: or if they needed more, they should with equall number increase those Priests: like as they were augmented and multiplied, when as five being put to foure, made up the  number of nine; that is to say, for every tribe three. Howbeit, because they were chosen out of the Commons who should supplie, and make up the number; the Nobles tooke it as grievously to the heart, as when they saw the Consulship parted equally in common: but they made semblance as though this indignitie perteined to the gods more than to them: who would themselves see, that their holy service and sacred mysteries should not be polluted. And as for them, this only they could do, namely, pray and wish, that no calamiti^ thereby should light vppon the common weale. But lesse earnest were they in opposing themselves and making resistance, for that they were used alreadie in all such broiles and contentions to have the worse: and they saw besides, that their adversaries shot not at that (which in time past they could scarce hope for) namely, the greatest honours and dignities: but that they had alreadie obteined all,  for which they had strived so long in so doubtfull termes of hope, to wit, manifold Consulates, Censurships, and Triumphs.
Howbeit, the contention and dispute in debating and arguing too and fro the law proposed, was mainteined (as men say) betwene Ap. Claudius especially, and P. Decius Mus: and after they had contested and discoursed in their orations pro and contra, the same reasons in manner, touching the rights and liberties pretended by the Nobles and Commons, which sometimes had bene alleaged, both for, and against the law Licinia, at what time as it was set on foote for the Commons to be Consuls; P. Decius Mus against App. Claudius. Decius (as it is sayd) represented in open audience the very resemblance and shew of his father, in such manner, as many of them who were then present at the assembly, had seene him: to wit, girded and apparelled in Gabine robe, standing over his iavelin, in which gesture, habit, and fashion, he offred himself to voluntary death,  for to save the people and legions of the Romans: Seemed (quoth he) P. Decius, that then was Cos. as pure and religious in the sight of the immortall gods, as if T. Manlius his colleague had bene likewise devowed and offred? and might not the same P. Decius have rightly bene chosen, to execute the publike divine service and sacrifices of the people of Rome? or is this all the feare and doubt, that the gods would give lesse eare to his prayers, than to Ap. Claudius? or doth Ap. Claudius with more devotion serve God privately, and worship the gods more religiously, than himselfe? Who was there ever that repented or misliked of the vowes, which so many Consuls and Dictators of the Com. either at their first setting forth to their armies, or in time of warre and battaile, pronounced for the common wealth? Recken and count the chiefe Captaines, yeare by yeare, since the first time that the Commons began to have the leading and conduct of the  warres: number all the triumphs ever since: it will appeare that the Commons are no whit abashed, and have no cause to complaine of their owne nobilitie. And this I know for certaine, that if any new sodaine warre should arise, the Senate and people of Rome would repose no more hope and confidence in the auncient Patritij, than in the Com. for to be the Captaines and commaunders. This being so, quoth he, what God or man can thinke it an indignitie,

to adorne those persons also with the titles and ornaments of Bishops and Augurs, whome  ye have honoured with chaire of yvorie, with the long robe bordered with purple, with the cote of armes embrodred and branched with the palme tree, with the gowne or mantle of purple, wrought with divers colours, with the chapelots and coronets of triumph, and with the victorious branch and garland of lawrell; whose houses ye have beautified above the rest, with setting up the spoiles of enemies? Or who can thinke much, if he be seen with a sacring cup, or holy-water pot, and with a croisier staffe, and his head vailed, either to kill a sacrifice, or to take Augurie by flight of birds from the castle hill; who hath bene adorned and decked with the ensignes and ornaments of the great god Iupiter, and hath ridden in a gilded chariot through the citie into the Capitoll? Or in whose Title inscription and stile over his image, men shall with content, reade Consulship, Censurship, and Triumph; will not the same abide to see and reade, that ye have added thereunto  either Augurship, or Pontificall dignitie? I verily for my part hope (without the displeasure, and with reverence of the gods be it spoken) that we by the beneficence of the people of Rome are such, as for our qualitie and worthinesse, may and will yeeld no lesse credit and honor to our priesthoods, than we shall receive thereby: and who desire, in regard of the honor and service of God, more than for our owne sakes and proper interest, to have the meanes, That whome we serve and reverence in private, those we may also worship and honor publickly. But why have I hitherto so pleaded the cause, as if the Patritij were entirely alone intituled and invested in the prerogative of Sacerdotall Dignities; and as though we were not already possessed of one right honorable and principall Priesthood? We see that the Decemvirs for celebration of sacrifices, and for interpretation of Sibylla her prophesies, and other the fatall destinies of this people, the  prelates also and ministers of Apollo his sacrifice, and other holy ceremonies, are of the Commons. Neither was there any injurie done unto the Patritij at that time, when for to gratifie the Commons, the number of the Duumvirs was increased; those I meane, who should oversee (as superintendents) the offring of sacrifices. And now at this present they have no greater cause to complaine, if the Tribune, a stout and brave man, hath added five places more of Augurs, and foure of Bishops, unto which commoners may be nominated: not to dispossesse you of your roumes, or to displace you, o Appius, but that men of the commons might assist you in the function and ministerie of divine service and church matters; like as they do their part, and performe good service in humane and civil affaires. And be not ashamed, o Appius, to have him for your colleague in the priesthood, whom you might beseeme to have in Consulate or Censorship, your companion  and fellow; unto whom being Dictator, you might be Coronel of horse; as wel as he to you in your Dictatorship. Those auncient Nobles in old time (our progenitors) admitted into their number and order, a Sabine stranger, the very head and top of your nobilitie, one Ap. Clausus, or Ap. Claudius (choose you whether.) You must not thinke much then, to accept us into the number of Priests. We bring with us many honorable titles, even all the same that make you so prowd, and to beare your head aloft. L. Sextius was the first Commoner, created Consull; and C. Licinius S^olo the first Coronel of horse. C. R^tilius was the first Dictator and Censor, and Q. Publius Philo the first Praetor. We have heard this song evermore sounding in our eares, That to you alone pertaineth the taking of Auspicia: that you only are of noble descent and gentilitie: that ye and none but ye, by right and dutie ought to manage the affaires, and the soveraigne government, both at home  and abroade: and yet alwaies hitherto the commons in their places and charges, have done and sped as well as the Patritij, and henceforth ever shall (I doubt not.) What? heard ye never it spoken, that the Patritij were at first (...) and created, and not descended from heaven: but such as were able to name their father and grandsire; that is to say, even freemen just, and no more? What? I my selfe can nominate alreadie mine owne father to have bene a Consull, and shortly shall my sonne be able to alledge his grandsire. There is nothing els, o Quirites, in the matter whereupon we stand, but that we may obteine all which hath bene denied us. For the Nobles desire only to maintaine a side and to comend, and reake not greatly what issue their contentions come unto. As for me, I am of advise, and this would I have, That (to the good, profite, and happie estate of you all, and the weale publick) this law may passe under your affirmative  voyce [Vtirogastis.] Then presently the people commaunded the Tribes to be called to a scrutinie: and soone it appeared, that the law would without all doubt be accepted: but that day was lost, by the opposition and negative of some Tribunes. Howbeit, the morrow after, they were afraid to crosse it; and then with exceeding consent of all hands, it passed cleere. So there

 were created Prelates or Bishops; first, P. Decius Mus himselfe (that so pleaded for the law) with P. Sempronius Sophus, C. Martius Rutilius, and M. Livius Denter. Likewise, five Augurs of the Commons, to wit, C. Genutius, P. Aelius Paetus, M. Minutius Festus, C. Martius, and T. Publius. So there were eight Prelates in number, and nine Augurs.
The same year, M. Valerius the Consull, procured the law of appealing to the people, more surely to bee established and confirmed. This was now the third time after the deposition of the kings, that this one Act was revived; and alwaies by the same house or familie of the Valerij. The cause of renuing the same so often, was no other I suppose, than this; for that the mightinesse of some fewe great men of the Patritij, was more powerfull than the libertie and freedome of the Commons. Onely the law Portia, seemeth to have beene enacted for to save the backe and sides  of cittizens from whipping, because that it awarded and set a greevous punishment upon him, that either had beaten or killed a cittizen of Rome. The law Valeria, which forbad, to scourge or behead any man whosoever, that made his appeale; had this annexed only, that if any one had trespassed and procceded farther, it should bee decreed, LEAUDLY AND NAUGHTILY DONE. Such was the modestie and reverence of men in those daies, that this one addition [in my conceit verily] was supposed to bee a sufficient bond to strengthen the law. But now adaies, would a man scarcely threaten his servant or slave in that manner.
The same Consull made warre, without any worthie or memorable exploit, against the Aequians that rebelled; who (setting aside their stout and prowd stomacks) had nothing left of their ancient fortune and estate. The other Cos. Apuleius, besieged the town The same that Narnia. Nequinum in Vmbria. The  place was difficult and hard to get up, and on the one side steepe downe right (whereas now standeth Narnia) so that it was impregnable, either by assault, or countermures and skonces whatsoever. Whereupon, the new Consuls, M. Fulvius Paetus, and T. Manlius Torquatus, entred upon this enterprise, left undone and unfinished by the former. Now when all the Centuries nominated with one voice Q. Fabius for the Consulship of that yeare, even without his owne suite and seeking; Macer Licinius and Tubero doe write, that he himselfe laboured to have that charge put off, and reserved unto a yeare of more warre: alleadging, that for the present hee would serve the Commonweale in better stead, by bearing some civile office in the cittie: and so neither dissimuling what hee rather desired, nor yet seeking for it, hee was made Aedile of the Chaire, with L. Papyrius Cursor. But, to set this downe for a certaine truth I dare not; because that Piso, a  more ancient writer of Chronicles, sayth, that the Aediles C^rule of that year, were C. Domitius, Cn. F. Calvinus, Sp. Carvilius, and Q. Fabius Maximus. That surname, I suppose verily, gave occasion of the error in the Aeediles. Whereupon ensued a tale (sorting to that errour) mixed and compounded of the Elections of Aediles and Consuls together. The same yeare was held a solemne survey and purging of the citie by sacrifice, called Lustrum, by P. Semproniius Sophus, and P. Sulpitius Averrio, and two Tribes more were added to the rest, Aniensis, and Tarentina. And thus much concerning the affaires at Rome.
But now to returne to Nequinum; after much time spent in long and lingering siege before the town, two of the inhabitants, whose houses joined close to the wall, undermined the ground, and by a secret way came as farre as the corps de guard of the Romanes. From whence they were  brought before the Consull, and promised him to let in and receive what garrison and troupe of armed men he would, within the cittie. This offer was thought neither to be neglected and refused, nor yet rashly to be credited. So with the one of these twaine (for the other was kept behind as an hostage) two other spies were sent by the same mine to discover the traine. By whose relation, when it appeared sufficiently, that all was safe and without danger: by the leading and guiding of the traitor aforesaid, 300 armed men, by night entred the cittie, and seized that gate which was next unto them: at which, being broken open, the Consull and the Romane armie without resistance, made entrie, and surprised the citie. In this sort Nequinum was reduced to the obedience of the P. of Rome. A Colonie was thither sent to frontier against the Vmbrians, called of the Nar, now Negra. rivers name [which runneth under it] Nerni. Namia. And the armie with a rich prize was brought  againe to Rome.
The same yeare the Tuscanes, contrarie to the tenure of the truce, made preparation for war. But whiles they were busily occupied otherwise, it fortuned, that a puissant armie of Gaules invaded their marches, and for a while altered their dessignements. Afterwards, by the meanes of monie, whereof they were full and bare themselves mightie, they sought to make the Gaules, of

enemies to become their friends, and sollicited them to band together, and so jointly to maintaine  warre with the Romanes. Their societie and friendship the barbarous people refused not; onely, they stood upon the summe what they should have for their hire. Which being agreed upon and received, and all things els in a readinesse for to goe into the field; when the Tuscanes willed them to follow after, they flatly denied, that they had received any consideration for to make warre upon the Romanes: but whatsoever they had taken, it was because they should not wast the Tuscane land, and by way of hostilitie and force of armes, doe any violence upon the inhabitants: howbeit, if the Tuscanes were so minded to employ them, they would bee willing to serve; but for no other reward and recompense, than to bee admitted into part of their territorie; that at the length they might have some certaine place of abode, to settle themselves in. Many Diets and consultations hereabout were held by the States of Tuscane, but nothing  resolved and concluded: not so much, for that they feared to part with some of their lands, as because they were in great dread every one and abhorred, to have dwelling by them such neighbors, descended from so savage a race and cruell nation. Thus were the Gauls let go and dismissed, having away with them a huge masse of monie, which they got without any travell or perill of theirs.
The bruit of the Gaules tumult and insurrection, together with the Tuscanes warre, caused no little feare at Rome. Wherupon, more hast was made to conclude a league with the Marca. Ancona. Picene people. T. Manlius the Consull had the charge of the Tuscanes warre alotted unto him. Who scarcely was entered into the confines of the enemies, but as hee was training and exercising amongst the horsemen, ran his horse with full cariere, and suddainly as he turned about, was cast  off, and presently lay for dead: and so the Consull, three daies after his fall, ended his life. Which the Tuscans taking hold of, as a good ominous token and presage, got hart and were very jolie; saying, that the gods had in favour of them, begun this warre. This was heavie news at Rome, both for the losse of so brave a personage, and for the time, wherein so unhappily it fell out: so as, the assemblie held (by the advise of the cheefe Peeres) for to substitute a Consul in his place that was deceased, frighted the Senatours from chusing a Dictator. All their sentences, and all the centuries, gave with M. Valerius to bee Consull: who was the man, whome the Senate was about to have pricked for Dictatour. Then forthwith, they ordained him to go into Tuscane to the armie. Whose comming suppressed and kept under the Tuscanes; so as not a man durst once go out of their trenches and hold. Even their very feare was as good as a siege unto them: for that the new  Consull, neither by wasting the fields, nor firing their houses in such sort, as every where, not onely the smal villages, but also the good and wel-peopled townes were seene to smoke and burn againe, could draw them forth to fight.
This warre continued longer than men thought: but behold, there arose a bruit of another; (which, considering the mutual losses of both sides, was for good causes greatly to be feared) upon intelligence given from the Picenes their new allies, namely, that the Samnites were about to take armes and rebell, and had sollicited them also to doe the same. The Picentes were highly thanked for this, and a great part of the Senatours care was diverted nowe from Tuscane to the Samnites. The dearth besides of corne and victuals troubled the cittie: and driven they had ben to extreame famine, if Fabius Maximus (as they have written, who are of opinion that hee was  Aedile that yeare) by provident purveighing and diligent conveighing of corne, had not been as carefull and industrious, in the dispensing of victuall now at home, as many times before in war-affaires. The same yeare there was an Interreigne, but upon what occasion, it is not knowne. The Interregents were App. Claudius, and after him P. Salpitius, who held an Election of Consuls, and created L. Cornelius Scipio, and Cn. Fulvius.
In the beginning of this yeare, there came the Oratours from the Lucanes to these newe Consuls, for to make complaint, That the Samnites, who by no conditions and meanes could induce them for to band and take armes with them, were entered into their confines, and made wast of the countrey, and by verie force provoked them to warre, saying, That the Lucanes had long agoe overshot and passed themselves that way: but nowe they were  so fully resolute, that they could find in their hears, sooner to abide and endure all kind of calamitie whatsoever, than ever after to offend and displease the Romane name. They besought the Senate therefore, to receive the Lucanes into their protection, and also to keepe and defend them from the violence and injurie of the Samnites. And for themselves, albeit entering

 into warre alreadie with the Samnites, they were of necessitie obliged to be sast and true unto the Romanes: yet for better securitie they were readie to put in sufficient hostages. The Senate was not long consulting hereabout: but all with one consent were of opinion, to make league with the Lucanes, and to summon the Samnits to make amends and restitution. The Lucanes, besides a courteous and gracious answere, were accepted into the league. Then were there Fecial Heralds dispatched to the Samnits, to give them warning for to depart the territorie of the Romane allies, and to withdraw their forces out of the confines of the Lucanes. But the Samnites sent out certaine messengers to meet them upon the way, and to denounce unto them, that if they presented themselves in any Councel within Samnium, they should not depart againe with safegard of their persons. When these news were heard at Rome, both the Senat advised, and the  people allowed, to make warre upon the Samnites. The Consuls parted their provinces and charges between themselves. To Scipio fell Hetruria, and the Samnites to Falvius: and so they take their journey divers waies, ech one to the warre allotted unto him. Scipio looked for no other, but a lingering warre at the enemies hands, and like to the defensive service of the former yeare: but behold, they with an armie well appointed and arraunged, encountred him and gave him battaile neere to Volterr^. Volaterre. Where they fought the better part of the day, with much blooshed on both sides: and whiles they were doubtfull which way the victorie went, the night came between. But the morning after, bewraied both who were winners, and who were loosers. For the Tuscanes in the still and dead time of the night dislodged. The Romane Consull comming forth into the field, and seeing by the enemies departure, the victorie confessed; went forward to the campe:  which he found emptie of men, but full of rich pillage, (for they had fearfully and in great hast abandoned their tents) and was master thereof. From thence he retired his forces into the territorie of the Faliscanes: and after he had left at Falerij, all his bag and baggage with a meetly garrison there; lightly appointed, he marched forward, and with a running campe wasted the marches and territories of his enemies. He put all to fire and sword: drave away booties from all parts: and left not the ground onely, wast and desert, but set fire also upon castles and borrough townes. Onely he forbare to assault the great and strong cities, into with feare had driven the Tuscanes for refuge. Cn. Fulvius the Consull on the other part fought a noble battaile in Samnium, neere Boiano. Bovianum, and the victorie was no whit doubtfull. After which he assailed Bovianum, and not long after Aufidena: and both citties he wan by force. The same yeare was there a  Colonie brought to Arceolo: Carseoli within the territorie of the Aequiculi. And Fulvius the Consull triumphed of the Samnites.
When as now the of this yeare, there came of the Consuls Election drew neere; there was a rumour raised, that the Tuscanes and Samnites were levying and enrolling of great and mightie forces: that openly in all their assemblies and Diets, the princes of the Tuscans were coursed and reprooved, for that they had not waged the Gaules to warre, whatsoever it had cost them: that the magistrates of the Samnites were blamed, for exposing that armie as it were a preie unto the Romanes, which had beene provided against their enemies the Lucanes. For now seeing that the enemies both with their owne power, and also with the helpe of their allies, were come to warre; they should not be able to match them, having their forces thus redoubled. Now albeit there were other famous  and renowmed persons stood to be Consuls, yet this new feare and affright turned all men to become favourites of Q. Fabius Maximus: who at the first made no suite, and afterwards, seeing the inclination of their affections, refused also to be Consull.q ] Demaunding what they ment to trouble and molest him, so aged a man as he was, and one, who as as he had gone through all labours and travails of this world; so he had passed also the rewards, and recompenses of his travailes: alleadging, that neither strength of bodie, norvigor of spirit could alwaies continue the same, and last for ever: and besides, he feared fortune her selfe, least haply she might be thought of any of the gods too propice and favourable unto him, and more permanent than the ordinarie train and course of this world would permit. Therfore, like as himselfe had grown up after the glorie of his elders, and succeeded them; so he saw and beheld with joy of heart, others also rising up after him,  and to succeed him in the like glorie: and as there wanted not at Rome high promotions and advancements for hardie and valiant men, so there failed not brave men of worth for to receive those honours and dignities. But by this refusall of his so modest, so just and reasonable he whetted and kindled more and more their earnest affections and favours towards him, which he thinking to dull and quench, with the reverent regard and awe of the lawes, commaunded a statute to

be read, wherein it was not lawfull for one and the same man within tenne yeares to be created  Consull twise. But scarcely for the noise that the people made, could this law be heard red: and the Tribunes of the Com. said, that this should be no let: for they would preferre a bil unto the people, that he might be discharged and despensed withal from the Statutes in that behalf. Howbeit he stood stifly st^l in his refusal: demanding of them to what purpose and end were the lawes made, if by the ver^e makers therof, they might be thus deluded and made of no force? For so (qd. he) lawes ruled not, but were overruled. But nath'lesse, the people went to a scrutinie and began to give their voices: and as everie Centurie was called into the railes, they named and chose Fabius Consull, without sticking at the matter.
Then at last, overcome with this generall accord and consent of the whole cittie: God say Amen (quoth hee) o Quirites, to that you doe and are about. But for as much as you will have your will and dispose of me at your pleasure, doe me this favour yet, that  I may have the chusing of my Colleague. I beseech you make Consull with me, P. Decius, a man approved unto me alreadie, with whom, I have sorted well in the fellowship of another office: a man I say, answerable otherwise to the greatnesse of his name, and worthie of his fathers vertue, from whom he is descended. This favour which he requested, seemed unto them just and reasonable. So all the Centuries behind, created Q. Fabius and P. Decius for Consuls.
The same yeare the Aediles served processe upon verie many citizens; for holding and possessing of more lands, than by law was limited: and none in a manner was able to acquite himselfe hereof. Which was a great bridle and restraint to their unmeasurable avarice. As the new Consuls, Q. Fabius Maximus the fourth time, and P. Decius Mus the third time, con^erred and laid their heads togethether about their charges, that the one should take in hand  the Samnites, and the other the Tuscanes; and consulted what forces might serve and be sufficient for this or that province and exploit; and to whether warre either of them were the more meete and sufficient leader; certaine Embassadours, from Sutrium, Neper, and Falerij, aduertised them, That the States of Tuscane, were now consulting in their Diets, about a Treatie of peace: which was an occasion, that they turned all their preparations and forces into Samnium. The Consuls being gone forth, to the end they might have the readier provision of graine and victuals, and the enemie be more to seeke, which way they would assaile them, led their Legions into Samnium; Fabius, through the territorie of Sora, and Decius by the way of the Sidicines. When they were come into the confines of their enemies, both of them spred themselves all abroad, and fell to forray and spoile the countrie: yet so* as they sent out their espials farther than  they wasted. Whereupon, they were well ware of their enemies, as they lay in ambush well appointed, within a close and secret valley neere Tifernum; what way as, they thought to take the vantage of the higher ground, and to set upon the Romans so soone as they were once entred in. Fabius having removed his cariages into a sure place, and set there a competent gard for defence, foretold his soldiors that there was a battaile toward: and in a four square battaillon marched directly to the forsaid Embascado, where the enemies lurked and lay in wait. The Samnits then, dispairing and out of allhope to do any great exploit, by suddain tumult, considering their trains were discovered; and seeing they must once at the length come to the triall in open field, were themselves also more willing to put all upon a set battaile. Thereupon they descended into the plaine and even ground, and committed themselves to the fortune of fight, with more courage of heart  than hope of victorie. But were it, that they had assembled together the whole floure and manhood out of all the nations of the Samnites, or that the hazard of the maine chance made them more hardie and take the better heart: surely even in plaine field, they held the Romanes play and put them to great feare. Fabius seeing the enemies no way to recule and give ground, commaunded M. Flavius and M. Valerius, two Colonels, with whom he had set forward and advanced into the forefront, to go to the horsemen, and to exhort them, If ever they remembred and called to mind, that the Commonwealth had beene helped by the valour of thegentlemen on horsebacke, they should that day endeavour to make invincible and eternall, the glorie of that degree and order of Cavallerie. For seeing that the enemies stood unmoveable against the Infanterie, there was no other hope but in the force of horsemen: and herewith all hee called upon  those two young Gentlemen, and plied both the one and the other with like courtesie, one while praising them, another while loding them with faire and large promises. But when as the assay of that force likewise, prevailed not, thinking where strength would take no place, there craft was to be tried and practised, he caused Scipio his Lieutenant, to withdraw out of the medley, the javelineirs

 of the first legion, and as closely as hee could to fetch about with them, toward the next hils: and then, to march up the hill some way from the fight of the enemies; and after hee had gained the top, all of a suddaine to shew himselfe behind, and charge upon the enemies backes, whiles their faces were turned another way. Now the horsemen, by the direction of those two Colonels, being ridden of a suddaine before the standards, troubled their owne fellowes almost as much as the enemies. For against these troupes and cornets of horse that thus violently put forward, the Samnites battaile stood unmoveable, and on no part could either bee forced to recule, or to breake their array. The horsemen when they saw this attempt to take no effect, retired themselves behind the ensignes, and departed out of the battaile. Hereupon tooke the enemies more heart unto them; neither had the vantgard of the Romanes beene able to abide so long a  conflict, and the violence of the enemies still encreasing, upon their owne confidence, but that the second raunges in the middle ward, by the Consull his commaundement, came forward into the front of the vaward. Where they with their fresh strength, staied the Samnites, being now readie to enter forceablie upon them, and to gaine the ground: and withall, at the time appointed, the ensignes shewed themselves from the hils, and came downe unwares to the enemies; and setting up a shout, not onely daunted the hearts of the Samnites [but also encouraged the Romanes.] For both Fabius cried aloud, that his Colleague Decius approched, and every souldiour for his part, what he might, with joyfull and cheereful hearts, iterated, that the other Consull was come, and the legions were at hand. Which error and mistaking, as it turned to the good of the Romanes, so it caused the Samnites to flie, and to be surprised with a fright, fearing and doubting  nothing so much, as that being now overtoiled and wearied, they should bee overcharged also with fresh and lustie forces. And for that in their running every way, they were scattered asunder, there was lesse slaughter than for the preparation of so great a victorie. For 3400 only were slain, and of prisoners were taken, welneer three hundred and thirtie: and three and twentie banners and ensigns woon and caried away. The Apulians had joined with the Samnits before the battel, but that P. Decius the Consull encamped against them at Maleventum, and having drawne them forth to fight, discomfited them. Where also there were more that fled, than died upon the sword: for not above 2000 Apulians were slaine. And Decius making no reckoning of that enemie, conducted his legions into Samnium. Where, two Consular hostes, having overrun the countrie in divers parts, within five moneths space laid all wast and desolate. Five and fortie places  there were in Samnium, where Decius had encamped: and eightie sixe, wherein the other Consul had pitched. In which, they left behind them not only the marks of stakes, rampires, and ditches, but also many other more notable signes and tokens of the countrie wasted all about, and utterly spoiled by them. Fabius besides, woon the cittie Cimetra. Where there were taken prisoners two thousand and foure hundred armed souldiours, and slaine there were in fight upon 430.
From thence he went to Rome against the Election of new Consuls; and made all the hast he could to dispatch that businesse. And when as all the Centuries first called foorth to give their suffrages, named Q. Fabius for the Consull; then Appius Claudius a Consular man, and one of the Competitours, a grim sir, and ambitious by nature, laboured no more for his owne honour  and advancement, than to recover again unto the Patruij, both the roomes of the Consulship, and emploied as well his own devoir, as also all the means and assistance of the Patruij and Nobilitie, to have himselfe chosen Consull with Q. Fabius. As for Fabius, at the first, spake and alleadged in his owne behalfe, the same reasons in manner which he had used the former yeare, and refused to be Consull. The whole bodie of the Nobilitie stood about his seat, praying instantly, and entreating him to plucke the Consulship out of the mire and base degree of these Commons, and to restore the auncient majestie both to the Magistracie it selfe, and also to the Patruij and their houses and families. Fabius after silence made, framed a middle and moderate kind of speech, whereby he appeased and allaied their hote affection, promising and assuring them, that he would willingly accept the names of two of the Nobilitie, if he might see, that they would create  any other Consull but himselfe: for at this present Election, he would in no wise admit himselfe, to be eligible and nominated Consull, and give so bad a precedent to prejudice all course of law, for the time to come. So L. Volumnius, out of the bodie of the Commons, was created Consull with App. Claudius, who likewise in the former Consulship had been matched Colleagues together. The Nobilitie used to object unto Fabius, and reproched him, that he avoided App. Claudius

to be his companion in government, who for eloquence and other civile parts was no doubt  a singular and excellent man. When the Election was ended, the old Consuls were commaunded to warre in S^mnium, having their governement continued, and their commission renued for sixe moneths. And so in the year following likewise, when L. Volumnius and Appius Claudius were Consuls, P. Decius, who being Consull, had been left behind his Collegue in Samnium, ceased not now in qualitie and name of Proconsull, to wast the countrie; untill at length, when the Samnites would in no place abide battell, they were by him chased out of their own borders and limites. And thus driven out of the field, and excluded out of their owne countrie, they went into Hetruria.
Where, supposing that with so huge a multitude of armed men, they should doe that more effectually with intreatie and praiers, mingled with threats among, which by so many Embassages they had so oft attempted in vaine; they called for a Diet and generall Counsell of the  States and Princes of Hetrutia. Which being assembled, they declared and shewed, for how many yeares space they had maintained warre with the Romanes in the right of their freedome; that they had assaied all meanes, if haply they might have beene able by their owne puissance alone, to sustaine and support the weight of so huge and important a warre; that they had besides made proofe of the aides of other neighbour nations, but to little effect; that they had sought for peace of the people of Rome, when they were not able to wage war any longer: and because peace was more greevous unto them with that subjection, than war with their libertie, they had rebelled and made warre againe: and now their onely hope they had, remained in the Tuscanes; knowing well enough, that for men, munition, and monie, they were the mightiest nation of all Italie; as having to their neighbours the Gaules, a people borne and bred up in armor and war;  by naturall disposition fierce and cruell, but especially in any quarell against the people of Rome: of whom they doe (and not untruly report) that they were by them vanquished and constrained to raunsome themselves for gold. Now, if the Tuscanes were of that heart and courage, as Porsi^^ sometimes, and other their noble progenitors were; there were no doubt, but that they might dis^^ize the Romanes, and dispossesse them of all the ground on this side Tybris, and make them fight for the defence and preservation of their lives, and not for the intollerable seignorie and dominion of Italie. They said moreover, that there was now come unto them an armie of Samnites, well appointed and furnished with armour, and stored with pay and monie, who would follow them forthwith, even to the assault of the citie of Rome, if they would lead them.
Whiles they were thus braving, and gloriously boasting themselves, and preparing of warre  in Tuscane, the Romanes warre at their owne dores, laysore upon them, and stung them at the heart. For P. Decius having learned by the espials, that the Samnites armie was gone foorth, and had taken their voiage, assembled a counsell and said, What meane wee thus to raunge over the sields, warring from village to village? And not rather assaile the walled townes and strong citties? There is no armie now, that defendeth Samnium: gone they are out of their confines, and wrought their owne exile and banishment. When they all had allowed of this motion, hee led forth his power to assault the strong cittie Murgantia. And so hotely were the souldiors set, both for the love they bare to their captaine, and also for hope of winning a richer pillage thereby, than by driving booties out of the countrie, that in one day by fine force of armes they won the towne. Where two thousand and one hundred Samnites, fighting men, either fell upon the edge  of the sword, or were taken prisoners, with a great and rich bootie besides.
But for fear that it should surcharge and encomber the armie with heavie carriages, Decius caused his souldiors to be called together unto an audience, and thus to them he said. And will ye stand contented indeed with this victorie onely, and this prey? Or will yee build your hope still, answerable to your prowesse and valour? All the citties of the Samnites, all the substance and riches that lieth and remaineth in their citties are yours; for as much as yee have in so many battailes vanquished their legions, and at last driven them out of their owne countrie. Sell these prizes, and with hope of gain draw after you chapmen and merchants to follow the armie. I will from time to time still helpe you to wares and commodities for to sell. Let us goe from hence streight to the cittie Romulea, where  your toile shall not be so great, but the spoile farre greater. So when they had made sale of their pillage, and willingly of themselves called upon and exhorted their captain to that expedition, to Romulea they goe. Where likewise, without mure and platforme, without warlicke engines of batterie, so soone as they advanced their ensignes, and approached the wals, they could by no violence bee driven from thence, but set up ladders in all hast, at the next place that every man

 could find, and so scaled up the walls. Thus the towne was woon and ransacked. To the number of 2300 were slaine, and 6000 taken prisoners. The souldiers having gotten an exceeding bootie, were forced to sell it, and make all away, as before: and from thence without any rest at all given unto them were they led to Ferentinum, yet they marched thither with exceeding courage and cheerefulnes. Howbeit, there they found more difficult and perilous service: for the walls were with all forcible meanes defended, and the place it selfe was both by mans hand, and naturall situation, surely fensed: but yet the souldiers now being fleshed, and inured to spoile, overcame al difficulties. Three thousand men about the walls were slaine: and the saccage fell to the souldiers share. The greatest part of the honor in assaulting and winning of these cities, is ascribed in some Chronicles  to Fabius Maximus. For they write, that Murgantia was by Decius woon, but Ferentinum and Romulea, by the conduct of Fabius. But some attribute the glorie hereof unto the new Consuls. And there are, that give the glorie not to both, but to the one of them, to wit, P. Volumnius, unto whom befell the Province of Samnium.
Whiles these affaires thus went in Samnium (by whose leading and managing it skils not) in the meane time a mightie war was a preparing in Hetruria; and that, of many nations banded together: the principall author whereof was G^llius Egnatius a Samnit. The Tuskanes, in manner all, had taken armes and levied their forces, and the neere societie, caused also the people of Vmbria adjoyning to take their part: besides, Gaules also were waged for money to ayde: all which multitude assembled together, and met in the Samnites camp. The newes of which sodaine and unexpected tumult, being brought to Rome; for so much as P. Volumnius the Cos. with the second  and third legions, and with 15000. confederates, was gone alreadie into Samnium; it was thought good and determined, that Ap. Claudius with all speede possible, should go into Hetruria: and after him, two Romane legions followed, to wit, the first and fourth, with twelve thousand allies; who encamped not farre from the enemie. But more good was done there, in respect that they came thither betimes, (to the end that the feare of the Romane name might keepe in awe certaine nations in Hetruria, which alreadie intended warre) than for any exploit performed either skilfully or luckily, under the conduct of the Consull. Many skirmishes there passed in places of disadvantage, and at times unconvenient; in so much, as the enemie took more heart, and conceived greater hope every day more than other: and now it grew welneere to this point, that neither souldier could wel recken of the sufficiencie of Captaine, nor Captain trust upon the loyaltie  of the souldier. In three several Annales I find, that Appius dispatched his letters to his fellow Consull, and sent for him out of Samnium: howbeit, I am loth to set this downe, being so uncertaine as it is; seeing that the verie Consuls themselves of Rome, who now the second time were coupled together in one government, contested, and openly jarred about this point: whiles Appius denied flatly that he sent any script at all, and Volumnius again avouched, that he was sent for by Appius his letters. Volumnius by this time had woon three Castles in Samnium, wherein were slaine three thousand enemies, and almost halfe so many taken prisoners: and composed besides, the seditions and quarels of the Lucanes, which arose from the commons and needie persons; and that, with the exceeding good contentment of the chiefe and principall personages of the countrey, by the meanes and mediation of Q. Fabius the Proconsull, who was thither sent with  the old armie. This done, he left Decius to wast and pill the countrie of the enemies, and himselfe with his forces marched toward his Colleague into Hetruria. Who at his first comming, was received generally with all the joy that might be. For mine owne part, I suppose verily, that as Appius had good cause to carie an angrie stomack with him, in case his conscience bare him witnesse, that he wrote not unto him* so againe, if he had need of his Colleagues aid, he shewed an illiberall, unkind, and unthankfull nature of his owne, in that he would so dissemble, and not be knowne thereof. For being come forth to meete him, before they had well greeted and saluted one another, How now, quoth he, o L. Volumnius, is all well? How goes the world in Samnium? What hath moved you to abandon and leave your owne charge and province, and to depart? Volumnius made answere, that in Samnium all things went well and chieved prosperously, and  that himselfe was now come, as sent for by his letters: which if they were counterfet, and that there were no neede of him in Hetruria, he would presently turne his ensignes, and be gone. Mary quoth he, and good leave have you: you may be gone when you wil, and no man holdeth you: and ill beseeming it is, that you who peradventure are not able to weeld and manage your owne affaires of warre, should glorie thus, and make your boast that you are come hether to helpe

others. Here at, Volumnius should reply again and say, It is well, and God send us good luck: I had  rather lose my labour, than ought should have hapned, whereby one Consuls armie were not sufficient to deale with Hetruria.
Now as the Consuls were parting asunder one from the other, the Lieutenants and Colonels of Appius his armie, came and stood round about them both: some requested their owne Generall, that the aide of his Colleague which ought to have bene accepted by them if it had bene required; now that it was offred so willingly, and of his owne accord, should not be refused and rejected. But the more part encountred Volumnius, as he was readie to go his way, and earnestly besought him not for any froward contention, and debate with his companion, to betray the common-weale. For if any overthrow or misadventure should happen, the blame would be imputed rather to the forsaker, than the forsaken: and now things were come to this passe, that the honor or dishonor of the war in Hetruria, prove it wel or ill, should fal  upon L. Volumnius: for that no man would enquire of the words and language that Appius gave him, but of the fortune and successe of the armie: and albeit Appius had given him his farewell and pasport, the weale publick and the armie held him still by the sleeve, and for proofe hereof, let him but make triall of the souldiers harts and affections. Thus with remonstrances, persuasions, and heartie prayers to the one Consull and the other, they drew them both, in manner against their wils, to parlie in publik audience before the whole army. Where they grew to longer speeches and discourses, but to the same purpose and effect, as before in the hearing and presence of a few.
Now when Volumnius (as having the better cause) seemed to reply, and that with good grace and words enough, against that singular eloquence of his Colleague; and that Appius in frumping and taunting manner, gave out and said, That they were beholden to him, and might  con him thanke, that of a dumbe and tongue-tide Consull, they had one now, that was so readie and eloquent: and who in his former Consulship, and specially in the first moneths, could not open his mouth, and speake a word, was now of a sodaine become an Oratour, and able to make plausible and popular Orations: then replied Volumnius and said, Would God, with all my hart, you rather had learned of me to fight valiantly, then I of you to speak finely: and in conclusion, he said, he would tender him an offer, which should determine and put out of all doubt, whether of them twaine, were, not the better Lawyer and Orator (for at this present the commonweale stood not in neede of such) but the better warrior and Captaine generall. Whereas therfore, there are ij. Provinces, Hetruria and Samnium, it shal be in your choise (quoth he) to take one of them, whether you will, and I my selfe will with my owne armie, make warre in the other. Then began the souldiers to  cry alowd unto them, that they would joyntly enter both upon the Tuskane warre. Which consent and accord of theirs, when Volumnius had perceived, For as much (quoth he) as I have once mistaken and misinterpreted the will of my Colleague, I will not in any case stand in doubt and be ignorant of your minds too: let me know therfore by a shout of yours, whether you would have me tarrie or depart? Whereat they set up such a note, that it gave an alarme to the enemies, and raised them out of their camp; and presently they caught their weapons up, and came forth into the field. Volumnius likewise caused the trompets to sound, and the standerds and ensignes to be brought abroad. Then Appius (as it is reported) seeing plainely, that whether he fought or sate still, the victorie would be ascribed to his Colleague, stood in a mammering and suspense for a while: but afterwards fearing, least that his owne legions also would follow  Volumnius, gave likewise unto his men the signall of battaile, which they so instantly called for. But neither they, nor the enemies were well arranged and in good order: for both the leader of the Samnits (Gellius Egnatius) was gone a foraging abroad, with some few cohorts and bands with him; whereupon the souldiers rather of their owne head, than by conduct and direction of Captains, began to charge: and also the Romane armies were not both lead forth together, nor yet had time enough to be marshalled accordingly: for Volumnius first gave the charge, before that Appius could come to encounter the enemies: whereupon, the forefronts were not equally matched together: and as if some fortune had exchanged the enemies, that they were wont to fight with all; the Tuskanes presented themselves to Volumnius, and the Samnites who stayed awhile (for that their Generall was absent) affronted Appius.
It is reported that Appius in the very  heate of the medley, was seene in the front of the formost ensignes, to lift up his hands to heaven, and pray in this wise, O Lady Bellona, if thou give us victorie, and the honor of this day, then, be sure, I vow here unto thee at this houre, a faire Temple. When he had thus prayed, as if the goddesse had put life unto him, and animated his courage, both himselfe matched the valour of his

 Colleague, and his armie answered the vertue of their Commander. For he performed the devoir and part (indeed) of a brave Generall. The soldiors likewise, for feare that the other armie should begin the victory, endeavoured and streined all that ever they could. Wherby, they disaraied, discomfited, and put to flight the enemies, who could not easely abide any extraordinarie force and violence, more than they were wont to meet withall. And so with preasing hard upon them still that reculed, and chasing them hotly that were scattered in flight, they beate them into their campe. There, by the comming in of Gellius and the Sabellian bands, the battaile for the time was freshly renewed. But when they also, within a while were discomfited, then was the camp assaulted by the conquerors. Thus whiles Volumnius for his part entred with banner displaied unto the verie gate, and Appius ever and anone, reiterated the name of Bellona the victresse, and all,  to set on fire and inflame the courage of his soldiors; there was neither trench nor rampier that could hold them backe. So the campe was won and sacked, and a huge pillage therein found, which was given all to the soldiors. Seven thousand and three hundred enemies were slaine, 2120 taken prisoners.
During the time that both Consuls, and the whole puisance of the Romans, were thus bent and implied in the warre within Tuscane; there were new forces raised in Samnium, to wast the marches of the Romane dominion: who taking their way through the Vestines, into Campania and the countrie of Faleria, drave huge prizes and booties away. And as Volumnius by great journies returned into Samnium (for by this time Fabius and Decius were come to an end of their prorogued government) the bruit that was blowne abroad of the Samnites armie, and their forraying  of the territorie of Capua, turned him out of his way, to the defence of his allies and confederates. So soone as he was entred into the countrie Calenum, both he himselfe saw the fresh markes and tokens of great dammage and desolation: and also the Calenians advertised him, that the enemies caried with them alreadie so excessive a preie and bootie, that they were scarceable for it to march in good order, and that their captaines began openly to speake and say, that the best course they could take, was presently to retire into Samnium, there to leave their prises and booties, and so to returne afresh to their rodes and make new expeditions; and not to commit an armie, so loden and surcharged, to the fortune and hazard of a battaile. Which words, albeit they sounded much to a truth, yet he thought it meet to looke better into the matter, and to build upon a surer ground, and therfore he sent certaine light horsemen, to intercept some forragers as  they stragled and were scattered one from another in the sields. By whom he learned, after much questioning with them, that the enemies encamped by the river Natarone; or Vulturno. Vulturnus, and from thence at the About midnight. third watch, would set forward on their journey directly into Samnium. After he had sufficient intelligences and advertisements concerning these things, he dislodged and put himselfe upon his way and encamped so farre from the enemies, as his approch by being too neere could not be knowne, and yet he might be able to surprise them as they should yssue in disorder out of their campe. So, a good while before day, he marched towards the enemie: and sent such as were well seene in the Osciane toung, to listen and learne what they did. Who being intermingled with the enemies (which was an easie matter in that night garboile and confusion) they found that the ensignes were set forward, not sufficiently accompanied with armed  men for defence; and that the whole pillage with the guard and convoy thereof, was now going forth, and marched carelesly, like a fort of vile and base lozels, every man thinking of his owne particulars and running on his owne head, without consent of others, and with little or no direction and government. This was thought the meetest time to set upon them: and now it drew neere day. Whereupon he commaunded the trumpets to sound the charge, and set upon the march of the enemies. The Samnites, incombred as they were, and pestered with their bootie, and few of them here and there in armour, began, some of them to double their pace and to march faster away, and drive before them the bootie: some stood still, and wist not whether they were better, to go on forward, or retire againe into the campe. But whiles they thus trifled and staied, they were environed and surprised by the Romanes: and by this time they had  gotten over their rampier: much killing there was, and confusion in the campe. The Samnites, as they marched, besides that they were troubled with the assault of their enemies, were also disquited with the suddain escape and revolt of their prisoners: who being some of them loose, losed also those that were bound: whiles others of them, caught vp their weapons which were fastened to the packes, and being confusedly intermedled in the march, made a greater and more fearefull

garboile and havocke, than the verie battell of the enemies. And more than that, they performed  formed one memorable and notable Act above the rest. For as Statius egnatius the Generall, went about the rankes and files encouraging the souldiors to fight, they set upon him, scattered the horsemen asunder, that accompanied him, environed him about, and tooke him as he sat on horsebacke, and haled him to the Romane Consull. Vpon which tumult and sturre, the foremost ensigns of the Samnits were called back, and the battell which in manner was done, now began afresh: yet could not they any long time resist and hold out. Slaine there were about sixe thousand; two thousand and five hundred taken prisoners. Amongst whom, were 4 Colonels and 30 ensigns: and (that, wherein the victors took contentment) of captives, 7000 and 400 hundred were again recovered; with an exceeding great bootie which they had gotten from their allies: whereunto, by proclamation were called, all that could lay anyclaime, or pretend a right, to seaze upon  their owne goods, and to receive the same by a day appointed. And look what parcels could not be owned or chalenged by the true owner, was given away to the soldiors: who were compelled to make sale thereof, to the end, that they should not set their heart upon any thing but warre.
This saccage of the territorie of Capua, had raised great trouble and stir in Rome. And at the verie same time also, it chanced, that there came news out of Hetruria, how that upon the withdrawing of Volumnius his forces out of those parts, all that countrie was up afresh in arms; that Gellius Egnatius the Samnite captaine, and the Vmbrians likewise, were moved to revolt; and the Gaules also sollicited with great summes of mony. At this bruit the Senate being affraid, commaunded an abstinence or vacation of terme, and that all sorts of men should be mustered: and not onely the free borne naturall citizens, and the flower of the youth were prest and sworne, but  certaine Cohort (...) companies also of the elder sort, yea and bands of Libertines newly enfranchised, were inrolled by the hundreds. Likewise they sat in Councel about devising meanes for defence of the citie: and P. Sempronius the Pretor, had the whole government of the State. But the Senate was partly cased and discharged of this care, by the letters of L. Volumnius the Cos. which gave intelligence that the forraiers of Campaine were diffeated, slain, and put to flight. Therupon were decreed in favor of the Consull, for this exploit by him atchieved, solemne processions, and the abstinence of terme again was remitted, which had continued for eighteene daies space: and the procession aforesaid, was tight joifully performed. Then began they to devise about garrisons for defence of the countrie, thus wasted and overrun by the Samnites. And agreed it was, that two Colonies should be sent, about the Vestine and Falerne costs, one to the mouth of the river Liris, which  Colonie was called (...) Minturnae, the other in the Vestine forrest and streights, adjoining to the Fal^rne countrie; where Synope, a Greeke town sometime stood, and afterwards was called by the Romanes there inhabiting, (...) Monte (...). Sinuessa. The Tribunes of the Com. had in charge to ordaine by an Act of the common people, that P. Sempronius the Pretor should choose certaine Triumvirs, about the sending and translating of inhabitants into those Colonies. But much adoe they ^ad to find those that willingly yeelded to be inrolled Coloners, supposing indeed, that they were sent thither, not to inhabite land and ground for their best behoofe, but to lie in garrison, and to stand upon their guard in those frontiers, which were continually molested by warlike enemies. From the care of these affaires, the Senate was withdrawne, by occasion of the Tuscanes warre, whereof the rumour dailie encreased: and letters also came thicke from Appius, who warned them not to neglect the rising of that countrey: which letters imported, that foure nations had united their forces, and banded themselves together; to wit, Tuscane, Samnium, Vmbria, and the Gaules: that they were alreadie encamped in two places, for that one was not able to receive so great a multitude. Vpon these occasions, as also for that the time drew neere of Election of Consuls, Lucius Volumnius the Consull was called home to Rome.
Who before that he called the Centuries for to give their voices, having assembled the people to an audience, discoursed before them at large, concerning the greatnesse of the Tuscane warre. How that afore time, when he himselfe and his brother Consull warred there together, it was of so great importance, that neither one leader, not yet one armie was sufficient: and by report, the Vmbrians, and a mightie power of Gauls were afterward combined unto them. So that they should remember, that they were to chuse that day two Coss. against foure nations. As for himselfe, but that he was certainely persuaded and assured, that the people of Rome would with a generall consent declare him Col. who at that time, without all controversie was counted the principall captain and best leader of all others, he would forthwith nominate a Dictator. No

 man doubted, but that Q. Fabius was the man, who by the assent of all, was ment and destined to this charge: and him, together with Volumnius, both the prerogative tribe, and all those that were called first, everie one, nominated to be Coss.
Fabius made a speech by way of excuse, in substance, like as he had done before, two years together: but afterwards seeing he was overcome with the generall agreement of the people, he framed it so in the end, that he required P. Decius to be his collegue: Alleaging, that he would be in steed of a good prop and stay to him in his old age: how he had found by experience in one Censorship and two Consulships, born jointly together with him, that there was no suretie and defence of the Commonweale, to the concord and agreement of those that are companions in governement. And to any other new Collegue besides him, hardly could an old mans mind sort and frame. Also that he would and could more easily impart his mind and purpose  to one, whose humor, condition, and behavior, he had been alreadie acquainted with. The Cos. himselfe confirmed his Oration, and accorded thereunto; as well, in regard of the commendable parts and deserts of P. Decius, as also of the good that proceeded and ensued upon the managing of war-affaires, by the concord and unitie of the Consuls; and of the hurt which happened and followed upon their disagreement and dissention; and therewith he shewed how neere they were of late to utter perill and destruction, through quarrels betweene him and his brother Appius; admonishing Decius and Fabius both, to live so, as with one mind and heart they affected and intended the same things. He added moreover and said, they were men of Action both, borne for war and to be soldiors; for martiall feats renowmed alreadie: but for to maintaine contentions of words and quarrels of the tongue, altogether rude and unskilfull, and such natures, (said he) were fittest to make Consuls. As for nimble heads and sine wits, deepely seene in points and quirckes of law, full of their eloquent tearmes, such as Ap. Claudius was; those were meet to be made Lord Presidents of the citie and cheefe Iustices in the common place, for to sit in judgement of causes, and see the execution of lawes. Thus in handling of these matters was that day spent. The morrow after, according to the Consuls appointment, was the Election held, both of new Consuls, and also of Pretors. Q. Fabius and P. Decius were created Consuls, and App. Claudius Pretour, all absent. And L. Volumnius by Act of the Senate, and graunt of the Commons, had his government proroged, and continued in his charge one yeare longer.
The same yeare were many strange sights and prodigious monsters seen: for the turning away of the dangers foresignified and menaced thereby, the Senate decreed supplications and Letanies  for two daies together. Wine and incense for the sacrifices, was allowed at the publick charges of the cittie, and in procession went both men and women in great number, with much reverence, to visit the holy shrines, and there to doe their devotions. These solemne supplications were more renowmed and memorable, by reason of a contention that arose among the dames of the cittie, in the chappell of Ladie Pudicitia Patritia, which standeth in the beast-market, by the round church of Hercules. The Noblemens wives would not admit into that chappell Virginia the daughter of Aulus, who, notwithstanding she was noblie descended from the race of the Patruij, yet had espoused Volumnius the Consull, a Commoner, and was married (forsooth) out of the familie and raunge of the Patruij. Whereupon, there began some short and cutted shrewd words to be dealt betweene: and so (as women commonly are soone angrie and set on fire) they  grew to heartburning and hote contention. Whiles Virginia alleadged and said, that shee being a gentlewoman and Patritia borne, and a chast and honest dame, was enteted into the chappell of Patritian Chastitie: over and besides, she had not been noted for Bigamie; but was the wife of one onely husband, unto whom she was given and brought a pure maiden: and as for her husband, and his dignities which he had borne, his noble acts that he had atchieved, shee had no cause to complaine, or be ashamed, nay rather she gloried therein right greatly. After this, shee accumulated these magnificent and glorious words, with as generous and brave a deed. For in the long street where she dwelt, she set by and cut off a part of her dwelling house, as much as would serve for an Oratotie or petie chappell, and there erected an altar.
And when she had assembled the wives of the Commoners together, and had complained of the injurious dealing of the Patritian  dames, This altar (quoth she) doe I dedicate unto Pudicitia Plebeia: and all you here I exhort, that with what emulation, the men our husbands, in this cittie contend about feats of valor and armes, who may doe best; so likewise the Matrones and wives strive avie in continence and chastitie; and that yee will labour and endevour, that this alter may have the name to bee frequented, and resorted unto, with more reverence and devotion, yea and if (it bee possible) of

more chast women, than that other of the Nobilitie. And so it fel out indeed, that from that time, this alter also had the same rites (in a manner) and ceremonies as the other, which was more auncient: in such sort, as no wise, but of approved honestie and chastitie, and wedded but to one husband during her life, might be allowed there to sacrifice and offer oblations. But this religious order and institution, in lapse and processe of time was prophaned afterwards and divulged, and the altar frequented by them that were stained and infamous, and not onely by matrones of name and qualitie, but also by women of all sorts and degrees, until at last through disuse it grew to be utterly forgotten, and came to nothing.
The same yeare the Aediles Curule, Cn. and Q. Ogulius accused certaine Vsurers, who were convicted, and their goods forfeit and confiscate. And of that which came into the common chist, they caused to be made a brasen portaile in the Capitoll, and silver vessels for to furnish out  three tables in Iupiter his chappell: also the image of Iupiter himselfe in the lanterne or frontispice of the Capitoll, sitting in his chariot drawne with foure steeds. Moreover, at the figtree Ruminalis, they erected and set up the images of the foundling babes, the first founders of the cittie, pendant at the teates of a shee wolfe. They paved also with square stone, the causey and high way from the gate Capena, unto the temple of Mars. The Aediles likewise Commoners, L. Aelius Paetus, and C. Fulvius Curvus, of the forfeited monie which they levied of the grasiers or farmers of the citie pastures, who were condemned and fined, exhibited certaine pageants and plaies, and set up golden bolles in the temple of Ceres.
After this, Q. Fabius the fift time Consull, and P. Decius the fourth, entred their government, who now had been companions together in three Consulates, and in one Censorship, men renowmed, not more for the honour of their noble exploits in war, which was right great, than for their loving agreement and concord. Which unitie of theirs was not perpetuall to the end; by occasion, I suppose, of the contention of the States that came betweene, rather than of any difference betwixt themselves. For the Patruij laboured, that Fabius should have the province of Tuscane extraordinarily: and the Commons were as earnest with Decius to put the matter to a Lotterie. Certaine it is, that a great contention there was in the Senate. But afterwards, seeing that Fabius was able there to doe more and make a greater side than his Colleague, the matter was brought againe before the people. Debate (...). In which assemblie, few words passed betweene the parties themselves, being martiall men both, standing more upon deeds than words.
Fabius gave out and said, that it was an indignitie, that another should gather fruit under the tree that hee  had planted. Also, that himselfe was the man, who had opened the way through the wood Ciminia, and had given entrance and passage for the Romane warre, through desart and wild forrests. What meant they then to trouble him, a man of those yeares, with this place of charge, in case, they minded to give the conduct of this war to any other Generall but himselfe? No doubt, but by little and little hee upbraided them covertly and cast in their teeth, for chusing unto him an adversarie, and not a companion in government: yea, and charged Decius, that he repented and envied the good concord, wherin they had lived together, during the time of three Magistracies alreadie. Finally, he aimed and reached at no farther matter than this, but if so bee, they thought him worthie of the province, thither to send him. For as he had been at the appointment and pleasure  of the Senate, so would he be at the ordering and direction of the people. On the other side, P. Decius complained of the injurie offered by the Senat: for that the Nobles had endevoured to their power, and done their best, that no Commons might have accesse to honourable places and dignities: and after that prowesse and valour had gotten the upperhand, and prevailed so, as even in those kind of men vertue wanted not her due reward and honour; there were meanes sought, that not onely the voices of the people were deluded and made vaine, but also the very awards and arbitrements of fortune, were transferred to the wils and pleasures of some few. All Consuls before him had their provinces by lot: and now the Senate by their absolute authoritie, without casting lots, gave unto Fabius the charge of his province. If it bee (saith hee) to honour the man: verily, he hath so well deserved both of my selfe and of the Commonwealth, that I favour highly and tender the glorie of Q. Fabius; provided alwaies, that it get not  a shining lustre, by a foile of my disgrace and dishonour. And who will ever doubt, where there is one difficult and daungerous warre, and the same precisely and absolutely charged upon one Consull, without ordinarie and lawfull calling: but that the other Consull standeth for a cipher, and is reputed either needlesse, or good for nothing? As for Fabius, like as hee

 gloried in his service and noble Actes atchieved in Tuscane, even so would Publius Decius also full saine doe the semblable: and peradventure, hee should bee able to put out and quench that fire once for all, which Fabius left behind him, so covered and raked up, as that oftentimes it suddainely brake out againe, and yeelded foorth newe flames and blases. In conclusion, hee could bee content to yeeld the titles of honour and all rewards of vertue unto his Colleague, in the reverent regard of his old age, and majestie of his person: but for any hazard or jeopardie that might be presented unto them, he neither at this time gave place, nor ever would (with his good will) to him or any man else whatsoever: and if he gat no other good by this contention, yet would he obteine thus much at the least, that the people should hold their owne, and dispose of that absolutely at their discretion, which was in their power; rather than  permit the Nobles to gratifie any one therewith attheir pleasure. And herewith he prayed Iup. Opt. Max. and all the immortall gods, that even as they vouchsafed to bestow upon him and his Colleague equall valour and happinesse in the conduct of their warre, so they would afford them one and the same right in authoritie and rule. For certes, it was in nature meete and reason, for example good and profitable, and for the credit and fame of the people of Rome much materiall, that such should be Consuls, as by either of their guidance and conduct, without exceptions, the warre with the Tuskanes might be administred, as it ought to be. Fabius then, having besought the people nought else, but that before the Tribes were called in to give their suffrages, they would heare the letters of Ap. Claudius Pretor red, which were brought out of Tuskane, departed out of the assembly. So the Province of Tuskane, without casting  lots, was awarded unto Fabius, with no lesse consent of the people, than of the Senate. Hereupon, all the yonger sort (in manner) ranne unto the Consull, and offred their service of themselves, and gave their names to be enrolled, so desirous were they to serve under that Captaine. Which multitude being thus flocked about him round; Foure thousand footemen, quoth he, and sixe hundred horse, and no more, am I minded to take up and levie. As many therefore, as to daye and to morrowe, will present themselves and give their names, will I accept of, and take with me: more care have I to bring you all home rich and wealthie, than to have numbers of souldiers to fight my battailes. Thus went he forth with a competent armie well appointed, and so much more confident, and in hope of good successe, by how much lesse he stood upon the great number; and directed his journey to the towne Aharna,  where Appius the Pretor encamped, and from whence the enemie was not far distant. A few miles on this side, the feuillers or woodpurveiors, accompanyed with a good gard of souldiers for their convoy, met him: who seeing the sergeants going before, and understanding that it was Fabius the Consul, with joy and cheerefull hearts, thanked God and the people of Rome, for sending unto them such a Generall. After this, when they came all about the Consull to salute and welcome him, Fabius demaunded whether they went? who answered, To purvey wood and feuell. Say ye so? (quoth he) and have ye not your campe empaled and fortified? Yes, cried they all, and that with a double rampier and ditch, but yet are we in exceeding feare. Then quoth he, ye have wood and timber enough. Go ye back again, and down with the trench and pallisade. Who returned into the camp, and as they were plucking up the rampier, they gave the alarme both to the souldiers that  taried behind in the camp, and to Appius himselfe, and made ^hem afrayd. Then every man sayd, to one or other as they came, that it was by the expresse commandement of Q. Fabius the Consull that they did so. The morrow after they removed the camp, and Appius the Pretor was dismissed and sent away to Rome. After which time, the Romanes abode no where in standing campe: for he said, it was not good and commodious for an army to make abode in any one place; but that it was better and more holsome both for the agilitie and health of their bodies, to have a running campe, to be ever marching, and changing the aire and the soyle. But their journeys were no other, than the winter would permit, which was not yet past.
In the beginning of the Spring, Fabius having left the second legion at Clusium, which in old time was called Camars, and appointed L. Scipio Propretor to be governor of the campe, he returned  himselfe to Rome for to consult about the warre: were it of his own accord and motife, because it appeared evidently in view of eye much greater than it was reputed before; or that he was sent for by order from the Senat: for there be writers that affirme both the one and the other. Some would have it thought, that he was called back again by Appius Claudius Pretor, who both at the Counsell table in the Senate house, and also before the bodie of the people

(like as he had continually done by letters) enforced the feare and terror of the Tuskanewarre, laying, that one Generall and one armie, were not sufficient to make head against foure nations: that it would bee dangerous and doubtfull, whether they ioyntly in one masse gave battaile unto one, or maintained warre apart in divers quarters: that one man was not able to performe and manage all at once. As for himselfe, hee had left behinde him two Romane legions and no more, and with Fabius there were come not full five thousand in all, of horse and foote together. His opinion therefore was, that with all speede, P. Decius the Consull, should go to his Colleague into Tuscane, and L. Volumnius have the charge of Samnium in the meane time. But in case the Consull had rather go into his owne province, then he advised, that Volumnius tooke his way directly, with a full and compleat Consular army into Tuscane, to the Consull. When this discourse of the Pretor, had moved a great partof the house, then P. Decius spake  (by report) to this effect; That all should be left entier and free to the disposition of Q. Fabius, untill such time as either himselfe in person (if it might stand with the weale publick) were come to Rome, or sent one of his Lieutenants, by whom the Senate might be enformed, and truly understand, the poyse and importance of the warre in Tuscane; what forces were requisite, and how many leaders and captaines were expedient and needefull. Fabius, so soone as he was returned to Rome, both in the Senate house, and also in the audience of the people, held a middle course in all his speech; that he might seeme neither to increase, nor yet to diminish the rumor of the warre: and in assuming to himselfe another Captaine, he pretended, that he condescended thereunto, in regard of other mens feare, more than for his owne safetie, or for any danger that the State was like to incurre. Howbeit, if they would allow him a coadjutor and companion in warre, how might he forget P. Decius the Consull? of whome he had so good proofe and experience in so many Magistracies, which they had borne and administred together. Of all men in the world he loved none better, and would make choise of no one sooner: and having P. Decius with him, hee would never thinke his forces too fewe about him, nor his enemies too many before him. But if peradventure the mind and heart of his Colleague stood otherwise, his request was, that they would give him L. Volumnius to be his assistant. The determination of all was referred over to Fabius: both by the people and Senate, and also by the Consull himselfe. And when as Decius shewed and testified, that he was ready to take a journey either into Samnium or Tuscane, there followed such a joy and gratulation of all men, as if they had conceived in their spirit a victorie aforehand, and even now, had decreed for the Consuls, not a doubtfull warre, but  a glorious triumph. I find in some writers, that Fabius and Decius, presently upon the entrance into their Magistracie, went into Tuscane, without any mention of casting lots for their charges and provinces, or of the contention betweene the two Colleagues, which I have set downe. There be some againe, who having laid abroad these debates, stayed not there, but over and besides have added a sur^rease of matter, touching the invectives of Appius before the people, against Fabius in his absence; as also the obstinat stubbornnes of him being Pretor, against the Consull, to his very face: moreover, another contention and variance betweene the two Consuls; whiles Decius endevoured to bring about, and was instant that each one should keepe him to his owne Province allotted unto him, and hold it. But all writers agree in the course of the historie, from the time that both Consuls went out to warre, and so forward.

But before that the Consuls arrived in Tuscane, certaine Gaules called Senones, came with a great power before Clusium, readie to give assault unto the Romane legion and the campe. But Scipio, who was left Governor thereof, thinking it necessarie to help out the small number of his men, by advantage, of the ground, led his armie up to the hill betweene the towne and the camp. But (as it falleth out in such sodaine cases) he had not discovered aforehand the waies and avenues all about; but inconsiderately went forward, and engaged himselfe up to the top and pitch of the hill, which the enemie was maister of alreadie, by another side. Thus was the legion assailed on the back, and beaten downe, and thus was it enclosed and environed round, by a multitude of enemies, and put to the sword. Some writers there be who report, that the whole legion perished there, so as not one escaped alive to carry tidings. Also, that the Consuls who now were  not farre from Clusium, had no newes brought them of this overthrow, before the horsemen of the Gaules were in fight; who carying the heads of them that were slaine, some hanging before at their horse poitrels, other sticking aloft upon their launces, braved and triumphed, singing and chaunting songs of joy, after their manner. Some write they were the Vmbri and

 not the Gaules, and that the defeature and massacre was not so great: also that when the forragers for the campe under the leading of L. Manlius Terquattis a lieutenaunt, were compassed about by the enemie; then Scipio the Pro-pretor came forth of the campe to succour and reskue them, and that the Vmbrianes who first had the better, afterwardes when the battaile was renewed, suffered the foile and were overcome, and that as well their prisoners as their bootie was taken from them. But more probable it is, that this overthrow was given by the Gaules, than the Vmbrians; for that as divers times afore, so that yeare especially the cittie was frighted with the tumults and risings of the Gaules. Vpon this defeature, over and besides, that both the Consuls were gone to warre with foure legions, and a great power of Cavallerie of naturall Romanes and a thousand horsemen of Capua, chosen out of purpose for that  warre, and sent unto them, with a greater power also of allies, andof Latines than of Romanes; there were two other armies not farre from the cittie of Rome, opposed to frontier and make head against Tuscan: the one in the Faliscian territorie, the other in the Vatican. Cn. Fulvius and L. Posthumius Megillus, both Propretors, were commanded to keepe a standing campe in those parts. But the Consuls by this time, having passed over the mountaine Apenninus, were come to the enimies within the country of the Sentinats. And there about foure miles off, they sat them down and encamped. Then the enemies, after much consultation, resolved in the end upon this point; not to be intermingled all in one campe, nor come into the field and hazard all their forces at once in one battaile: but that the Gaules should take the Samnites unto them, and the Vmbrians joine with the Tuscanes. The day of the battaile was appointed. The Gaules and Samnites  had the charge to maintaine the fight: and in the time of battaile the Tuscanes and Vmbrians were commanded to assault the campe of the Romanes. But these their dessignes and purposes were altered by reason of three Clusine fugitive traitors, who by night stale away privily unto the Consull Fabius, and disclosed the intents and enterprise of the enemies: who were sent away with rich rewards, to the end that everie hower, upon new plots and devises that should be determined by the enemies, they would give them an ynkling and certaine intelligence. The Consuls write unto Fulvius and Posthumius, that the one should advance and come forward with his armie, out of the Faliscane country; and the other out of the Vatican directly unto Clusium: and that with all their forces, they should overrunne and destroy the enemies countrie. The rumor of these rodes and invasions, caused the Tuscans to remove out of the Sentinate territory, to the defence  of their own frontiers. Hereupon the Consuls made speed to strike a battel in their absence. And for two daies space they skirmished continually with the enemie, and chalengedhim to the field: but for those two daies, no worthie deed of importance was atchieved. A few on both sides were slaine, and hereby were their courages rather provoked, and their stomacks whet to a full set battaile than any trial or hazard made of the maine chance. Vpon the third day into plain field they come with all their power. When both armies stood ranged in battaile aray, there fortuned a Hind to be chased out of the mountains, and to run away before a Wolfe, even through the mids of the plains between both armies: then, parted both these wild beasts asunder, the Hind tooke her way to the Gaules, and the Wolfe his course to the Romans. The wolfe had way given him through all the rankes and files: but the hind was killed among the Gauls. Then a Romane soldior,  one of the forefront, who was to fight before the ensignes: There will the flight, (qd. he) there will the slaughter bee, where you see the beast sacred and dedicated to Diana lie dead: but heere on this part, the martiall wolfe, consecrated to Mars, having with victorie gone cleere away safe and unwounded, hath put us in mind of our martial nation and of our first founder, the sonne of Mars. The Gaules put themselvs in the right wing, the Samnites in the left. Against the Samnites, Fabius marshalled the first and third Legions, in the right point: and Decius, the fifth and sixt in the left, affront the Gauls. For the second and fourth served in Samnium under L. Volumnius Pro-consull. At the first shocke and encounter, the battaile was so indifferently fought, and with so equall force, that if the Tuscanes and Vmbrians had either shewed themselves in the field, or assailed the campe, the losse and overthrow must needs have light in either place, where as they had bent  their forces. Howbeit, although hetherto the conflict of battaile went equall and indifferent, and that as yet fortune had not determined, which way she would encline and give the victorie; yet they fought not alike, in the right and left wings. For the Romanes under the conduct of Fabius, rather warded the enemie warily, and stood upon their gard, than offered to charge lustily: so as they maintained fight, and drew it at length untill it was verie late in the evening, because the

captaine was enformed and persuaded of the Samnits and Gauls both, that being as they were in  the first skirmish very hot and furious, it was sufficient to keep off at length, and at staves end. As for the Samnits, their courages would abate and fal, by any long conflict: and the bodies of the Gauls, (who of all other can least away with travaile, and heat especially) would turne all to sweat, and melt away: who at the beginning, fight more fiercely than men, but in the end more faintly than women. Against that time therfore, when the enemy used to faile and give over, Fabius had kept his soldiors in breath, and reserved their strength fresh and lustie. But Decius, being verie eager and hot by reason of his youth and courage of heart, laid on lustily at the first, and spent upon the enemies all the force and vigor he had: and for that the Infanterie seemed to fight but coldly, he set the Cavallerie a worke: and himselfe personally in the thickest throng and troupe of most valiantand hardie knights, exhorted and besought the formost gallants of those lusty youths, to joine with  him, and to charge upon the enemie: saying, that they should cary away a double honor, if by the meanes of the men of armes, the victorie began at the left wing. Twise they forced the Gaules horsemen to turne side and backe: but when as they were engaged farther within, and were now fighting hard pell-mell among the squadrons of the horsemen, they beheld a new and strange kind of fight, which troubled and terrified them. For the enemies standing all armed upon chariots and wagons, with a great noise of their steeds, and rumbling of the wheles ran full upon them, and mightly affrighted the horses of the Romans, which had not been acquainted with such uncouth and strange dins. So the horsemen who had the upper hand before, and were at point of victorie, were now with a foule feare discomfited and scattered, as if the hideous furies of hell, and the divel himselfe had beene amongst them. Whereupon they fled suddainly, and not looking before them  were overthrowne both men and horse. By this occasion, the ensignes of footmen were distressed and disordred; and many of those that were raunged in the front before the ensigns, wereby force of horse and wagons, driven crosse through the battaillons, troden under foot, and their guts squashed out. Here with all the battaillons of the Gauls footmen, seeing their enemies thus scared, followed on apace, and gave them no time of breathing. Decius cried out aloud to his men, Whether she yee? Or what hope have yee to save your selves by flight? Decius opposed himselfe against them that reculed and fled: Decius rallied those that were disbanded and scattered: but seeing that by no force or means he could stay them, thus amased and astonied as they were; he called upon his father P. Decius by name, and said;
Why do I stay any longer the fatall death that is destined to my house and name? It is given to our race and familie, to be sacrificed in lieu of propitiatorie  sacrifices, for to assoile and save the publike-weale from dangers menaced and threatned unto it. Even now therefore, will I offer the legions of the enemies to be sacrificed with my selfe to Dame Tellus and other infernall gods. When he had spoken these words, he commaunded M. Livius the high priest (whom as he marched into the field, he streightly had charged not to depart from him) for to pronounce and say that forme of words, whereby he should devow, offer, and betake himself to death, together with the legions of the enemies, for to save the armie of the Quirites and people of Rome.
Which when he had done by the same forme of praier, and in the same habite wherin his father P. Decius at the river Veseris, in the warre against the Latines, caused himselfe to be offered to death: and besides these solemne praiers, added moreover these words: That he drave before him, Fright, flight, murther, massacre, bloudshed, yre and wrath of gods in  heaven, and fiends in hell; and that he would with deadly maledictions and execrable curses smite the ensigns, weapons, and armours of his enemies; and that one and the same place, should give both himselfe, and also the Gauls and Samnits together with him, plague, perdition, and destruction. After these cursed, horrible, and detestable speeches against his owne person and his enemies; looke where he saw the thickest rankes of the Gaules, thither he spurred his horse, and rode in amongst them: where amids the pikes, javelins, and swords, he was presently slaine. Then could it hardly be seene, that the battaile was any longer fought by power and helpe of man. The Romans so soone as they had lost their captaine, (which at all other times is wont to smite a terror into them) staied their flight, and were willing and contented to renew the battaile afresh. The Gaules, and especially that troupe which stood about the Cos. his bodie, fared as though they  had ben out of their wits, flang their darts from them (I know not how) to no purpose, and in vaine: some of them stood still, as it were benummed, forgetting both to run away, and to fight still. But on the other side, the high priest Livius, with whom Decius had left the serjeants, and whom before his death hee nominated and ordained to be Propretor, cried out, as lowd as he could, that the

 had the victorie, and by the death of the Consull, were acquit and excused from all other fatall daunger: but as for the Gaules and the Samnites, they were destined and forfeited (as it were) to mother Tellus and the infernall spirits. And now Decius (quoth he) haleth after him, and calleth to follow him, the armie that with him was devowed, cursed, and offered: now all the enemies are full of furies and fearefull fright. Then, as these aforesaid began the m^dley againe, behold there came unto them, Cornelius Scipio, and C. Martius with a supplie of succours from the rereward: who by commaundement of Q. Fabius the Consull, were sent to aid and rescue his Colleague. Where they heard of the worthie end of P. Decius, a noble example to encourage them to adventure all hazards in the service of their countrie and Commonweale. Therefore, when as the Gaules stood close and thicke together, opposing their targuets before them, raunged and joined  one over another featherwise, so, as to deale with them afront, and to cope together at hand strokes, was thought a difficult and dangerous matter; then, by the commaundement of those two Lieutenants, the darts and launces which lay strewed upon the ground, betweene the two armies, were gathered up, and flung against the pavoisade or tortuse-fense of the enemies targets abovesaid. And by reason that these javelins and speares light and stucke fast, some in their targets, and some in their very bodies, it happened, that their knot was broken, and the battaillon (asmassive and close as it was) disbanded, in such sort, as many of them, notwithstanding their bodies were untouched and unhurt, fel down astonied one upon another. Lo how fortune altered the case, and changed all in the left wing of the Romans. But in the right, Fabius (as is before said) at the first, lingered and drew on the day: but afterwards, when as he perceived, that neither the enemies  shouts, nor their manner of giving charge, ne yet the darts and javelins which they launced, had the same vigor and force, as before; hee commaunded the captaines of the horsemen to wheele about with their cornets, and to flanke the Samnites, that upon a signall given, they might charge them overthwart with all the violence they could, whiles his owne Legionarie footmen by little and little advanced forward, and brake the ranke, and disordered the enemie. When he saw once, no resistance made, and that without all doubt, they were wearied and out of breath; then he gathered together all his subsidiarie companies of the reregard, which hee had reserved untill that time and businesse, fresh and in heart; and at once, both set forward the Legions, and gave the horsemen also a signall to set upon the enemies. But the Samnites could not endure this violent charge, but ran as fast as ever they could to recover the camp fast by the battaillon  of the Gaules, leaving their fellowes behind them in fight, to pay the reckoning. The Gauls having likewise made a target-fense, stood thicke and close together under it. Then Fabius advertised of the death of his brother Consull, commaunded a wing or corner, to the number almost of 500 horsemen of Capua, to withdraw themselves out of the medley, to cast about and to play upon the backes of the Gaules: after whome, bee caused the Principes of the third Legion to follow; and wheresoever they espied the rankes of the enemies by force of horsemen disordered and broken, there, to second them, and presse on still, and kill them whiles they were in disarray, and afraid. Himselfe vowed a temple to Iupiter Vi^tor, together with the spoiles of his enemies. Which done, he advaunced streight forward to the campe of the Samnites. Thither all the multitude of them were driven in great fright and disarray. And for that the gates were not  able to receive so great a multitude, ^rouding together, they that were kept out, and could not get in, by reason of the throng of their fellowes, began again to fight under the rampier. Where Gellius Egnatius, the Generall of the Samnits was strucken down and slaine: after this, the Samnits beaten within their rampier, were killed every one, and their camp after small resistance woon. The Gaules behind their backe were environned and cut in peeces. That day were slaine of enemies five and twentie thousand, and 8000 taken prisoners. Howbeit, this victorie cost the Romanes bloud: for of P. Decius his armie, there died seven thousand, and of Fabius, a thousand and two hundred. Fabius then having sent out to seeke the bodie of his Colleague, gathered up all the spoiles of the enemies into an heape, and burned them, to the honour of Iupiter Victor. But that day could not the Consull his bodie bee seene, by reason it was covered and hidden: under  heapes of the Gaules that lay there dead. The morrow after it was found and brought againe with many a teare of all his souldiours. Then Fabius setting all other matters for the time aside, solemnised the buriall and funerall obsequies of his fellow Consull, with due commendation and condigne praises, and with all honour that could bee devised.
In Tuscane also about the same time, Cn. Fulvius Propretor, had fortunat successe to his harts

desire: for besides great damage done to the enemie, by invasions and rodes into the countrey, he fought also a notable battaile: wherin of Perusines and Clusines were slain above three thousand, and twentie ensignes woon. The Samnites, as they fled through the territorie of the Pelignians, were by them intercepted and enclosed; and of five thousand, they were left but one thousand. Great is the fame of that day, and of the battell that was fought in the Sentinate territorie; if a man hold him only to the truth, and make no more of it than it was. But some have overreached a little, and written, that the enemies were 40330 foot, and (...) Horse strong: also, that they had a thousand charriots or waggons, reckoning and comprising the V^^brians and Tuscanes withall: who also (as they say) were at the battell. And to encrease also the power and forces of the Romans, they report, that L. Volumnius Propretor, was a Commaunder, together with the Consuls, and that his armie was joined with the Legions of the Consuls. But I find in most Chronicles, that this victorie was atchieved by the two Consuls only. Volum^^^^ in the meanetime warred in Samnium; and having forced and driven the armie of the Samnites, to take the hill (...); nothing afraid for the disadvantage of the place, discomfited them, and put them in ^light. Q. Fabius, having left the armie of Decius behind him in Tuscane, reduced his owne legions into the cittie; and triumphed over the Gaules, Tuscanes, and Samnites. His soldiours followed him in his triumph, who in their rude militarie rithmes and songs, celebrated no lesse the brave and noble death of P. Decius: than the worthie victorie of Quintus Fabius. And they revived the memorial of his father late deceased, comparing him in equall degree, for the issue and event, as well publicke as private, with the praises of his sonne. Of the bootie and pillage gained from the enemies, the souldiors had given unto them (...). 82 Asses apeece, with a liverie  cloke, and a coat; a good reward for a souldiors service in those daies.
For all these notable victories atchieved, yet neither the Samnites nor the Tuscanes were at quiet. For, both the Perusines began to rebell, so soone as the Consull had away his armies and also the Samnites came downe to forrey and spoile into the territorie of Vestine and Formianum, and another way into Esetrunium, which lie along the river Vulturnus. Against them was Appius Claudius the Pretor, sent with Decius his armie. And Fabius in Tuscane, which began new warre, slew foure thousand and five hundred Perusines, tooke prisoners 1740, who were raunsomed for (...). 310 Asses apeece. The rest of the spoile was all bestowed upon the souldiours. The Legions of the Samnites being pursued hard at heeles, partly by Appius Claudius Pretour, and partly by L. Volumnius Proconsull, met all together in the territorie of (...) Stella. Where both  the Samnite Legions abode, and also Appius and Volumnius joined and encamped together. There, was a sharpe and cruell battaile fought on both sides. The Romanes were incensed with anger and choller against those that had so often rebelled: the other, upon a desperat mind were resolute to hazard the utmost. So there were slaine of the Samnits, 16300; 2700 taken prisoners, and of the Romanes there died 2700.
This yeare so fortunate in warre, was by reason of pestilence much afflicted; and for certain^ prodigious tokens, full of care and perplexed. For it was reported, that in divers places it rained earth: and that in the armie of Appius Claudius, there were many smitten and blasted with lightening. In regard hereof, the bookes of Sibylla were perused and sought into. The same yeare Q. Fabius Gurges, the Consull his sonne, fined and punished by the purse, certaine  wives who had been convicted and condemned before the people, of Adulterie: of which monie so raised by their fines, he caused to be built the temple of Venus, which standeth neere the great Cirque or Race.
There remaine yet behind certaine warres of the Samnites, whereof we have now continued our historie in these foure bookes, for the space of fixe and fortie yeares, ever since that M. Valerius, and Au. Cornelius were Consuls, who were the first that warred in Samnium. To let passe therefore, and not to trouble the readers, with a prolixe narration of the alternative overthrowes given and received betweene both nations so many yeares one after another, for all which calalamities and losses their hearts and courages could not bee daunted or conquered: the very last yeare, the Samnits, in the Sentinate countrie, in the Pelignes territorie, at Tifemum, and in the  territorie of Stella, were defeated both by themselves, with their owne legions, and also mingled with others; and that, by foure armies, and foure Romane Captaines, lost the bravest and most noble Generall of all their nation; saw their confederats and allies in war, the Tuskanes, V^brians, and Gaules, in the same predicament as themselves, not able to stand and maintaine their

 estate any longer, either by their owne power, or with help of forreine forces; yet for all this, would they not forbeare and abstaine from warre, so little wearie were they of defending their libertie, although it were unfortunately: choosing rather, to be vanquished; than not to attempt the winning of victorie. Who is he, that would not thinke it yrkesome, and tedious, either to write or reade this long suite and traine of warres, which they in fighting were never wearied?
After Q. Fabius and P. Decius, succeeded Consuls L. Posthumius Megillus, and M. Attilius Regulus. To them both, was committed the charge of Samnium, for that the bruite went, that the enemies had prepared three full armies, the one to go againe into Tuskane, the second to invade and over-runne afresh the territorie of Capua, and the third to defend their owne frontiers. Posthumius by reason of sicknesse remained at Rome, but Attilius went presently with an  armie forth, to the end that he might surprise the enemies on a sodaine in Samnium, before they had taken the field; for so the Senate had given direction: and he found the enemie in the way to meete him, as if it had bene so of purpose before by them determined, readie there to keepe him from entrance: and so far off were they from wasting the lands of the Samnites, that they could not once enter into their confines; nay, the Samnites debarred them from departure thence, into the peaceable parts and territories of their allies. Now when as they were encamped affront one against another; that, which the Romanes being so often conquerours, would hardly have adventured, (see how utter despaire driveth men to rash projects and extremities) the Samnits attempted: even to give assault upon the Romans campe. And albeit this so venterous enterprise sped not well in the finall effect, yet was it not altogether in vaine attempted. There  chanced to be a foggie mist, which continued a good part of the day, so thick and palpable, as men could not see before them, I say not, so farre as without the trench, but not so much as those that came close to speake one to another. The Samnites hereupon taking the advantage fit for an ambushment, before it was full day light, and the same much overcast and dimme with the mist, came as farre as the Corps de guard of the Romanes, who in the gates and entrance of the campe warded but negligently: being thus taken on a sodaine, they had neither courage nor strength enough to resist. At the back side of the camp, they assalted the great gate Decumana, seised the Questors pavilion, and that quarter about it: where the Questor himselfe (L. Opimius Pansa) was slaine, and thereupon the alarme was given. The Cos. being with this tumult raised, commaunded two bands or cohorts of allies, to wit, the one of Lucanians, and the  other of Suessans, which haply were next hand, to defend and guard the Pretors pavilion, and that quarter. In the meane while he marched with the legionarie bands along the high broad streete in the campe, called Principalis, and before they had buckled and fitted their armour about them, they were raunged in battaile aray; and had knowledge of the enemy, by the eare and outcryes, rather than by sight of the eye: neither could they give an estimate what number they were. At the first, as doubtfull of the event, and mistrusting their fortune, they reculed, and received their enemies in, and let them come even into the middes of the campe: but then the Consull cryed out, and asked, Whether they ment to be turned out of their owne rampiers and holds first, and after, have a new peece of worke to assaile and win them againe? So, they set up a shout, and put all their might together, and first made resistance only and kept their ground;  but afterwards they set forward, and pressed upon them; and having once beaten them back, they drave them afore them; with the same feare, that they themselves began, yea and chased them out of the gate and the trench: but to proceede further, for to pursue the chase, they durst not, for feare of some ambushment, by reason of the mistie and troubled wether, contenting themselves with the saving of their campe and no more: and so they retired within their rampie^s, having slaine to the number welneere, of three hundred enemies. Of Romanes, as well those that were in the first Corps de guard and Sentinels, who kept the watch, as of those that were surprised about the Questors lodging, were killed 230. This bold adventure of the Samnites speeding so well, made them take better hart; so as they would not permit the Romanes to encamp farther into the countrie, no nor so much, as to go a foraging into their territorie: whereupon  they were compelled to retire againe, and to purveie forage in the quiet and peaceable quarters of their friends about Sora.
The bruit of all these occurrents more troublesome and fearefull than truth was, being come to Rome, caused L. Posthumius the Cos. before he was well recovered of his sicknesse, to take the field; but ere he departed the citie, he proclaimed the Rendez-vous at Sora, for his soldiers there

to meete. Himselfe now dedicated, unto the goddesse Victoria, the Temple, which in the time of  his curule Aedileship he tooke order to be built, with the money raysed of certaine fines taken of persons condemned. Then tooke he his journey to the armie, and so went forward from Sora directly into Samnium, to the camp of his brother Consull. But the Samnites distrusting themselves, as not able to withstand two armies, were dislodged, and departed back: and the Consuls also parted one from another, sundrie waies, to wast the countrie, and assault the townes, Posthumius at his first comming, assayed by fine force to assaile the towne Milionia, and seeing he could do small good that way, at length by rolling trenches and platformes, he approched close to the walls, and wan it: and albeit the towne were thus forced, yet there continued a sharp and long fight in all streetes and parts thereof, from the From ten of the (...) in the morning, until (...) in the afternoone. fourth houre of the day untill the eight, with doubtfull and variable events for a good while; but in the end the Romanes became maisters  of the towne. Of Samnites were slaine 3200, and 4200 were taken prisoners: besides the gaining of other bootie and pillage. From thence, he led forth the legions to Ferentinum, but the inhabitants with their bag and baggage, and all that ever they could drive or carie, had quit the towne in the still night season, and departed in great silence at a contrarie posterne gate, which opened from the campe of the enemie. The Consull so soone as he was come, at the first approched the walls, as well appointed and provided of all things, as if he should have found as much to do, as at Milionia: but afterwards, perceiving all silent and desolate throughout the citie, seeing neither men nor munition within the towres and upon the walls; he held back his souldiers, desirous and greedie to enter upon the bare walls, so abandoned and disfurnished of defence: and doubting, tofal headlong ere he were aware, into the traines of some hidden and privie  ambush, he commanded two comets of the Cavallerie of Latine confederats, to ride about the walls along the countrescarp, and well to view and consider all places. The horsemen finding one or two gates, neere together of one side standing wide open, and in the verie same waies that led from thence, the fresh tracks and footing of the enemies, as they fled by night; rode softly neerer and neerer to the gates; and there they might see streight afore them safe entrance, and the citie lying open even from one end to the other: whereupon they brought word back to the Consull, that the citie was abandoned, and the enemies gone: which was verie evident and apparent, as well by the very solitude thereof, as the new and fresh marks and traces of their dislodging and departure; as also by the stuffe and goods that lay here and there scattred all abroad, whiles they hastened fearefully in the darke, to take their flight. The Consullupon this report, with his hoast  drew to that side of the towne, which the horsemen were at: and pitching downe his ensignes not farre from the gate, commaunded five other horsemen to enter into the citie; geving order, that when they had gone forward a pretie way, three of them should stay behind in the same place; if they saw all safe and out of danger; and the other two, bring him word what they had seene and found. Who being returned, made relation that they were gone so farre as they might see about them every way into all parts, and could perceive nothing but silence and vast desolation all about, both farre and neere: then forthwith, the Consull entred into the citie, with certaine cohorts lightly appointed, and charged the rest in the meane while to fortifie the campe. The souldiers being once entred, fell to breake open the dores: where they found a few silly old folke, and some feeble and diseased persons, with such moveables as were hard to be conveighed and  transported: those they rifled, and ransackt; and by certaine captives they understood, that divers other townes thereabout, were all with one accord fled and gone: and as for their owne countrymen, they departed at the first watch of the night, and they thought no other verily but that in the rest of the cities, they should find the like emptinesse and solitude. And as the prisoners said, so it proved indeede: and the Consull possessed himselfe of those forlorne and abandoned townes.
The other Consull M. Attilius, bad not so easie warre for his part: who as he was marching with his Legions toward Luceria, which he heard was besieged by the Samnites; the enemie encountred and met him in the verie entrie of the frontiers, and gave him battaile: and the anger and indignation of both sides was answerable to their might and forces. The fight was variable and  doubtfull on both parts, but the end and issue more heavie and dolorous on the Romans side: both because they were not used to be vanquished; and also for that in the verie loose and retreat, rather than in the combat and medley, they found that many more were hurt and slain of their part. Which feareful sight and terrour, as it began in the campe, if it had surprised them in the conflict,

 it would have beene an heavie day with them, and no doubt they had received a notable overthrow. And even then, being as it was, they had a carefull night, and full of anguish, thinking verily that the Samnites would presently assault their camp, or at least waies that in the morning betimes they must of necessity fight with the conquerors. But the enemies, as their losse was lesse, so their heart and courage was never the more: For so soone as the day brake, desirous were they to be gone without any battaile. Howbeit there was but one way; and that, lay close and neere to their enemies; which they were not so soone entred into, but they made shew a farre off, as if they marched streight to the assault of the campe. The Consull commaundeth his men to arme, and to follow after him without the rampiers. To his lieutenants, colonels, and captaines of the Allies, he gave severall charges to doe as he thought needfull and requisite. They all promised to  execute any direction whatsoever: but they said withall, that the soldiours hearts were done, that they had watched and sit up all night, amongst the grievous wounds and uncomfortable groanes of them that lay a dying: and no doubt if the enemie had come before day against the campe, so daunted were they, that they would have abandoned their colours: and even now for very shame and nothing else, they forbare indeed to run away, but otherwise their hearts were gone, and they cleane spent. The Consull hearing this, thought good to go about himselfe in person, unto every one of his soldiors, and to speake unto them: and even as he met with any of them, and saw them so backward, and going about so coldly to take armes and weapon in hand; he checked and rebuked them: crying alowd, and asking why they sat stil? why they loitered and made such hafting? saying, that the enemies would come to them within the very camp, and cut their throts, unlesse they made  more hast to sally forth: yea and forced they should be to fight before their tent dores, if they would not give battaile without the trench and rampiers. They that are armed (saith hee) and will fight manfully, shall obtaine undoubted victorie: but the unarmed and naked man that attendeth the enemies comming, must either die for it, or endure captivitie. As he rated and rebuked them in these termes, they answered flatly againe; that they had enough of yesterdaies worke, and were utterly done; and had neither strength nor blood left them in their bodies: and now the enemies (say they) seeme more in number, than they were the day before. Amid these speeches the armie approached: and being now but a little way off, they might take a full view of them more certainly, and see every thing. Whereupon they said confidently, that they saw the Samnites to bring with them their stakes and pales to cast a pallaisade, no doubt, round about their  whole campe. At this, the Consull cried out upon them, for verie shame, to suffer so foule a reproch and disgrace of a most dasterdly enemie.
And shall we be (quoth hee) beset and empaled within our owne campe, there to die for hunger and famine with shame, rather than by edge of sword (if there be no other remedie) with honour, like me^? The gods speed us well (quoth he) and their will be done; and do every man as he thinkes best: as for M. Attilius the Consull, he is resolved even himselfe alone (if no man else will follow) to meet the enemie in the face, and rather be beaten downe and die amongst the Samnites ensignes, than see the Romane campe besieged, with a trench cast, and rampier raised about it. The Lieutenants, Colonels, and all the bands and cornets of the Cavallerie, yea and the principall Centurions of the foremost companies liked well of this, and accepted the Consul his words. Then the soldiors for starke shame, full faintly  take weapon in hand, and as slowly, God wot, go forth of campe. And thus in long rankes and files; not close united together but broken here and there, with heavie cheere, and as men halfe vanquished already, they marched after a sort toward the enemie, who was neither in hope nor in heart better resolved and setled than they. For so soone as the Samnites discovered the Romane standerds, suddainly from the vaward to the reregard, there went a muttering and bruit from o^^ to another, that the Romanes were come forth (the onely thing they alwaies feared) to empeach and stop their passage; so as now there was no way for them to flie and escape from them, and save themselves, but must either die in the place, or slay their enemies and make a lane even over their bodies. All their packs and fardels, they cast together upon an heap in the mids: and being armed as they were, euerie man ranged and marshalled themselves in their owne araies. Now was there  a verie little space betweene the two armies, and they stood looking one upon another, waiting when their enemies would begin to give the first charge, and set up the first shout. But neither of both had any stomacke to fight. And surely on both sides, they had gone sundrie waies untouched, and without any blowes given or taken, but that they feared both, left if they had dismarched of one part first, the other would have come upon them. Thus of themselves they began a faint

fight, as unwilling and loth thereto, with an uncertaine and unequall shout; neither sturred any  man one foot. Then the Roman Consul, to begin the skirmish, sent out some few cornets of horsmen from a side, without the battaillons: wherof the most part fel from their horses, and others were disaraied and put out of order: whereupon both Samnites ran out to kill those that were fallen, and Romanes also to reskue their fellowes. Then the skirmish began a little to wax hote: but the Samnites advanced forward in greater number farre, and bestirred themselves (as it seemed) more lustily: and withall, the Romane horsemen being disordred and in confusion, with their horses affrighted trode under their feet the footmen that came to reskue. Who beginning once to flie, caused the whole Romane armie also to turne their backs. And now the Samnites plaied upon the backes of the Romanes, as they fled: whereat the Consull rode before a gallop to the campe gate, where he bestowed a good corps degard of horsemen, opposite in the way; and  made proclamation, that who soever came toward the campe, were he Samnite or were he Romane, should be taken and used as an enemie. With these and such like threats, he put himselfe against the soldiors, that hied them so fast in heapes to the campe. Whithera way s^^ha, (quoth hee to every soldior that he met) even here thou shalt find men in armes to fight withall; here shalt thou meet with thine enemie, as well as in the field behind: no entring here into the campe without victorie, so long as thy Consull liveth: chuse therefore whether thou hadst rather fight with thy owne countrimen or thine enemies. Whiles the Consull intertained them with this welcome, the horsemen also with speare in rest, and bent full against them, came all about, charging the footmen upon their perill to turne againe to battaile. Thus not onely the Consull his vertue and proesse served in good steed, but fortune also went on their side: for the Samnits followed  not the chase so hard, but that the Romans had both time and ground enough to turne about their ensignes, and to direct their battaillons from their campe against the enemie. Then one encouraged another to go to battaile againe. The Centurions snatched the banners out of the bearers hands, and advanced them forward: declaring to their soldiors, how few the enemies were in number, and how disorderly and out of all array they came against them. In this while the Consull lift up his hands to heaven, and with a cleere and audible voice, vowed a temple to Iupiter Stator, if so be the Romane armie staied their flight, and by renuing the medley should kill and vanquish the Samnites Legions. Hereupon endevoured they on all hands, the captaine and soldior, both horsemen and footmen, to re-enforce the battaile. And even the verie gods from heaven seemed to have a speciall regard of the Romanes at that time, so quickly the dice turned, and the enemies were repulsed from the rampiers, and within a small while forced againe to the verie place where the battaile began. Where by reason of their fardels and packs which they had heaped together in the mids, and now lay in their verie way, they were stopped in their passage, and for feare, least their goods should be rifled and spoiled, they cast a ring round about their bag and baggage. Then the Romane Infanterie a front, and the Cavallerie behind, compassed them, and charged upon them right fiercely: where, in the mids between, they were either slaine or taken. The prisoners were in number 7300. who were all put naked under the yoke, and sold: the number of them that were slaine was about 4800. The Romanes for all this had no great list to bost and brag of their victorie, for the Consull taking view and account of his losse these two daies, found by computation, that he missed 7300.

Whiles these things thus passed in Apulia, the Samnites with another power, assaied to surprise and get againe (...). Interamna, a Colonie of the Romanes, situate upon the Latine high way: but when they could not be masters of the towne, they ouerran and harried the territorie: and ha^^^g gotten a good bootie of men, women, and cattaile, one with another; whiles they were driving the same before them, together with certaine Coloners whom they had taken prisoners, they light upon the Consul as he returned with victorie from Lucena: where they not onely lost their spoile, but were themselves slaine as they marched disorderly in long files. The Consull made proclamation, That every man should repaire to Interamna, for to owne and chalenge his owne goods, and to receive the same againe: and there, leaving his armie, went to Rome, against the Election of new magistrates. When he laboured instantly for a triumph, he was denied that  honour; both for that he had lost so many thousands, and also because he had put his captives under the gallowes, and sold them, without farther imposition.
The other Cos. Posthumius, wanting subject matter of war to worke upon among the Samnits, passed with his armie into Tuscane: and after he had first pilled and spoiled the Volsinians territorie,

 he gave them battel not far from their wals, who issued forth to defend their frontiers; where there were 2200 Tuscanes slaine: the rest, by reason that the cittie was so neere, escaped and saved themselves. Then led he his armie into the territory of Rosellum, where he not only laid the fields wast, but wan the towne also; tooke prisoners above two thousand, and slue under two thousand before their wals. Howbeit, in that yeare, the peace obtained in Hetruria, was more honorable and renowmed, than the warre had ben. For three of the strongest and most puissant states, even the very capitall cities of Tuscane, to wit, Volsini^, Perusia, and Aretium, desired accord. And having conditioned with the Consull, and promised, to find his soldiors clothing and corne, so they might have leave to send Oratours to Rome to treat for peace, obtained at length a truce of fortie yeares. And for that present, each cittie was fined to pay 1562 lib. 10 (...). 500000 Asses. For these actsdone,  the Consull having requested triumph of the Senate, for manner and fashion, rather than upon any hope to speed, and perceiving some of them to denie him flatly, as pretending, that it was so late ere lie departed the cittie; and othersome, for that without order and direction of the Senat, he passed out of Samnium into Tuscane; and that partly his adversaries, and partly the friends of his Colleague, who might take some comfort and contentment, that he also had the repulse with him, were against his triumph: My masters (qd.he) you that are Senators of Rome, I will not be so far mindfull of your honour and majestie, as that I will forget my selfe to be a Consull: and by vertue of the same authoritie of commission, wherewith I have conducted and managed these warres; for so much as, I have happily brought them to end, and subdued Samnium and Tuscane, atchieved victorie, and obtained peace; triumph I will, and ask you no leave. And with that,  he departed out of the Senate. After this, there arose a debate and dissention among the Tribunes of the Commons. Some of them said, they would enterpose their negative, that he should not in this manner triumph, and give so ill a precedent. Others gave out, that they would assist him in his triumph, maugre the heads of all their Colleagues. After much ado, the matter was referred to the people, and the Consull being thither called, alledged, that L. Horatius, and Mar. Valerius Consuls, also Caius Martius Rutilius of late daies, even the father of him, who then was Censor, triumphed without the authoritie and approbation of Senat, only by the ordinance of the people. Over and besides, he added and said, that himselfe also would have mooved the people therein, but that he knew, that the Tribunes of the Commons, who were become vassals and slaves to the Nobles, would have nipped and crossed the bill. As for himselfe, hee protested,  that he did and would account of the will and favour of the people, agreeing together, as well as of all their acts and decrees whatsoever. So the morrow after, by the assistance of three Trib. banded against the opposition and negative voices of seven, yea, and against the generall resolution of the Senat, he triumphed: and all the people with great joy solemnised and celebrated the honor of that day. But the records do varie much, about the acts and affaires of this yeare also. Claudius writeth, That Posthumius having woon certaine towns in Samnium, was after in Apulia discomfited and put to flight: and that himselfe in person being hurt, was with some few besides, driven to take Luceria for refuge: and that it was Attilius, that fought in Tuscane, and triumphed. Fabius contrarily reporteth, That both Consuls warred in Samnium, and at Luceria: and that one of the armies was transported into Tuscane: but which of the Consuls had the conduct thereof, he hath  not set downe withall: also, that before Luceria, there were on both parts many slaine: and how in that battell, there was a temple vowed to Iupiter Stator, like as Romulus had done before in times past: howbeit, before this time, there was no temple erected, but onely a Fanum, [i. a place pronounced, destined, and consecrated before, to build a temple on.] But in this yeere at last, the cittie being now twise bound and obliged to performe one and the same vow, made a consc^en^e of it, and moved the Senate to decree and take order, that the house and temple aforesaid should be edified accordingly.
After this yeere, there succeeded a brave and noble Consull, L. Papyrius Cursor, as well in regard of his fathers glorie, as his owne reputation. Also a mightie great warre, and such a victorie as never any Generall wan the like at the Samnites hands before that day, but L. Papyrius againe  the Consuls father. And as it fell out, they made the like preparation for warre, with the same endevour and furniture of most costly and brave armors, as before time. Moreover, they used the helpe and favour of the gods besides, by a strange kind of induction and institution of the souldiours, binding them to take their oth, after an old ceremoniall custome, as if they were to take orders in some holy mysteries; yea and levied musters throughout all Samnium, after a newe

forme of a law and edict: That whosoever of the younger sort and serviceable man, fit to beare  arms, shewed not themselves, and gave attendance at the Generals appointment and proclamation, and whosoever departed without his leave and licence, his head should be forfeit unto Iupiter as accursed and damned. Which done, the Reader-vous was appointed at Aquilonia, for all the forces to assemble. Where there gathered together, to the number of fortie thousand fighting men, even the whole flower and manhood of Samnium. There, about the mids of the campe, was a plot of ground set out, well sensed and enclosed all about, with hardels and bourds, and the same covered all over with linnen clothes: the place was two hundred foot square, every way. Then there was a solemne sacrifice celebrated, and divine service said, according to an order read out of an old booke made of linnen, and the same, by a certaine Priest, one Ovius Paccius, a very aged man: who avouched, that he set these sacredand holy ceremonies from the old auncient  religion of the Samnites, according to the manner and custome, which in times past their auncestors had used, at what time as they complotted secretly and conspired, to surprise Capua out of the Tuscanes hands. When the sacrifice was done, the Generall of the armie by his Pursevant at armes, commaunded to cite and call forth by name, the noblest persons, either for parentage, or acts atchieved: who were brought into the place aforesaid, one by one. Amongst other preparations of this sacred solemnitie (which were able to strike a religious feare and devotion in a mans mind) there were certaine altars erected in the middest of this place closely covered in all parts, and sacrifices lying slaine all about, and the Centurians standing round with their swords readie drawne. Then the souldior was caused to approch neere the altars (like a sacrifice himselfe, rather than one that should have his part of the sacrifice) and urged by vertue of an  oth, to promise, that he would never utter abroad and reveale, whatsoever hee there should see or heare. Afterward, he was put to sweare, after an horrible and dreadfull forme of words, framed and tending expressely to the cursing of his owne person, his house and all his race and linage, in case, he went not into any battell, wheresoever the Generals should lead him, and if either himselfe fled out of the field, or saw any one to run away, and slue him not outright in the place. At the first verily, some there were that refused to take such an oth, and presently were massacred by the altars side. And lying there along together with the beasts, which had their throats cut for sacrifices, they served for a warning, to teach all the rest how they made refusall. When the chiefe of the Samnits had taken this abhominable and cursed oth, ten of them were elected and nominated by the soveraigne captaine, who every one had in charge to chuse himselfe a fellow, and they  likewise successively to take other to them, man by man, untill they had made up the number of 16000. And these were called Linteata Legio [i. the linnen Legion] taking the name of the covering of that enclosure, wherein the Nobilitie of the Samnites was sworne. These had given unto them brave and glorious armour, with helmets crested and plumed, because they should seeme taller than thereit. Another armie there was, consisting of twentie thousand and better, who neither in goodly and tall personage, nor in martiall proesse and reputation, ne yet in furniture and setting out, were inferiour unto the linnen Legion aforesaid. Loe, what a number there was of fighting men, even the whole strength and manhood of all Samnium, assembled and encamped in Aquilonia.
The Romane Consuls tooke their journey from the cittie of Rome, and C. Carvilius first: unto  whom were appointed the old Legions, which M. Attilius the Consull of the former yeare, had left in the territorie of Interamna. And with them he marched into Samnium. And, mean while that the enemies were overmuch busied and amused about their superstitious ceremonies, and h^ld their secret and mysticall councels, he woon by force from the Samnits, the towne Amiternum. Where almost 2800 men were slaine, and 4270 taken prisoners. But Papyrius, having by direction from the Senat enrolled a new armie, forced the towne Duronia; tooke fewer prisoners than his Colleague, but in lieu thereof, put many more to the sword. A rich bootie there was gotten, both in the one place and the other. Afterwards, the Consuls overran the whole countrie of Samnium, but they spoiled and wasted especially the lands about Atinium. Carvilius marched as far as Cominium, and Papyrius to Aquilonia, where the whole power of the Samnites  lay encamped. There, for a good while they neither sat still, and were altogether idle in the camp, ne yet was there any hot service in the field. They spent the time in provoking them to fight, that gladly would have sitten stil; or in lying off and giving ground, to those that assailed them: and thus, I say, with threatening, rather than offering battell, they passed the day. For whiles they began estsoones

 and gave over anon, there was no issue seene of any skirmishes, and the decision even of small matters and occurrents were prolonged and put off from day to day. The other campe of the Romaines lay twentie miles off: and albeit the other Consull was absent, yet his hand and counsell was in every enterprise and exploit. For as there lay a greater weight and charge at Aquilonia, than at Cominium: so Carvilius had a more carefull eye that way, than to the place which himselfe besieged. L. Papyrius being now at all points provided to fight, dispatched a messenger to his Colleague, to signifie unto him; that he minded the next day, if he were not checked by the Auspices, to give the enemie battaile: and withall, that it was expedient and needefull; that he likewise should with all his forces assault Cominium; that the Samnites within, might have neither meanes nor leysure to send any succour to Aquilonia. This post had that one  day allowed him to do his message, and attend hisdispatch; and by night he made returne, and brought word unto the Consull from his Colleague, that he liked well of his purpose and advise. Papyrius then immediatly dismissed and sent away the courrier aforesayd; and assembled his souldiers to an audience, where he discoursed at large concerning warre in generall.
Much he spake also as touching the present preparation and magnificent furniture of the enemies, more brave and goodly for shew and ostentation, than effectual and of importance in the end: For they are not the plumed crests (quoth he) that give the deadly wounds, but the Romaines speare and launce it is, that is able to pierce their guilded and damasked shields: yea, and that other glittering armie with milke-white diaper coates, must be died red in bloud, when they come to strokes, and to try it out by dint of sword. The golden and silvered armies of the  Samnites, were sometimes by my father put to the sword, and killed to the last man: and they served rather for rich spoyles to honour the victorious enemie, than for armour of proofe, no defend and save themselves. This is a fatall gift, and destinied to our name and familie, for to be chosen Generals, and to be opposed against the greatest puissance and attempts of the Samnites, and to bring away with them, those spoiles which might be ornaments to beautifie the publicke places of the citie. And the immortall gods no doubt are present to defend and assist us in our quarell, against those that so oft have sought for peace and alliance, and as often broken the same themselves. And if a man may conjecture and guesse of the will and providence of the gods, they never were to any armie more adverse and full of indignitie, than to that, which being stained and polluted with the bloud of beasts and men,  massacred and mingled together in an horrible and execrable kinde of sacrifice; and devowed to a double anger of the gods, having in dread and horror of one side, the vengeance of the same gods, witnesses of their breach of covenants with the Romaines; and on the other side the detestable and abhominable curses, comprised in an oth, taken against all covenant and promise; hath sworne by constraint and perforce; hateth and detesteth the oth whereby they are perjured, and at one time, is in feare of the gods, of their owne selves, and their enemies. Thus having shewed unto his souldiours (who were alreadie of themselves badly and maliciously enough bent against the enemies) that he had certaine intelligence of all these things, by the constant relation averted by certaine fugitives that were fled from them unto him; they all being now full of assured hope of Gods help and mans, with one uniforme  crie called for battaile: and nothing grieved them more than this, That it was put off untill the morow; hating in their harts the rest of that day behind, and that one night, for being so long. About midnight, Papyrius having received letters back from his Colleague, gat him up closely when all were fast asleepe, and sent the chick-maister to take token, and observe the presage of the pullets. There was not one throughout the whole campe, of what qualitie or degree soever, but had a desire to fight. The highest as well as the lowest were earnest and eager: the Captaines might behold and see the souldiours affection and courage that way, and the souldiour likewise the Captaines; in so much as the same ardent desire of battaile which was in all the rest, reached also even to those that had the charge of the Auspices. For when as the chickens would not peck, the chick-maister adventured to lye and falsifie the token, and made report to the Consull, that  it was The chickens fell to their meare so eagerly, that with their hastie feeding, some corne fell from their bi^s to the ground, and rebounded againe: and bi^s was Tripudium solistimum, and in their learning was reputed the best Auspiciuns in that kind, and presaged most happie successe. Tripudium solistimum. Whereat the Consul right glad and joyous, pronounced that the token was luckie, and that they were to fight under the favour and conduct of the gods: land hereupon he put forth the signall or bloudie banner of battaile. As he was now marching forth into the field with his armie, behold a fugitive out of the enemies campe, brought word, that twentie cohorts or companies of Samnites, and those were about 400 in a cohort, were gone to

Cominium. And because his Colleague Carvilius should not be ignorant hereof, lie presently  dispatched a curryer in post unto him, and himselfe commanded the Ensignes and Standerds to be advanced and set forward with speede, ordeining the bands in the rereward for succours, and disposing them in divers places, with Captaines over the same, accordingly. He appointed L. Volumnius to leade the right wing, and L. Scipio the left, and the horsemen he committed to the conduct of two other Lieutenants, C. Ceditius, and Trebonius. As for Sp. Nautius, he charged him in all hast to take off the packsadles from the Mules, and to mount the cohorts of the light; armed footemen that serve in the wings, upon their backs, and with them to fetch a compasse, and to seize upon an hill there in sight, and in the heate of the medley; to shew himselfe from thence, and to raise as great a cloud of dust as possible he could. Whiles the Generall was occupied hereabout, there arose some warbling amongst the chicken-maisters touching the auspice  or presage of that day; in so much as they were overheard of the Romane horsemen; who supposing it a matter of good consequence and to be regarded, advertised Sp. Papyrius (the Consuls nephew, or brothers sonne) that there was some doubt and question about the Auspice.
The youth, borne in those dayes when there were no Atheists, nor lectures red of despising. God and religion; enquired farther into the matter, because he would not certifie anything whereof he was not sure: and when he had found out the truth, gave knowledge thereof to the Consull: who sayd thus unto him, God blesse thee my sonne: and be not thou dismayed thereat, but fight hardly more valiantly, and do thy best devoir. As for him, that hath the charge and oversight of the birds and Auspice, if he have made a wrong report, and given up a contrary presage, or false signe, all the mischiefe and perill light upon his owne head for his lewd lie. As for me, I was told  of a Tripudium, and that the birds fell hartily to their meat: and I hold it for a luckie auspice and token of good successe unto the people of Rome and the armie, and for no other. This said, he commanded the Centurions to set those pulletors, in the forefront of the battaile. The Samnites also for their part set forward their ensignes, and their battaillons follow after, gallantly set out in gorgeous armour and brave apparell, in such sort, as the very sight of the enemies represented a magnificent and stately shew to the beholders.
But see what hapned; before the first shout given, before the first vollie of shot and encounter, the principall pulletier chaunced to be stricken with a Iavelin, launced at aventure and at randon, and fell downe dead even before the ensignes. Which being reported unto the Consull, Behold the handie worke of God (quoth he) the gods are present in this battaile; the guiltie person hath his due reward. And as the Consull  was a speaking these words, so, just before him a Raven set out a wide cleere throate, and cryed with a lowd note: at which Augurie, the Cos. rejoyced, and avowed, that the gods appeared never in mens affaires more evidently. And herewith he commanded the trumpets to sound, and to set up a lustie shout: them followed a cruell and terrible fight on both sides, but with harts and courages farre unlike. The Romanes were ravished and carried on end to the battaile, with anger, hope, and heate of conflict, greedie of bathing their swords, and embruing their hands in the enemies bloudshead. But the Samnites many of them, by force of necessitie, and constraint of a blind and superstitious religion, even against their wils, were forced to make resistance, and defend themselves rather than to fight and offend the enemie. Neither had they susteined and held out the first shout, charge, and shock of the Romanes (as having now for certain yeares past bene  used evermore to go away defeated and vanquished) but that a mightier feare imprinted and setled in their heart rootes, held them perforce from running away: for they ever had continually represented in their eye, the whole furniture of that secret sacrifice; of those armed sacrificers and priests with naked swords; of that hideous butcherie of men and of brute beasts, lying slaine one with another in their bloud intermingled together; of the altars besprinckled and stained with the lawfull sheading of the one, and the detestable effusion of the other; of the dreadfull and horrible execrations; and to conclude, of that frantick, furious, and detestable forme of words, composed and devised to the detestation and malediction of their line and race. Being fast bound, I say, with these bonds for fleeing away, they stood to it, and stirred not back, fearing their owne countrymen more than the enemies. The Romanes from both points, and from the  middle and maine battaillon charged hotely, beat them downe, killed and cut them in pieces, thus amazed and astonied as they were with dread of gods, and awe of man. Small resistance made they, as who only feared to flye and run away: so as by this time, there was execution and havock made of them almost to the very Standerts. At which very instant, there appeared overthwart

 from the one side a dust, as if a mightie armie had raysed it in their march; namely Sp. Nantius (or as some say Octavius Metius) who had the leading of certaine Cohorts called Alarie, mounted upon Mules, which for the nonce made a dust greater than son^ that number they were. For those varlets and new horsemen, as they sat on their Mitles and Sumpter beasts, drew after them trailing on the ground, roughes of t^ees full of branches and leaves: and first, there appeared in the fore-front (as it were through a duskish and dimme light) their armbur and guidons: but the dust behind them, rising higher and thicker made shew of a troupe of horsemen flanking an armie of footemen: wherewith not onely the Samnites but Romaties also were deceived. And the Consull himselfe; to avow the errour and beare them downe it was so; cried alowde amongst the formost ensignes, so as his voice reached unto  his enemies, That Cominium was woon, and his brother Consull was come with victorie; and therefore, they should endeavor and enforce themselves to get the day, before that canother armie should win the honour out of their hands. Thus cried out on horsebacked galoping among the ranks too and fro. Then he commaunded the Colonels and Centurions, to make a way for the mein of armes. Himselfe afore, handwissed Trebonius and Cedilias, that when they ofpied him to beare his speare upright and to shake it; then they should with all the might they had; put forth the Cavallerie and charge the enemies. Everie thing was done at a becke; according as they were directed and enstructed before hand. The waies were made wide betweene the files. The horsemen fling out, and with speare in rest charge upon the middle battaillon of the enemies and brake their arraies whersoever they charged. Volumnius and Scipid seconded them  with the Infanterie: and while they were disarmed overthrew them, and bare them to the ground. Downe went these linnen Cohorts now, when God and man fought against them, and were discomfited: and as well those that tooke the oth, and the other that were unsworne, fled amaine; and without respect of one thing or other, feared none but their enemies. All the footmen that escaped the bartaile, were beaten into their campe at Aquilonia. The gentlemen and the men of armes fled toward Bovianum. The Cavallerle of the Romanes pursued the horsemen, and the Infanterie chased the footmen. The wings tooke divers waies, the right toward the campe of the Samnites, the left unto the towne. Volumnius was somewhat before, and got the campe. Scipio found more resistance in the cittie: not for that vanquished men, as they were, had more courage and resolution, but because that wals are stronger to endure an assault, and better to keepe  outarmed men, than a plaine trench and rampier. For, from the courtine, with stones they beat and repulsed the enemie. Scipio foreseeing well enough that they should be longer about the assault of a strong and sensed town, unlesse he dispatched the matter quickly and went through with it, in their first affright and confusion, before they tooke: heart againe: demaunded of his soldiors,. If they could take it well, and abide to see the campe woone by the other point of the battaile, and themselves (being likewise conquerors) to be repelled from the citie gates? When they all cried, No; and said they would never endure, that disgrace himselfe with his target over his head, approched the gate, the other following after under a target sense, rush into the cittie, thrust downe the Samnites about the gate, and gat to the walles: but to engage themselves farther into the cittie, they durst not, being so fewe as they were. The Consull  himselfe at the first knew nothing of all this, but was occupied about the retreate, and rallying of his men: for now the sunne was well neere down; and the night comming on a pace, caused everything even to the verie victours to seeme dangerous and suspicious. But when he was advanced farther, he saw on the right hand the campe taken: and on the left, he heard a confused crie and blunder in the citie, compounded of the noise of fighting men, and frighted persons: and even at that instant, it fortuned, that they skirmished at the gate. Then he rode on, neerer and neerer, and saw his owne men upon the wals, howbeit nothing yet fully performed, but through the rash adventure and foolehardines of some few, an overture onely made, and some advantage gotten of performing a great peece of service and a worthie exploir. Whereupon, the commaunded the forces that were retired, to be called, and with banner displaied to enter the  cittie. So soone as they were in, they tooke the next quarter to the gate, and for that the night approached, there they rested, and went no farther. But even in that verie night, the enemies abandoned the towne. There were slaine that day, before Aquilonia 30340 Samnites, and 3870 taken prisoners: and of field ensignes they went away with 90. Moreover this is reported and recorded of Papyrius, that there had not beene lightly seene a Generall, in any battalle more

lightsome, cheerfull and merie; were it of his owne naturall disposition, or upon assured confidence  of victorie. Vpon which courage and resolution, he could not be revoked from battaile, albeit there was some question and scruple about the Auspice: and even in the hottest time, and dangerous point of the conflict, at what time as the manner is to vow temples to the immortall gods: he vowed unto Iupiter Victor, If so be that he defaired the Legions of the enemies, to present him with a cup of sweet and pleasant mead, before he dranke any strong and headie wine of the grape: which vow the gods accepted and liked of, and turned the ill presage of the Auspices, to good.
The other Consull has as good speed at Cominium: For at the breake of day, he approched with all his forces to the wals of the towne, and invested it round about: and set strong gards at the gates, for feare they should yssue or sally foorth. And even as he was about to give the signall  of assault, there came a messenger post from his fellow Cons. who in great affright brought word of the comming of twentie cohorts to the (...) or them within the citie which both kepe him short from giving the assault, and caused him to call backe againe part of his forces which were arranged and readie under the counter scarp to assaile the defendants. Then he gave charge to Decius Bruius Scava, one of the Lieutenants to take the first legion, and twentie cohorts of the wings, and other horsemen, to make head against the reskue of the enemies aforesaid; and whersoever he met them, there to empeach them, yea and if occasion served, to give them battaille and in no case to suffer that power to come to Commium. Himselfe commaunded that ladders should be reared on everie side of the towne, and under a ferise of targets approched the gates. So that in one instant the gates were burst open, and the wals skaled on every part. The Samnites, as their hearts served them well enough to keepe the enemies from enterance, before they saw any armed men upon the wals: so, after they perceived, that they were assailed not aloofe with stones and darts, but fast by and with hand strokes: and how that they, who hardly and with great difficultie from the plain gat up the wals, having now gained and surmounted the place (which they most feared before) could fight at ease from aloft with their enemie, who was not able to match them in the even ground; quit their towers and wals, and gathered all together in the market place, and there for a while tried the utmost hazard of battaile. But afterwards throwing downe their weapons, 15400. of them yeelded themselves to the Consull his mercie. There were slaine 4380. Thus went the game at Cominium, and thus at Aquilonia.
In the mid way between these two citties, where a third battaile was looked for, the enemies  were not to bee found. And when they were seven miles off from Cominium, they had a countre-maund from their owne countriemen, and were called away, and so came not to the reskue, neither in the one battaile nor the other. In the shutting in of the evening, when it began to bee darke, being within the sight of the campe of one hand, and Aquilonia on the other; they might heare a like noise and crie from both parts, which caused them to pause. But afterwards, when they were over against the campe which was fired by the Romanes; the flame spreading farre abroad declared the diffeature of the Samnites more evidently, and staied them there for going farther. In which verie place, they laid them downe here and there in their armour (as they were) and passed a restlesse and unquiet long night, expecting (and yet fearing) the light of the day. At the dauning whereof, and so soone as it began to peepe, while they were uncertaine  and doubtfull what way to take, they hapned to be discovered by the Cavallerie of the enemies: and suddainly in a fearefull amaze and affright, they tooke them to their beeles and fled in great, disorder. Those horsemen having pursued the Samnits, who in the night season escaped out of the towne, chaunced to espie this foresaid multitude, and perceived they were neither entrenched, nor defended with a good corps degard. This companie was descried also even from the wals of Aquilonia: whereupon, by this time, the legionarie footmen likewise made after them; but they, could not overtake them in the chase, so fast they fled: howbeit the horsemen cut-off some, and slew two hundred and foure score in the taile of the reregard. In this affright they left much armour behind them, and eighteen ensignes, and so the rest of the armie saved themselves, and as well as they might in so fearfull confusion, recovered Bovianum. The joy of these two Romanes  armies was wonderfully encreased, to see one another have so good and fortunat successe in their enterprises. Both the Consuls, by ech others advise and consent, gave their townes thus woon, unto their soldiors, to be sacked and rifled; and after the goods were out, to set fire on the emptie houses; in such wise, that in one and the same day, both Aquilonia and Cominium were

 burnt to ashes and the Consuls, with mutuall congratulation and joy, as wel betweene their Legions as themselves, feasting one another, joined both their campes in one. Afterwards in the sight of both armies, Carvilius highly commended and praised his soldiors, everie one as he deserved, and rewarded them with gifts accordingly. Papyrius also for his part, who had performed many and sundrie skirmishes as well in the field and battaile, as about the winning of the camp and forcing the cittie, bestowed by way of honour upon Sp. Nautius, and Sp. Papyrius his brothes son, as also upon foure Centurions, and the band of the Hastatl or Iaveliniers, braselers and coronets of gold and namely Nautius, for that he bare himselfe so worthily in that journey and expedition, wherein with his counterfeit troupe of horsemen upon Mules, he so terrified the enemie, as if he had conducted a maine armie of men of armes: and young Papyrius; for his good service  with his cavallarie as well in the battaile and medley, as also in that night, wherein he forced the Samnites to the secretly; and quit the citie Aquilonia: the Centurions and souldiours, in this regard, that they were the first who seized the gates and walls of that towne: as for all the horsemen, in consideration of their manifold travaile, and brave devoire shewed in sundrie places; he gave them braselots and little hornes of silver. This done, for as much as it was time now to withdraw draw their armie from out of Samnium, either both twaine, or one of them alone; they sate in counsell and consultation thereupon: and thought it was the better course (to the end that the Samnites might be brought lower, and their state more sensibly decaied) to go forward still, and charge them with greater force and resolution, and to pursue the rest that was behinde; that Samnium might be delivered up to the Consuls their successours, utterly tamed and subdued:  since that the enemies now had no armie abroade in field, like either to geve or abide another battaile, and there remained but one manner of making warre, even to besiege and assault their cities and strong townes; by the winning and subversion whereof, they might with the pillage enrich and make their owne souldiours for ever, and withall empoverish their enemies, and make a hand of them quite, being now at the last cast; forced to fight for church and home. Hereupon the Consuls dispatched their letters to the Senate and people of Rome, conteining the effect at large of all their exploits; and then devided themselves, and tooke two several wayes: Papyrius marched with his legions to the siege of Sepinum; and Carvilius with his, to besiege Volana.
The Consuls letters were red and heard with exceeding joy, as well in the court of the  counsell of the citie, as in the common hall of assemblies; and this publick contentment and rejoycing was solemnised with generall processions, for the space of foure dayes, and with marveilouszeale, affection, and devotion of private persons in particular. And to say a truth, this victorie was to the state of Rome not only great and honorable, but also of great consequence, in regard that it fell out in so good and commodious a time. For even then, newes came, that Tuscane was revolted and rebelled, and men began to cast in their minds, and discourse how they should do (in case ought should happen but well in Samnium) to withstand the forces and invasions of the Tuscanes: who taking heart, and presuming upon the Samnites, and their cursed and execrable oth, by vertue whereof they were obliged to fight to the utterance and extremitie, imbraced the occasion and opportunitie of taking armes againe, whiles both the Consuls and the  whole forces of Rome were diverted and withdrawne into Samnium, and there imployed. The Embassadours of their allies and confederates, were by M. Attilius the Pretor brought into the Senate, and had audience given them; where they complained, that their territories were overrun, burnt, and spoyled, by the Tuscanes their next neighbours, and all because they were unwilling to revolt from the people of Rome: humblie beseeching the LL. of the Senate, to defend and protect them against the violence, wrong, and outrage of common enemies. Answere was returned unto the embassadours: That the Senate would have regard, that thein allies should have no cause to repent of their faithfull allegeance, and constant loyaltie; and that ere many dayes went over their heads, the Tuscanes should tast of the same cup that the Samnites had begun unto them. Howbeit, they would have bene slack and cold enough in dealing with the  Tuscanes, had not fresh newes come, that the Falisci also, who had for many yeares continued in amitie and friendship with the people of Rome, were combined with the Tuscanes, and entred into armes, as well as they. The neere neighbourhood of this nation, gave an edge to the Senatours, and whet them on, to take care and ordeine, that their Feciall Heralts should be addressed thither to demaund restitution and amends for harmes done: which being denied, and

no goods restored; by the advise and authoritie of the Senate, together with the graunt of the  people, warre was proclaimed against the Tuscanes: and the Consuls were commaunded to cast lots, whither of them should passe out of Samnium with his forces, into Tuscane.
By this time now Carvilius had woon Volana, Palumbinum, and Herculaneum, townes appartaining to the Samnites. Volana was forced within few dates: Palumbinum, the same day that he came before the walls: but at Herculaneum, he fought two severall battailes, with doubtfull and uncertaine issue, yea and with more losse of his owne part, than of the enemies. But afterwards, he pitched his campe before the towne, beleaguered the enemies, and kept them within their walls, gave the assault, and woon it in the end. In these three townes there were either taken prisoners or slaine in all, to the number of ten thousand: but so, as through feare the greater part by farre, suffred themselves to be captives, rather then to dye on the edge of the sword.
The Consuls cast lots for their Provinces and it fell unto Garvilius to go into Tuscane, as the  souldiours wished and desired, who could no longer away with the rigour of cold weatherin Samnium. As for Papyrius, he found a greater power of enemies, and more resistance, before Sepinum. Many a time he was fought withall in battaile arranged: oft skirmished with, in his march: yea and oftentimes under the very walls, the enemies fallyed out against him from the towne, in such sort, as he: could not tell what to make of it: for neither was it to be called properly a seege alone, nor yet altogether a battaile fight; considering that the enemies were no more protected and covered themselves, by the strength of their walls; than the walls were defended by force of armes, and men of warre: howbeit in the end, what with fighting, and what with skirmishing, he lodged them within the citie, so as they durst come abroad no more, but kept  themselves close, and were besieged indeede: and after long siege, as wel with forcible assaults, as by trenches, bastils, and rampiers, he was maister of the towne: and therefore after he was possessed of it, upon anger and choler that they had so long stood out and put him to so much trouble, there was the more bloud shed; and seven thousand dyed by the sword, whereas under three thousand were taken prisoners. The spoyle and pillage, which was exceeding great, considering that the Samnites had layd up all their goods in some few cities, was given to the souldiours. And now lay the snow thick all over upon the ground: neither could men endure abroad in the field without house and harbour: and thereupon the Consull retired his armie out of Samnium. Against his comming to Rome, it was decreed by the generall voyce of all men, that he should triumph: and so he triumphed whiles he was in his Magistracie, with great magnificence, and  sumptuous pomp, as those dayes would affoord. For as well his footemen as horsemen marched and passed by in a shew, adorned with their gifts and prizes of honor. Many a For saving of a citizens life in battaile, made of grasse. civike For mounting first, over the rampier of the enemies campe, fashioned (...) the pales in a rampier. vallare, and For skaling over the wails first, of an enemies citie: and formed to the manner of the courtin or battilments of a wall. murale garland was seene worne that day. Much looking and woondering there was at the spoyles also of the Samnites armour and apparell: for with their goodly beautie and, glorious hew, were they comparable to those that his father had woon before him, which were commonly seene, and well known in the publicke places of the citie, adorned and beautified therewith. Moreover there were led before him in this triumph and pompeous entrance of his into the citie, certain captives and prisoners of noble bloud descended, men of great worth sometime and name, as well for their owne deedes, as their fathers acts. Great store of Brasse bullion in Ingots, and not coined, was caried in shew, amounting to the weight of Two millions five hundred shirtie three Asses in valour, and of english sterl. 25006 li. 13. shilfourd within a farthing. 2000533 pound: which masse  of brasse or copper, was raysed of the ransome of prisoners. But the silver which was gotten in the saccage of the townes, came to 3990 pound sterling after five shilling, an ounce. 1330 pound weight and above. All the brasse and silver, was laid up in the common treasurie of the citie, and nothing at all of the whole bootie given to the souldiours: and the discontentment and hartburning that grew thereby, was so much the greater in the common people, by reason they were charged besides with an exaction and contribution for souldiours pay; whereas if the Consull had not upon a vainglorious humour brought into the citie-chamber, such summes which he had gained from the enemie, there might a good portion thereof have bene bestowed freely among the souldiours, and of the surplusage their due wages paid and dispatched. Moreover, whiles he was Consull, he dedicated the Temple of Quirinus, which his father being Dictator, had vowed: for, that himselfe vowed it in the very  time of the battaile, I finde not in any auncient writer; and certainely in so short a space, he could not possibly have built and finished it. He trimmed it besides, and garnished it with the spoiles of the enemies, whereof there was such store and abundance, that not only the foresayd Temple and the market-place were therewith set out and bravely decked, but they were

 distributed abroad to their allies also and Coloners, neere inhabitants, for the decoration and beautifying of their churches and publicke places. After the triumph ended, hee brought his armie to winter in the territorie of the Vestines, because those quarters were distressed and annoied by the Samnites.
In this meane while, Carvilius the Consull, having at his first comming given the assault unto Troilium, a cittie in Tuscane, graunted license to 470 of the richest citizens, to depart from thence, and by composition, to pay a great sum of monie unto him. The rest of the multitude fell into his hands, after hee had woon the towne by fine force. This done, he forced five castles, situate in places of great strength: where were slaine of enemies 2400, and not all out 2000 taken prisoners. He granted to the Falisci (who sued for peace) truce for one year, and yet to make present  payment of a 312 lib. 10 sh. 100000 Asses, and to discharge the souldiours wages for that yeare. After these exploits atchieved, he departed to his triumph: which as it was lesse honourable and glorious than that other of his companion in government, in regard of the service performed against the Samnits: so, if wee consider withall, the Tuscane warre, it was equall and comparable unto it everyway. Of brasse money he brought into the common chest 937 lib. 15 sh. 7.d.ob.Sterl. 300090 pound; of the surplusage of the pillage and other spoiles, hee caused the chappell of Fors fortuna to bee built, neer unto the temple of the same goddesse, dedicated by king Servius Tullus: To the soldiors that served on foot, he gave of his bootie 6 sh.5.dob. siert. 102 Asses a peece, and twise as much to every Centurion and horseman. Which reward they accepted more thankefully at his hands, by reason of the nigardise and miserie of his Colleague before him. And so gracious was this Consull, that he protected  and saved L. Volumnius, one of his lieutenants, against the people: who being arrested and called to his answere by M. Cancius, a Tribune of the Commons, fled for his last helpe, to his Lieutenantship (as they say) and avoided thereby the daunger of their judgement: for that during his absence in that charge, his accusation might well bee set on foot and followed, butbrought to a finall end and definitive sentence, it could not bee.
After this yeare expired, the newe Tribunes of the Commons entered their office: and for that there was supposed some errour in their creation, the fift day after were other chosen in their steed. The same yeare there was a Lustrum or solemne survey of the cittie, held by P. Cornelius Arvina, and C. Martius Rutilius Censors. In which were numbred and assessed 262322 pols of Roman citizens. These were in order the six and twentieth Censors from the beginning: and this  was reckoned the nineteenth Lustrum after the first institution. In this yeare, and never before, the spectators of the Romane Games and Plates, in regard of their happie successe in warres, stood adorned with wreaths and garlands of floures upon their heads: and then came up the fashion at Rome, borrowed from the manner and custome of Greece, to honour those with braunches of the date tree, who wan the prises, and were victors in those solemne Games.
The same yeare the Aediles curule, who exhibited the said pastimes and exercises of activitie, paved the causey or high way with flint or peble stone, from the temple of Mars unto Bovillae: and the fines of certaine Publicanes or farmers of the cittie, that were grasiers and condemned, paied the charges. Then Papyrius held the great Assemblie for Election of new Consuls, and created Q. Fabius Garges the sonne of Maximus, and D. Iunius Brutus Sceva, Consuls. Papyrius  himselfe was chosen Pretor. This yeare, so joious and fortunate in many respects, could hardly countervaile and recompence with al other comforts, one only calamitie, namely, a pestilence and mortalitie, which consumed and devoured both town and countrie. In so much, as for the strangenes and extremitie therof, it was held for a prodigious and portentious sign beyond all course of nature, and reach of reason. Whereupon, the bookes of Sibylla were perused, to know out of them, what issue and remedie the gods would vouchsafe to shew of this maladie and miserie. Wherein they found, that the Image of Aesculapius must be sent for, from as far as Pigiade, or Chronisi. Epidaurus to Rome. But for that yeare, by reason, that the Consuls were busied in the warres, nothing was done, but onely one day bestowed wholly in supplications and devout Letanies, to the honour of the  said god Aesculapius.



THE TEN BOOKES NEXT FOLLOWING OF T. LIVIVS, (VSVALLY CALLED THE SECOND DECADE) ARE lost: the arguments whereof remaine yet extant in the Abridgements or Breviaries of L. Florus, which in steed of the Historie it selfe, are set downe in this place.


The Breviarie of L. Florus to the eleventh Booke.
WHen Fabius Gurges the Consull, had fought an infortunate battaile against the Samnites, and the Senate were about to discharge and remoove him from his armie; Fabius Maximus his father, besought them for his sake, not to offer him that disgrace and dishonour. For rather than that should come to passe, he promised to serve in person under his sonne in qualitie of his Lieutenant. Which moved the Senat, and prevailed more than  anything els. And hee was his words maister. For hee went to the field, and by his meanes and good advise, the Consull his sonne was so well assisted, that he defeited the Samnites, triumphed over them, led captive before his triumphant chariot C. Pontius Lord Generall of the Samnites, and afterwards strucke off his head. Whiles the cittie [of Rome] was pitteously visited and afflicted with the plague, there were certain Embassadours addressed and sent to Epidaurus, for so translate the image of Aesculapius from thence to Rome. And in steed thereof they brought away a great snake or serpent, which of it selfe embarked in their ship, and wherein, they were verily persuaded, that the puissance and divine power of the said god was resident. And when they had conducted it with them by sea as farre as to Rome, it went forth of the owne accord, and swam to the Island within Tyberis, where it setled: and in that very place where it  tooke land, they erected a temple to Aesculapius. L. Posthumius, a consular man [i. who had been Consull] having the charge of an armie, was condemned, and had a round fine set upon his head for that he emploied his souldiours about some worke in one of his sermes. The league was now the fourth time renued with the Samnites, at their earnest suit and request. Curius Dentatus the Consull, after he bid defeited and slaine the Samnites, vanquished the Sabines, who were revolted and rebelled, and received them under his obeisance, triumphed twise during the time of one Consulship. Three Colonies were erected and peopled, to wit, Castrum, Sena, and Adria. The three Triumvirs to sit upon capitall crimes, were then first created. Asessing was holden, and a solemne Lustrum, wherein by iust account were numbred 273000 cittizens of Romanes. The Commons, because they were deepely engaged in debt, in regard of greevous and long seditions and dissentions, retired in the end to Ianiculum, from whence they  were reclaimed and brought againe into the citie, by the meanes of Q. Hortensius the Dictatour, who died in the very time of his Magistracie. This booke containeth moreover the exploits against the Volsinians, and also the Lucanes, against whom it was thought good and ordained, to send aid and succours to the Tyrrhenians.


THe Breviarie of L. Florus to the twelfth Booke.
THe Romane Embassadours being murdred by the Senonois Gaule, and warre thereupon denounced and proclaimed against them, Lucius Caecilius the Pretour, fortuned with  his whole armie to bee defeited by them, and put to the sword. When the Romane fleet was spoiled and ransacked by the Tarentines, and their Admirall besides slaine, the Senate dispatched their, Embassadours unto them to make complaint of these wrongs and outrages: but they

 were evill intreated and sent away with great abuse. Wherupon, defiance was likewise given unto them, and warre proclamed. The Samnites revolted. Against whom together with the Lucanes, Brutians, and Tuscanes, sundrie battailes were fortunatly fought by divers Romane captaines. Pyrrhus the King of the Epirotes [or the Albanois] passed over into Italy, for to aid the Tarentines. When a Legion of the Campans was sent under the conduct of Decius Iubellius to Rhegium, there to lie in garison, they treacherously flew the naturall inhabitants, and seized the cittie of Rhegium to their owne behoofe.


The Breviarie of L. Florus for the thirteenth Booke.
VAlerius Levinus the Consul, lost a field against Pyrrhus: by occasion principally that his soldiors were terrified and amazed at the uncouth sight of the Elephants. After that battaile, when Pyrrhus viewed and beheld the dead bodies of the Romanes, lying slaine on the ground; he observed and marked, that all their faces were turned toward the enemie affront. From thence he went forward spoiling and wasting all the way to Rome. C. Fabricius was sent unto him for to treat about the redemption and ransome of the prisoners: and was sollicited by the King (but in vaine) to abandon the service of his owne countrie. The foresaid prisoners were enlarged and sent home without paying any ransome at all. Cyneas was sent as Embassadour from the King unto the Senate; who required, that the K. his master, for to end and compound all quarrels, might be received into the cittie and amitie of the people of Rome: but when it was  thought meet to debate and consult of this important matter, in a more frequent assemblie of the Senatours, Appius Claudius who many a day had not intermedled with the affaires of State and Counsell, presented himself in the court among the Senators: where his opinion caried the matter cleare away, and Pyrrhus his demaund was flatly denied. P. Domitius the first Censor of Commoners, held a Lustrum or survey of the citie, in which were found 278222 Roman citizens by the pol. A second field w^s fought against Pyrrhus, but with doubtfull event and yssue. With the Carthaginians, the alliance was renewed now the fourth time. When a certaine fugitive traitour that ran from Pyrrhus, offred to C. Fabricius the Consul, for to poison the K. he was sent backe againe, and the treason was discovered to the king. Over and besides, this booke conteineth the prosperous affaires in warre against the Tuscans, Lucenians,  Brutians, and Samnites.


The Breviarie of L. Florus, upon the fourteenth Booke.
PYrrhus passed the seas into Sicilie. When among other prodigies and fearefull tokens, the image of Iupiter in the Capitoll, was overt browne and smitten downe with lightning, the head therof was recovered and found again by the soothsaiers. Curius Dentatus, as he was taking musters, sold in port-sale the goods of one, that would not answere to his name when he was called. He defaited Pyrrhus, after his return again out of Sicily into Italy; and forced him to void and depart once for all. Fabricius a Censor, cassed and displaced out of his Senatours rowme, P. Cornelius Rufinus, one  that had been Consul, for that he had in silver plate, to the waight of ten pounds. There was a Lustrum holden by the Censours, and therein were found 271224 citizens. A societie and alliance was contracted with Ptolomee K. of Aegypt. Sextilia a prosessed vestall Nun was convicted of uncleannesse and fornication, and buried quick. Two new Colonies were erected, to wit, Posidonia and Consa. A fleet of Carthaginians arrived, to aid the Mamertines: by occasion whereof, the league was broken. This booke compriseth also, the happie exploits against the Lucanians, Samnites, and Brutians: together with the death of king Pyrrhus.


The Breviarie of L. Florus, to the fiveteenth Booke.
THe Tarentines being vanquished, had both peace graunted, and liberty also restored unto them. The souldiours of the Campaine legion aforesaid, which had possessed themselves of Rhegium, were besieged: and after they had absolutely yeelded, were every one made shorter by the head. Certain lustie youths of Rome, who had misused and beaten the embassadors of the Apollionats,

sent unto the Senat, were delivered unto their bands to be used according to their discretion. The  Picentes were overcome in battaile, and obtained peace. Two Colonels were sent, the one to Artminu^ within the marches of Picenam, (i. Ancona) the other to Beneventum, in Samnium. Now and never before began the Romanes to use silver coine for their mo^ie. The V^brians and Sallentines were vanguished, and their submission of obedience received. The number of the Questors was augmented [to be eight.]


The Breviarie of L. Florus, to the sixteenth Booke.
THE first rising of the Carthaginians, with the beginning of their citie, are in this booke related: Against whom together with Hiero King of the Syracusians, the Senat of Rome ord^ned to send aid unto the The inhabitants of Messina Mamertines: and after much arguing and debate about this point, whiles some persuaded, and others againe dissuaded; the gentlemen of Rome, who served on borsebacke, then first crossed the seas, and bare themselves bravely in many battailes and to good purpose, against Hiero: who at length craved peace, and bad it graunted. The Censors held a Lustrum and numbred the people: and enrolled Eutropius saith 292000. 372224 citizens of Rome, into the subsidie booke. D. Iunius Brutus, was the first that ever represented combates of swordsensors at the sharpe to the ^tterance, in the honour of his father late deceased. One Colonie was planted at Aesernia. This booke comprehendeth besides, the good successe of the affaires against the Carthaginians and the Vulscinians.



The Breviarie of L. Florus, for the seventeenth Booke.
CNeus Cornelius the consul, being surprised and environed with a fleet of Carthaginians, and under colour of a parle, trained forth and called unto them; was villanously taken prisoner and kept still with them. Cn. Duillius the Consull, fought with happie successe against this their foresaid flees: and was the first Romane captaine that rode in triumph, for a navale victorie at sea. In regard wherof, this honour for ever after was done unto him, That when he supped forth in any place of the cittie, as he returned home to his owne house, the waits should found, the ha^boies all the way, and a man go before him with a burning torch. L. Cornelius the Consullwoon a field in  Sardinia against the Ilanders, together with the Corsians, and Hanno the General of the Carthaginians. Attilius Calatinus the Consull, having unadvisedly engaged his armie within a place of great disadvantage, whereas the Carthaginians lay round about in ambush, retired and escaped by the valour and industrious meanes of M. Calpurnius, a Colonell: who with aregiment of 300 foot venterously salted out, and turned all the forces of the enemies upon himselfe. One Anniball a Carthaginian Commannder, upon the deseature of the Armads whereof he was Admirall, was by his owne soldiors trussed up, and crucified. Attilius Regulus the Consull, having in battaile at sea vanquished the Carthaginians, sailed over into Affricke


The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the eighteenth Booke.
ATtilius Regulus the Consul, slew [in Affricke] a serpent of a mightie and wonderfull bignesse, but with the exceeding losse of his soldiors. And after many encounters and battailes with the Carthaginians, when the Senat by reason of his so happy conduct and management of the wars, sent no other to succeed him, he dispatched his letters unto them and complained therof: and among other pregnant reasons that he alleadged for to have a successor to come unto him, this was one; That the little inheritance and living which he had suffred wast, by the default or leaudnesse of his bailisses of husbandrie. Meanewhiles, as if fortune had beene disposed and sought meanes to shew a notable example in the person of this one man Regulus, as well of adversitie as prosperitie, bec was  overthrown in plaine field, and taken prisoner by Xanthippus, a renowmed captain of the Lace^^monans, whom the Carthaginians had waged, and sent for to aid the. After this, the sundrie shipwracks of the Romane Navie, eclipsed, obscured, and disfigured all the other noble exploits that the Romane Chieftaines had fortunately atchi^ved before, as well by land as sea. T. Coruncanius was the first high Priest

 or Archp^^las, created out of the bodie of the Commons. M. Sempronius Sophus and M. Valerius Maximus the Censors, when they made a review of the Senate, cassed thirteene, and tooke their embrodred purple clokes from them. They held a survey also of the whole cittie, and entred into their subsidie booke 317217 Romane citizens. Regulus, being sent from the Carthaginians to the Senate of Some, to treat a peaceable accord, or if he could not obteine so much to deale about the exchange of prisoners one for another, bound himselfe by an (...) to returne againe to Carthage, if he sped not, for the exchange afore said. And being come to Rome, himselfe dissuaded both the one and the other: howbeit, to accomplish and performe his promise by oth given, he made returne accordingly, and by the Carthaginians was despiteously put to cruell torture, and so died.


 The Breviarie of L. Florus to the nineteenth Booke.
CAius Cecilius Metellus, in consideration of his fortunate conduct of the warres against the Carthaginians, rode in a most stately and magnificent triumph: wherin were shewed and led captine 13 chiefe Captaines of the enemies, and 120 Elephants. Claudius Pulcher the Consull, who maugre the adverse presages of the Auspices, would needes bazard a battaile, commaunded the sacred Pullets to be doussed and drenched over the head in the water, to see if they would drinke, since they resused to eate their meate; and received an overthrow at sea, in a conflict with the Carthaginians. For which, he was called home by the Senate, and commaunded to nominate a Dictator: whereupon he  declared C. Glaucia, a base companion, and a person of the meanest degree and qualitie: who being constrained to resigne his Magistracie, yet notwithstanding afterwards beheld the games and plaies in his mantle of estate. Attilius Calatinus was the first Romane Dictatour, that led an armie out of Italie. An exchange was made of Romane captives for Carthaginians. Two Colonies were transported, namely to Fregelle, and to Brandusium, in the territorie of the Solentines. Another Lustrum was taken by the Censors: wherein were reckoned of Rom. citizens 251222. Claudia, the sister of that P. Claudius, who in contempt and despite of the Auspices, fought a battaile to great losse, fortuned upon a time as shee came from the great Plates, to be crouded in the thrust and preasse of people; whereupon she cryed out with a lowd voyce, Would God my brother were alive againe, and had the charge of another Armado: for which words, she had a good fine set on her head, and paid it. Two Pretors  were now created, the first that ever were at Rome. Cacilius Metellus the high priest, kept perforce within the citie, A. Posthumius the Consull, because he was besides, the Flamin unto Mars; and would not suffer him to be Non-resident, and absent himselfe from his charge. After sundry battailes and conflicts that many Romane Captaines had against the Carthaginians, C. Luctatius the Consull obteined the honour of the finall victorie, when he had desaited their Fleete; and so made a full end of the first Punickwarre. The Carthagintans therefore sued for peace, and had it granted. At what time as the Temple of Vesta was on a light fire, Caecilius the high priest, recovered and saved out of the flame the holie reliques. Two tribes were added to the rest, Velina and Quirina. The Falisci rebelled, and within sixe daies were subdued, and brought under subiection.


 The Breviarie of L. Florus to the twentith Booke.
AColonie was planted at Spoletum, An armie was led against the Ligurians [i. Genowaies,] which was the first time that they were warred upon. The Sardinians and the Corsians, who revolted and tooke armes, were subdued. Tuccia a Vestal virgin and a Votarie, was condemned and executed for her incest or whoredome. Warre was proclaimed against the Illyrians, for that they killed one of the embassadors which were sent unto them, and being defeited, confessed themselves subiects to the Romans. The number of the Pretors was increased from two to foure. The Gaules inhabiting beyond the Alps (toward France) who came downe and entred into Italy, were overthrowne  and put to the sword. In which warre, the Romanes had by report of the Latines and other confederates and allies, to the number of 300000 fighting men, that served under them. The Romain forces passed then first, over the river Padus [i.Po,] where the french Insubrians [i. Lombards] after certaine discomfitures, were glad to be ruled by reason, and rendred themselves. Mar. Claudius Marcellus the Consull, having slaine Virdumarus the Generall of the Lumbards with his own hand, went away with

the honor of the third rich and royall spoyles gotten from the enemie. The Istrians were subdued: so  were the Illyrians also, after they had revolted and put themselves in armes ^ and were so tamed, that they came under obedience. The Censors held a Lustr^m, and tooke account of the number of the Romane citizens, and found in all 270000. The Libertines (or slaves enfranchised) were reduced into foure tribes by them selves, to wit, Esquilina, Palatina, Suburrana, and Collina: where as before time, they had bene dispersed indifferently, and mingled among the rest. C. Flaminius the Censor, saved the high way called Flaminia, and built the great Cirque or Theater named Flaminius Circus. And two Colonies were established within those territories, that were conquered  from the Gaules, to wit, (...). Placentia, and Cremona. @




THE XXI. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the one and twentieth Booke.
IN this booke are rehearsed the acts which passed in Italie, as touching the second Punicke warre, and how Anniball, the chiefe commaunder of the Carthaginians, contrarie to the accord of alliance, passed over the river Iberus: by whom, Saguntum a citie belonging to the allies of the people of Rome, was in the eight moneth of the siege, forced by assault. For to complaine of those wrongs and ini^ries, Embassadors were sent to the Carthaginians. And for that they would not make satisfaction and amends therefore, warre was proclaimed against them. Anniball having passed over the mountaines Pyre^ti, and discomfited the Volscians, who made head against him, and would have empeached his passage, mounted the Alpes, and after hee had passed through them with great difficultie and paines, and repulsed also the French mountainers in sundrie ski^nisbes and battailes, he descended into Italie: and neere the river Ticinius, discomfited and dis^^aied the Romanes in a battaile of Cavallerie. In which conflict, when P. Cornelius Scipio was wounded, his sonne (the same who afterwards was surnamed Africanus) rescued him, and saved his life. Anniball after he had defaited the Romane armie a second time, neere the river Trebia, pussed over the Apennine: where his souldiers were mightly afflicted and distressed, by reason of soule weather and violence of storme and tempest. Cn. Cornelius Scipio sped well in his warres against the Carthaginians within Spaine, and tooke prisoner Mago, the Generall commaunder of the enemies.

THe same may I well say, in the Preface and entrance of this one part of my worke, which most writers of histories have promised and made profession of, in the beginning of the whole, to wit, That I will write the most famous and memorable warre that ever was, even that, which the Carthaginians under the conduct of Anniball, fought with the people and State of Rome. For neither any other citties or nations are knowne to have warred together, more wealthie and puisiant than they; nor at any time ever, were they themselves so great, so strong in forces, and so mightie in meanes, as nowe they were. Moreover, they came not newly now, to wage war, without knowledge of the prowesse and martiall skill, one of another; for triall they had made thereof sufficient alreadie, in the first punicke warre. Besides so variable was the fortune of the field, so doubtfully were their battailes fought, that neerer losse and daunger were they, who in the end wan the better, and atchieved the victorie. And to conclude if a man observe the whole course and proceeding of these their warres, their malice and hatred was greater in a manner than theirforces: whiles the Romans tooke foule skorn and disdaine, that they, whose hap before was to be vanquished, should unprovoked, begin warre afresh with the Conquerors; and the Carthaginians again were as mal-content, and throughlyf

offended, as taking themselves (notwithstanding they were overcome) to bee abused too much at  their hands, by their prowd, insolent, and covetous rule over them. Over and besides all this, the report goeth, that Anniball being but nine yeares old, or thereabout, came fawning and flattering as wanton children doe, to his father Amilcar, that hee would take him with him into Spaine, at what time, as after the Affricane war ended, his father was offering sacrifice, readie to passe over thither with an armie: where he was brought to the altar side, and induced to lay his hand thereupon, and to touch the sacrifice, and so to sweare, that so soone as ever he were able, he would be a professed and mortall enemie to the people of Rome. Vexed (no doubt) at the heart, was Amilcar himselfe, a man of high spirit and great courage, for the losse of the islands Sicilie and Sardinia: for not onely Sicilie was overhastily yeelded (as he thought) as despairing too soone of the state thereof, and doubting how it should be defended: but also Sardinia was by the cunning and  fraudulent practise of the Romanes surprised out of the Carthaginians hands, whiles they were troubled with the commotion and rebellion of Affrick; and a Tribute besides imposed upon them. He being disquieted, I say, and troubled with these greefs and discontentments, so bare himselfe for five yeares space, in the Affricke warre, which insued immediately upon the peace concluded with the Romanes; and likewise after, in Spaine, for nine yeares together, enlarging ever still the dominion of Carthage; that all the world might fee, he intended and dessigned a greater warre than that he had in hand; and if God had spared him longer life, it should have beene well seene that the Carthaginians under the leading of Amilcar, would have made that warre upon Italie, which afterward they waged by the conduct of Anniball. But the death of Amilcar happening in so good season [for the Romanes] and the childhood and tendernonage of Annibal together, were the cause that this war was put off and deferred. In the meane time, between the father and the sonne, Asdruball bare all the rule for the space almost of eight years. This Asdruball had ben Amilcar his minion, growne highly into his grace and favour, at the first (as men say) for the very prime and flower of his youth: but afterwards, in regard of the singular towardnesse of a brave and haughtie mind, which soone appeared in him, and for his forwardnesse to action, hee was preferred to be his sonne in law, and married his daughter. Now, for as much as he was Amilcar his sonne in law, he was advaunced to the soveraigne conduct of the warre, with no good liking at all and consent of the Nobilitie and Peeres, but by the meanes and favour onely of the Barchinefaction, which bare a great stroke, and might do all in all, among the souldiours and the common people. Who managed all his affaires, more by pollicie and sage counsell, than by  force and violence: and using the authoritie and name of the Princes and great Lords of those countries, and by intertaining friendship with the cheefe rules, woon daily the hearts of new nations still, and by that meanes enlarged the power and siegnorie of the Carthaginians in Spain, rather than by any warre and force of armes. But for all this peace with forraine States, he was never the more sure of his owne life at home. For a certaine barbarous fellow, for anger that his maister and Lord was by him put to death, (...) flew him in open place: and being laid hold on by them that were attendant about Asdrubal his person, he kept the same countenance still, as if he had escaped and gone cleare away: yea, The (...) and res lut^^^ of a slave. and when hee was by cruell torments all mangled and torne, hee looked so cheerefully and pleasantly on the matter, as if he had seemed to smile; so far his joy of heart surpassed the paines and anguish of his bodie. With this Asdruball, for that hee  had so singular a gift and wonderfull dexteritie, in solliciting and annexing unto his dominion the Nations aforesaid, the people of Rome had renued the league, upon these two capitulations and conditions; first, that the river (...). Iberus should limit and determine the siegnories of them both: Item, that the Saguntines, seated in the middest between the territories of both Nations, should remaine free, and enjoy their auncient liberties.
No doubt at all there was now, but when a new Commander should succeed in the rownie of Asdruball, the favour of the people would goe cleare with the prerogative voice and choise of the souldiours: who presently brought young Anniball into the Generall his pavilion, and with exceeding great acclamation and accord of all, saluted him by the name of Captaine Generall. For this you must understand, that Asdruball by his letters missive had sent for him, being verie  young, and hardly 14 yeares of age; yea, and the matter was debated first in the counsell house at Carthage, where they of the Armican the father of Anniball was the sonne of B^tha, from where arose the Barshine fatho^ so often named in this storie. Barchine side, laboured and followed the matter earnestly, that Annihall should be trained in warfare, and grow up to succeed his father in equal proesse and greatnesse. But Hanno the chiefe man of the contrarie faction; It is but meet and reason (quoth hee) that

Asdruball doth demaund: and yet for mine own part I thinke it not good, that his request should be granted. The speech of Hanno in the Scha^ of Carthage. When they mused and mervailed much at this so doubtfull speech of his, and wist not what construction to make of it.
Why then, (quoth Hanno) to be plaine, That floure and beautie of youth, which Asdruball himselfe yeelded and parted with all sometimes unto Annibals father, for to use or abuse at his pleasure; the same he thinketh by good right he may chalenge and have again, from the sonne, to make quittance: But it be seemeth not us, sot to acquaint our yoong youths with the campe, that under the colour, and in steed of their militarie institution and teaching, they abandon and give their bodies to serve the lust and appetite of the Generals. What? Is this the thing we feare, That the sonne of Amilcar should tarie too long erche see the excessive graundeur and soveraintie of his father, and the stately shew as it were of his roialtie? Or doubt wee, that wee shall not soone enough serve in all dutifull alleageance his naturall sonne, unto whose sonne in law, all our armies have been left (as it were) in lawfull right of inheritance? Nay, I am of opinion, and this is my judgement, That this youth be kept in awe at home, under obedience of lawes, under civile magistrates, and learne a while to live in equall condition with the rest of the citizens and subjects; for feare least at one time or other, this little sparke doe burne outright and raise a mightie flame. A few, and those were, in manner all of the best fort and foundest judgement, accorded with Hanno. But, as commonly it is seene, the greater number overweighed the better.
Thus Anniball was sent into Spaine, and immediatly at his first comming, drew all the whole armie after him; so highly he was regarded and beloved. The old soldiors beleeved verily, that Amilcar was alive againe, and come amongst them: they thought they beheld and saw the same vigor and spirit in his countenance and visage, the same quicknesse and livelinesse in his eies, the same proportion, feature and lineaments of his face. And afterwards, within short time, he had so wrought and wound himselfe into their favour, that the late remembrance of his father, was the least matter of all others, that woon him grace and love among them. The naturall disposition of Annibal. Never was there one and the selfe same nature, framed and fitted better, for two things that are in qualitie most contrarie; namely, to rule, and to obey. Whereby, a man could hardly discerne and judge, whether he was more deere unto the Generall for the one, or to the armie for the other. For neither Asdruball would make choise of any one before him, when there was some valiant service or brave exploit to be executed; nor the soldiors put more confidence in any other leader, nor go  more boldly and resolutely to any enterprise, His vertues than under him. Most forward he was and hardie to all hazards and dangerous adventures: right provident and warie againe, at the verre point of perill and jeoperdie. No travaile was able to wearie and tire his bodie: no paines taking, could daunt and breake his heart. He could away with heat and cold alike. For his diet and feeding, he measured both his meat and drinke by his naturall appetite, and not by pleasure and delightsome tast. For sleeping, for waking, day and night was all one with him. When he had once performed his service, and finished his exploit; if there were any spare time after, therein would he take his rest and repose: and that, should not be upon a soft bed neither, nor procured with great curiositie by still silence, and making no noise about him. Full often many a man hath seen him, lying on the hard and bare ground, under a good soldiors jacket and homely cassocke cast  over him, even among the Sentinels and corps de gard. For his apparrell, it was not more costly nor braver than his fellowes and companions: mary, in his armour and horses he loved ever to be goodly be-seene above all other. Amongst footmen and horsemen both, he would alwaies be a great way formost. And to conclude, in giving a charge upon the enemie, and to begin the battaile, he was by his good will ever the first, and when the fight was done, the last man seen to retire out of the field. Of these noble qualities and manly vertues, he had not so many, but there were as great vices and imperfections in him againe, His vertues. to counterpoise the same. Crueltie most savage and inhumane, falshood and trecherie more than Ordinarie in Carthaginians. Punicke: no truth, no honestie, no feare of God, no regard of oth, no conscience, nor religion.
Disposed thus as he was, and inclined by nature, to vertues and vices, he served full three years  under Generall Asdruball. During which time, he omitted and forgat no one thing, that was meet either to be executed or enterprised by a man that was himselfe another day to be a captain and chiefe Commander in the warres. From the verie first day that he was chosen and declared Lord General; as if at the same instant, Italie had ben the province assigned unto him, as if, I say, he had received commission to warre with the Romanes, he thought good to make no delaies, forfeare

least haply whiles he lingred and slacked the time, some mischance might prevent his designes  and cut him short, like as it had overtaken his father first, and Asdruball afterwards: but presently determined to make war upon the Saguntines, by assailing whom, the Romanes no doubt were touched, and would take armes and enter into the quarrell. But first he led his armie into the marches of the A people within the kingdome of Teleroin Spaine, nerre the cittie O^asia. Olcades (a nation beyond Iberus, rather siding and taking part with the Carthaginians, than under their jurisdiction) that he might not seeme to have shot at the Saguntines and intended ought against them directly: but that by order and course of his affaires, after he had subdued the countries bordering upon them, he had been drawne (as it were) for vicinitie and neighbourhead sake to that warre, and to joine them also with the rest unto the Empire. And first he wan by force, and sacked Clusius suppoposeth is to be Cartagena: some take it for Conill others for Tarissa, or rather Algezira. The French translatour, calleth it Altheia. Carreia, a rich cittie, the seat towne and chiefe place of all that nation. Whereupon, other meaner and smaller cities also, for feare came under his obedience, and yeelded to pay tribute. His armie then after these victories, and enriched with spoile and pillage, was brought backe to new Cartagena. Carthage, there for to winter. Where he made sure unto him the hearts and affectionate love, as well of his owne countrimen as of the allies, partly by bestowing the pillage liberally among them, and partly by making true paiment of soldiours wages for the time past. And then in the verie prime of the spring, he went forward to warre upon the Old Castella or Castile. Vaccei. He forced by assault Salamanca in Castile. Hermandica and Arbacula, two townes of thePeople in Andalusia. Carteij. Arbacula by the manhood and multitude of the towesmen held out a long time. But certaine fugitives that were fled from Hermandica, having rallied themselves, and joined with other exiled persons of the Olcades, a nation the summer before subdued, raised also the Inhabitants of the kingdome of Tolcium. Carpetanes to take armes: and set upon Anniball, in his returne from the Vacce; and not farre from the river Ta^^ Tagus, troubled and disordred his march, heavily charged with spoile and bootie. Anniball forbare  to fight, and encamped himselfe upon the banke of the river: and so soone as the enemies were in their first sleepe, and all still and husht, passed over with his armie at the fourd: and after he had pitched his camp so farre off from the river side, as that his enemies might have rowme enough to march away besides him, he determined to set upon them as they should passe over the river. To his horsemen he gave commandement to charge upon the regiment of footmen, so soon as they perceived them to have taken the water: and upon the banke he arranged fortie Elephants afront them. There were of the Carpetanes, counting the aides and succours of the Olcades and Vaccej, 100000 strong: an armie invincible, if they had fought on even and indifferent ground. Who being both by nature fierce and courageous, and for multitude confident; presumptuous  besides, upon their imagination that the enemie was retired for feare; supposed that the onely stay of their victorie, was, because the river ran between: and setting up a shour and outcrie, without direction of any leader, in all disorder they ran into the river here and there, everie man what way was next him. Now from the other side of the banke, a great troupe of horsemen were entred into the river, encountred them in the mids of the chanell, and fought with great advantage. For whereas the footmen unsteadie and not able to keepe fast footing, and hardly trusting the fourd, might easely be cast aside and overturned, even by naked horsemen, if they did but put forth and pricke forward their horses it skilled not how: the horsemen on the other side having their bodies at libertie, and able to weld their weapon, with their horses under them standing sure even in the mids of the streame and whirlepooles, might with case either fight close hand to hand, or  assaile the enemies aloose. Many of them besides perished in the water: some by the whirling waves of the river were driven upon the enemies, and by the Elephants troded under foot, and crushed to death. The hinmost, who might with more safety recover their owne banke, after they were rallied together into one from divers places, as feare had scattered them; before they could upon so great a fright, take heart and come againe to themselves, Anniball who with a soure square battaillon had entred the river, forced to slie from the banke: and when he had wasted the countrie, within few daies brought the Carpetanes also under his obedience.
And now all beyond Iberus was subject to the Carthaginians, the Saguntines onely excepted. With whom as yet he would not seeme to warre: howbeit to minister some cause and occasion thereof, quarrels were picked, and feeds of dissentions sowne between them and their neighbours, namely the Algarbia, a people in Portugali. Turdetanes. Vnto whose aid, when he was come, that was himselfe the sower of all the variance, and had set them together by the eares; and when it appeared plainly that it was not a matter of right to be tried by law, but an occasion rather sought of fight and open war; then the Saguntines sent their embassadors to Rome, for to crave aid against that warre, which

 doubtlesse was at hand. The Consuls at that time of Rome, were P. Cornelius Scipio, and Titus Sempronius Longus, who having brought the embassadors into the Counsell house, and proposed matters unto the L.L. there, concerning the weale publick, and decreed to send their embassadors into Spaine to take survey, and looke into the state of their allies: who also if they thought it meere, should give Anniball warning, not to meddle with their consederates, and molest the Saguntines; and withall, to sayle over to Carthage into Affrick, and there make relation of the complaints and greevances of the allies of the people of Rome: when I say, this embassage was decreed, but yet not sent, newes came sooner than all men looked for, that Morvedre. Saguntum was alreadie besieged. Then was the matter propounded new again before the Senat. Some were of mind to dispatch the Consuls unto the provinces of Spaine and Africke, with commission to make  warre both by sea and land: Others thought better, to bend all their forces wholie into Spaine against Anniball. There were againe of opinion, that so great and weightie an enterprise was not hand over head, and rashly to be attempted; but rather that they should attend the returne of the embassadors out of Spaine: and this advise that seemed most safe, was held for the better, and tooke place. And therefore, so much the sooner were these embassadors P. Valerius Flaccus, and Q. Rebius Pamphibar, addressed unto Anniball before Saguntum, with direction, from thence to go forward to Carthage (in case he would not desist and give over war) and for to demaund the captaine himselfe, for amends and satisfaction of breaking the league. But whiles the Romanes were amused about these consultations and decrees, Saguntum besuged by Anniball. Saguntum was by this time with all forcible meanes assalted. This citie of all other most wealthie and rich, stood beyond Iberus, situate almost  a mile from the sea. The inhabitants are sayd to have had their beginning out of they land Zanto. Zacynthus: and some among them, were descended from Ardea, a citie of the Rutilians: but they grew within short time to this puissance and wealth of theirs, partly by the fruits and revenewes of their lands, and partly by the traffick and gaine of their merchandise, and commodities transported by sea, as also by the great affluence and increase of people, and lastly, by their streight rule of discipline, whereby they observed their troth and loyaltie with their allies, even to their owne ruine and finall destruction.
Anniball after he had invaded their confines as an enemie, and by way of hostilitie, with his armie overrun and wasted their countrie, besieged and assailed the citie three waies. There was one canton or angle of the wall shooting out into a more plaine and open valley, than any other  place all about: against which he meant to raise certaine mantlets or fabricks, under which he might approch with the Ram to batter the wall. But as the place farre from the wall, was even enough and handsome for such engins of batterie to be driven upon: so after that they came to the proofe and execution indeed, the successe answered nothing to the enterprise begun. For besides that there was a mightie towre overlooked and commaunded them, the wall it selfe (as in a place doubted and suspected) was more fortified and raysed higher there, than elsewhere: and also the chosen youth and ablest men were bestowed there, to make more forcible resistance, where there was like to be most trouble and danger. And first with shot of darts and quarels, and such like, they put the enemie back, and would not suffer the pioners and labourers in any place to entrench or rayse rampiers in saffetie. In processe also, they shot not from the wall only and  that towre, and shewed themselves there in armes for defense, but also their harts served them to sallic forth, and to breake into the gards of the enemies, yea and to enter upon their trenches and fabricks. In which skirmishes there dyed not many more Saguntines than Carthaginians. But so soone as Anniball himselfe, approching unadvisedly under the wall fortuned to be wounded greevously in the forepart of his thigh, with a dart or light javelin, and therewith fell to the ground; they all about him fled so fast, and were so skared, that they had like to have geven over quite and abandoned their mantilets, and other fabricks aforesayd. After this, for some few dayes, whiles their Generall was under cure of his hurt, they lay at siege rather, than followed the assault. In which meane time, as they rested from skirmish, so they ceased not to invent new devises, and to prepare new fabricks. Whereupon the assault began againe more hote than before:  and in many parts at once they fell to raise rolling mantelets, so many and so thick, that some places would not receive them; and withall, to drive the Ram against the walls. Anniball had men good store, for it is thought he was 150000 in campe, strong. The townesmen with devising meanes to defend, and fee to every place, began to have their hands full: but all would not serve, For now were the walls beaten with the rams, and many parts thereof shaken and battered: and

at one place above the rest, by continuall batterie there was such a breach, as the towne lay open  and naked to the enemie. After that, three turrets, and all the courtine betweene, fell downe with a mightie and horrible crash, in somuch as the Carthaginians thought verily that with that rush the towne had bene woon: By which breach, as if the wall had protected both parties before, they ran forth together on each side to fight. The battaile was not like to a tumultuarie skirmish, such as are wont to be about assaults of cities, by the occasion and advantage of the one part or the other; but a very set and raunged field (as it were) in an open ground betweene the breaches of the wall, and the houses of the towne, that stood a pretie way distant within-forth. Of one side they were pricked forward with hope, on the other with despaire; whiles Anniball thought verily that he was maister of the towne already, if he held on but a little longer; and the Saguntines seeing their towne bare, and voyd of walls, opposed their bodies in the breach, not one stepping  back a soote, least in the space betweene he should let in the enemie. The more fiercely therefore, and the thicker and closer that they fought together on both parts, the more were wounded; and there was not a dart could light in vaine betweene their bodies and their armour, The description of a weap^n or d^rt, called ^alarica. but it did mischiefe. The Saguntines used a weapon called Falarica, in manner of a dart, which they let slie and launced from them, having a long shaft or steale, round and even every where, but toward the one end, where it was headed with iron, and bound about with towe, and smeared with pitch. The yron head was three foote long, that it might pierce both harnesse and bodie through. But the greatest skare that it did was this, although it stuckfast in the targuet, and entred nor into the bodie, that being driven and flung, when the middle part was set on fire, by the motion thereof as it flew, it gathered much more fire, forced the souldier to forsake his armour, and exposed him disarmed and naked to the shot following. Well, the fight continued doubtfull a long time, by reason that the Saguntines tooke better heart unto them, because they had rested beyond their hope and expectation: and the Carthaginians toke themselves vanquished, for that they had not gotten the victorie, and better hand: whereupon, the townesmen all at once set up a crie, and beat the enemies back to the very breaches, and ruines of the wall, and from thence thrust them out cleane, whiles they were thus encombred and affrighted, yea and at last discomfited them, put them to flight, and chased them as farre as their campe.
In this meane while newes came, that there were embassadors arrived from Rome: unto whom Anniball dispatched certaine messengers to meete with them at sea side, and to give them to understand, That neither they might safely with securitie of their persons come among the  broiles of so many barbarous and fierce nations; nor their maister Anniball amid those dangerous and troublesome affaires, had any leysure to attend or give audience unto embassages. He knew full well, that the embassadors being not received and enterteined, would straight to Carthage. Whereupon, he addressed aforehand his letters and courriers to the chiefe of the Barchine faction, to frame and prepare the minds of that side, so, as they of the other part might not gratifie, or do any thing in favour of the Romanes. By which meanes, besides that they were neither admitted by Anniball, nor audience given them, that embassage also was in vaine, and tooke no effect at Carthage. Onely Hanno, notwithstanding the whole bodie of the Senate was against him, spake with great silence and assent of the hearers, by reason of his authoritie and reputation, and pleaded to the point of the breach of league, The Oration of Hanno in the Senate of Carthage. in this wife.
I have, quoth he, foretold and warned  you in the name and for the love of the gods, who are the witnesses and judges of covenants and confederacies, I have I say, admonished you, that ye should not send Amilcar his sonne, or any of his breed unto the campe: for that neither the ghost and spirit, nor the progenie and race of that man can rest and be quiet; nor the Romans league will ever be assured and established, so long as there remained one alive of the Barchine name and familie. But sent ye have for all my words, unto your armies, a youth boyling in ambition, inflamed with a covetous desire of being a King, and one that seeth no other way thereto, but by bruing one warre after another; to live garded with armies and legions about him. In which action of yours, ye have as it were ministred dry fewell, and put oyle to the fire: ye have, I say, sed that fire, wherewith ye now all are set a burning. Your armies now besiege Saguntum, from which by covenant and vertue of the  league they are debarred. Within a while and shortly, will the Romane legions lve in siege before Carthage, under the conduct and guidance, no doubt, of those gods, by whose support and aid in the former warre, they were revenged for the breach of the accord and alliance. What? know ye not yet, either your enemie, or your selves, or the fortune of both nations? This good

 Captaine and gentle Generall, forsooth, of your making, would not admit and receive into his campe, Embassadours comming from our allies, and in the behalfe also of our allies: wherein he abolished the law of Nations. Howbeit, they having taken a repulse, from whence even the very Embassadours of enemies, are not wont to be repelled, are come unto you, and by vertue of their league demaund amends of trespasse, and restitution of satisfaction for their domages. And presuppose the State bee not touched nor culpable in this Action, they require no more. but to have the authour himselfe in person, who is the offender. The more gently they deale, and the longer it is ere they begin, the more obstinate they will be, and continue with greater rigor (I fear me) if they once begin. Set before your eies the Islands Gotha, or ^avagnana The same which Virgil calleth A^ae, and the Italians in old time Saxa. Aegates, and A citie in Sicilie, s^nan upon an high hill, of that name. T^apani, or Monte S. Iulino at this day. Eryx: and what for these foure and twentie yeares past, ye have endured both by land and sea. Neither was this beardlesse  boy our captaine their, but his father Amilcar himselfe, even a second Mars, as these his supposts would have him. But what of that? We could not then, according to our league, hold our hands, and let Tarentum in Italie alone; like as now we are doing with Saguntum. Therefore, both God and man tooke the matter in hand, and vanquished us in the end: and when wee were at arguing and debating the case with discourse of words about this point, Whether Nation of the twaine had broken the league? the event of warre, as an indifferent and equall judge, awarded victorie where the right was. And Carthage it is, against which, Anniball even now hath reared mantelets, towers, and other engines of assault: even now, battereth and shaketh he Carthage walls with the Ram. The ruins of Saguntum (God graunt I be a false Prophet) will fal upon our heads, and the warre begun with the Saguntines, we must maintaine against the Romanes. How then? (will some man say) shall wee yeeld Anniball unto them? I know well, how small my authoritie is in this point, by reason of the old grudge and enmitie betweene me and his father deceased. Howbeit, as I reioiced, that Amilcar was dead, for that if hee had lived still, wee should ere now have warred with the Romans: so this very youth, an impe of his, I hate and detest as the very furie and firebrand of this war: whom I would have, by my good wil, not only to be rendred unto them, for to purge and expiare the breach of league; but if no man would chalenge him for to be punished, I would award, that he should be caried and transported as far as there is sea or land, and to be sent away thither, from whence we might not once hear of him againe, and where he might never trouble the quiet and peaceable state of this citie any more. Over and besides, my opinion and resolution is, that some Embassadors be sent presently to Rome, to satisfie the Senat: and others also, with a  message to Anniball, that he withdraw his forces from Saguntum: and with commission, to render up Annibal himselfe into the Romans hands, according to the tenor of the league: and a third Embassage likewise to the Saguntines, for to make restitution and amends for their harms and losses alreadie sustained. When Hanno had made an end of his speech, it was altogether needlesse, that any one man there should make replie, and debate the matter with him by way of Oration, the whole Senat was so possessed alreadie and wrought for Anniball: and with one voice they blamed Hanno, and sounded it out, That he had made a bitterer speech, and more favoring of an enemie, than Flaccus Valerius himselfe the Romane Embassadour. After this, the Romane Embassadors had this answere returned, That the warre began by the Saguntines, and not by Anniball. Also, that the people of Rome offered them injurie, in preferring the Saguntines before the most ancient  alliance of the Carthaginians. Whiles the Romanes thus spent time in sending Embassages, Anniball having wearied his men, what with skirmishes; and what with trenching and raising mounts and fabrickes, he gave them rest some few daies, and bestowed certaine good guards toward and keepe the mantelets and other engines of batterie. In the meane season he encouraged his souldiours, and set their hearts on fire, partly by pricking and provoking them to anger against their enemies, and partly by tilling them on, and alluring them with hope of great rewards. But after he had once in a generall assemblie, made proclamation, That the spoile and pillage should be the souldiours share; they were all so enkindled and enflamed, that if presently he had sounded the signall of battaile, it seemed, that no force in the world had been able to resist them. The Saguntines, as they had some rest from skirmish, and continued certainued daies, neither  assailing nor assailed: so they gave not over labouring night and day, for to make up a newe wall and countermure, on that side of the towne which lay open by reason of breaches. But after this, grew the assault more hote and furious than before: neither wist they well (the shouts and al'armes were so divers and dissonant on every side) whether to come first, or where was most need of helpe and succour. Anniball himselfe was present in person to encourage and exhort his soldiours

where as the rouling tower was driven, which was so high, that it overlooked all the mures  and countrefabrickes of the cittie, and being once approched neere the wals, furnished as it was in every loft and storie, with ordinance of quarell shot, brakes, and other artillerie, beat the defendants from off the wals, so as none durst abide upon them. Then Anniball taking the time, and supposing that he had now a good oportunitie presented unto him, sent about 500 Affricanes that were pioners with picke-axes, mattocks and such like tooles, to undermine the wal, yea, and to dig into it from the very foundation. And that was no hard matter to do, for that the cement or morter was not hardened and bound with lime, but tempered with earth and clay, after the old maner of building: and therefore the wall came tumbling downe before it was hewen and wrought into: and through the wide breaches, whole troupes of armed souldiours entered the towne: and withall, they seized one high place above the rest, whereon they planted their artillerie and ordinance  of slings and brakes, and cast a wall about it, that they might have within the very cittie a fort and bastillon of their owne, like a castle to overlooke all. The Saguntines likewise, raised another mure withinforth along that side where the towne as yet was not taken. So that on both sides they made fortifications, and also fought with all their might and main. But the Saguntines defending the inner parts, by little and little brought their towne daily into a smaller compasse. And by that meanes, as also by reason of the long siege; as scarsitie and want of all things grewe more and more, so the expectation of forraine aide and succour was everie day lesse than other: the Romans their onely hope, being so farre off, and their enemies so neere on every hand. Howbeit, the suddaine rode and journey of Anniball against the The inhabitants of (...). Oretanes and (...) the realm of (...). Carpetanes, refreshed for a while their troubled and afflicted spirits. These two nations being risen upon a discontentment  of a streight muster and rigorous levie of souldiours, had staied and detained those Muster-maisters, that had in commission to take up all sufficient and able men for the warres, and so, made some shew and feare of rebellion: but being prevented in the beginning by the speedie comming of Anniball, were soone quiet, and laid downe their armes. But the assault of Saguntum continued neverthelesse. For Maharball, Himilco his sonne, whom Anniball had left behind as Lieutenant, so bestirred himselfe, that neither the townesmen nor the enemie found the misse or absence of the Generall. This Maharball had made some fortunat skirmishes, and with three rammes shaken a good part of the wall, so as hee shewed to Anniball at his returne, all lying along and every place full of fresh ruines. Whereupon the armie was presently brought against the verie castle of the cittie, where began a cruell and bloudie conflict, with the slaughter of many  on both sides, and one part of the said fortresse was forced and woon.
Afterwards there was some treatie of peace and agreement, by meanes of two persons, Alcon a Saguntine, and Alorcus a Spaniard, and some small hope there was of it. Alcon supposing hee could somewhat prevaile by way of request and entreating, without knowledge of the Saguntines, departed away by night to Anniball. But after that hee saw, that with all his weeping he could doe no good, but that heavie and intollerable articles and capitulations of peace were exhibited, as from a wrathfull conquerour; of an Orator, proved to be a very traitour, and remained still in the campe with the enemies, saying, that he was sure to die, whosoever should moove the Saguntines to peace, under those conditions. For demaunded it was of the Saguntines, Imprimis, to make restitution to the Turdetanes of all harmes and losses. Item, to deliver up all  their gold and silver. Item, to quit the towne, and depart but with one sute of apparrell a peece; and there to dwell, where the Carthaginians would appoint. When Alcon avouched plainely, that the Saguntines would never accept of peace with these conditions, Alorcus replied againe and said, That seeing all things els now failed them, their hearts also must needs come downe, and faile likewise; and therewith promised to deliver unto them the tenour of the said peace, and to bee a mediatour and dealer in the compassing thereof. At that time he served Anniball as a private souldiour: howbeit, a publicke friend he was, and an host and guest of old to the Saguntines. Who having in fight of all men yeelded up his offensive armes, to the warders of the enemies, and passed the rampiers, was brought (for so himselfe desired) before the Governour and Provost of Saguntum. Thether came running presently, a number of all sorts of people: but after the rest of the multitude were commanded to void, Alorcus was called into their Counsell house, and having audience given, The Oration of Alorcus a Spaniard, in the Senate of Saguntum. made this or the: like speech unto them.
If Alcon your countriman and fellow cittizen, as he came from you to Anniball for to treat about peace, had likewise brought backe againe unto you from Anniball the conditions and articles of peace, I needed not to have

 taken this jorney; who am come unto you neither as an Orator from Annibal, ne yet as a fugitive. But seeing he, hath remained with the enemie, either through your default or his own, I know not whither: the pretended and fained causelesse feare, himselfe is to blame; but if they stand in daunger that report a truth vnto you, then are ye in great fault. I therfore, to the end ye should not be ignorant, but that there are conditions offred to you of life, of safetie, and of peace, in regard of old amitie and acquaintance, in regard (I say) of mutuall intertainement long time between us, am now come unto you. And that ye may beleeve, that whatsoever you shal hear delivered from me, I speak it for your good, and for the favour of no man else; this one thing, if no more, may assure you, that neither so long as ye were able to make resistance by your own strength, nor all the while that yee hoped for aide from the Romanes, I never made word or mention of peace unto you. But  seeing now, that yee have not any hope at all from the Romanes, and that your owne forces and citie wals, are able no longer to defend you: I present unto you a peace, more necessarie, I confesse, than equall and reasonable. Wherof you may have some hope, in these terms; namely, if as Anniball offereth and presenteth it like a conquerour, so you will heare of it; and accept therof as conquered: if I say, yee will not make reckning of that which you forgoe as a losse and damage (seeing by extremitie all is the victors) but that which is left, as gaine and advantage, yea and frely given unto you. Your towne, whereof a great part is ruinated by him, and which he hath taken in manner all, that he mindeth to put you by: your lands and possessions he leaveth unto you, purposing to set you out a plot of ground, whereupon you may build yourselves a new cittie. Your gold and silver all, as well common treasure as private monies and plate, he commaundeth  to be brought unto him: the bodies of your wives and children he is content to spare and save undefiled: upon this condition that you wil depart without armour, and with a double suit of apparrell a peece, and no more. These are the impositions that your enemie (a conquerour) demaundeth: Which albeit they be hard and grievous, yet your fortune and state is such, as you must allow thereof and be content. For mine owne part, I am not out of hope, but when you have put all into his hands, he will deale better by you, and remit somwhat of these conditions. But I thinke yee were better to abide all this, rather than your bodies to be murdred, your wives and children to be ravished, haled and forced before your faces, as the law and manner of warre requireth.
To the hearing of this Oration the people had flocked about, and by little and little entermingled  their own assemblie with the Senators: and all of a suddain the chiefe of them withdrew themselves and departed, before answere was given: and brought all their silver and gold, as well publicke as private, into the market place: and when they had cast it into a great fire made hastilie for that purpose, most of them threw themselves into it headlong after. Whereupon there being a feare and trouble alreadie throughout the whole cittie: behold, another outcrie besides and noise was heard from the castle. For a certaine tower that had beene a long time battered and shaken, fell down; and at the breach therof, a band of Carthaginians made entrie, and gave signe to their General that the citie was abandoned of the ordinarie watchmen and corps de gard of the enemies, and altogether lay open and naked. Annibal supposing it was no wisedom to neglect and stacke so good an opportunitie, with all his forces at once assailed the cittie, and wan it  in the turning of an hand: The winning of Saguntum. and presently gave order that all above fourteene years of age should be put to the sword. A cruell commaundement, no doubt, but yet needfull, as afterwards is was well seene in the end and upshot of all. For who would have spared and taken pitie of those, that either shut themselves with their wives and children into their houses, and burnt them over their owne heads, or in their armour, gave not over fight before they died? Thus was the towne woon with exceeding store of pillage within it. And albeit much was spoiled for the nonce by the owners, and that in the massacre and execution they had no respect of age in the furie of their anger: and for all that, the prisoners fell to the soldiors share; yet certaine it is, that of the goods sold in port-sale, there arose a good round peece of mony: and much rich houshold stuffe and costlie apparrell was sent to Carthage.
 Some there be that write, how Saguntum was woon the eight Month after the siege began: and that from thence Anniball departed to winter in new Cartagena. Carthage: as also, that the fifth moneth after he departed from Carthage, he arrived in Italie. Which being so; it cannot be, that P. Cornelius and T. Sempronius should be the Consuls, unto whom both in beginning of the siege, the Saguntine Embassadors were sent; and who also in their year of government fought with Anniball,

the one neere the river Tesino. Ticinus, and both together a good while after, at (...). Trebia. And wee  must say, that either all these things were atchieved in shorter time a good deale, or else that Saguntum in the beginning of that yeare, wherein P. Cornelius and T. Sempronius were Consuls, began not to be besieged; but finally was forced and woon. For the battaile at Trebia could not be so long after, as to fall in the yeare wherein Cn. Servilius and C. Flaminius were Consuls. For that Flaminius entred his Consulship at Ariminum, and was created by T. Sempronius, Consull, who after the battaile of Trebia came to Rome to elect Consuls and after the Election was ended, returned againe to his armie, into the wintering harbours.
About the same time, as well the Embassadours which returned from Carthage, brought word to Rome that there was nothing but warre: as also tidings came, of the destruction of Saguntum. And so greatly grieved and sorrowed the Senators, and pitied withall their allies thus  unworthily massacred, so ashamed in themselves they were, that they had not sent aid in time, so deepely offended and incensed with indignation against the Carthaginians, yea and so mightily feared the losse of the verie maine chance at home, as if the enemie had beene already at the gates of the cittie: that in verie deed, having their minds possessed at one time, with so many troubles, they rather trembled and quaked for feare, than fetled themselves to consultation and counsell. For they considered and saw very well, that neither a more fierce and warlike enemie ever encountred with them: nor the state of Rome was at any time so restie, so feeble, and so undisposed to warre. Moreover, it was commonly said, that the The Ilanders of Sardegna. Sardi The Ilanders of Corsica. Corsi, The people of Istria. Histri, and The people of (...). Illyrici had rather challenged the Romanes, and made bravadoes of warre, than exercised and toiled them in any hard conflicts: as for the Gauls they were but tumults, rumors, and al'arms which  they made, and no warres indeed: but the Carthaginians their enemies, they were old beaten soldiors, inured and hardened for this 23 yeares in most difficult service of warre, amongst the Spanish nations, and went away ever with victory: first trained and practised under Amilcar, then under Asdruball, and now lastly under the conduct of Anniball, a right hardie and valiant captaine. Considering moreover, that now he commeth fresh from the ruine of Saguntum, a most rich cittie, and passeth streight waies over Iberus: drawing after him a traine of so many nations of the Spaniards, exercised alreadie by him in the warres: and will no doubt raise the Gaules, a people at all times readie to take armes: so as now they were to wage warre in Italie, with no more but all the world besides, yea and under the walles of Rome, for the defense of the cittie.
Now had the Provinces beene nominated and appointed before to the Consuls: but then were they commaunded by casting lots, to part them between them. To Cornelius fell Spaine: To Sempronius Affricke and Sicilie. Likewise decreed it was, that for that yeare, there should be levied six Legions of Romans: and of allies, as many as they thought good: also that as great a navie as might be, should be rigged and set out. So there were enrolled 24000 Romane footmen, and of horsemen 1800: of allies 44000 foot, and 4000 horse: 220 gallies, with five course of oares on a side, and twentie foists, were set a flote. After this, a bill was preferred unto the people, that it might please them to determine and graunt, that warre should be proclaimed against, the people of Carthage. And in regard of that warre, there was also a solemne supplication holden through the cittie: wherein the people adored and praied the gods to prosper and bring  to an happie end, this warre which the people of Rome had determined. And betwixt the Consuls thus were the forces divided: Sempronius had the conduct of two Legions, consisting of foure thousand foot, and three hundred horse a peece; also of allies sixteen thousand foot, one thousand and eight hundred horse, besides 160 gallies, and twelve barks or foists. With this power for land and sea service, was Sempronius sent into Sicilie, from thence to passe over into Affricke, in case the other Consull were able to impeach the Carthaginians for comming into Italie. Cornelius had the charge of a smaller power: for that L. Manlius the Pretor, was sent in person into France with a sufficient armie: but in the number of ships especially, was Cornelius skanted. 60 gallies of five banks of ores he had, and no more, (for it was supposed that the enemie would neither come by sea, nor fight in that kind of service) and two Romane Legions with the full proportion  of horsemen, ^ i. 200 to a Legion. and 14000 footmen of allies, with 1200 men of armes. That Province of France (in those parts where the Carthaginian warre was expected) had that yeare two Legions of Romane footmen, 14000 allies, besides 1000 horse from them, and 600 of the Romanes. When all things were thus prepared, to the end that before warre began, it might apppeare

 they dealt by order of law, and with justice; and that all due complements might be performed, they sent certaine grave and ancient personages in Embassie into Affrick, to wit, Q. Fabius, M. Livius, L. Aemylius, C. Licinius, and Q. Bebius, First, to demaund and know of the Carthaginians, Whither Anniball by their publick warrant and authoritie, besieged and assailed Saguntum? then, if they avowed the act, and stood to it (as they were like to do) confessing that it was done by the counsell of the State; to give defiance, and proclaime open warre against them. The Romanes being arrived at Carthage, had audience given in their Senate house: where, after Q. Fabius had briefly demaunded nothing els, but that one thing which he had in charge and commission, then a principall Senator among the Carthaginians stood up and sayd.
Your former Embassage, The Oration of a Senatour in Carthage. my maisters of Rome, was even as vaine as this, when ye required  and would needes have Anniball to be yeelded unto you; as if he had beseeged Saguntum of his owne head.
And as for this, that you come with now, howsoever in words it seeme more mild and smooth, in very deede and in truth it is more rude and rigorous: for then, was Anniball onely charged and demaunded to justice; but now are we both urged to acknowledge a fault, and also forced to make restitution and satisfaction out of hand; as if we had avowed and confessed the action. For mine owne part, of this mind am I, that the case ought thus to be laid, and the question brought to this issue, not whether Saguntum was besieged by a private person; or publick counsell; but whether by right, or wrongfully. For to enquire and examine whether our citizen and subject have done this by our advise, or of himselfe, pertaineth to us alone, as also to censure and punish him accordingly: with you we are to debate this point onely, Whether  it might stand with the league to do it, or no. And therefore since it pleaseth you, that we should dispute and distinguish, betweene the action of a Generall, warranted by the publick state, and an enterprise proceeding from his owne motife; ye shall understand, that there was indeede a league betweene you and us, contracted by Luctatius the Consull, wherein there is a clause, comprising the allies of both parties: as concerning the Saguntines (who as then were none of your confederates) there was not one word at all therein: but in that league (ye will say) that was contracted with Asdruball, the Saguntines are expressely named and excepted: to which I have nothing to pleade, but even that which I have learned of you. For yee your selves denied, that ye were bound to stand to that accord which C. Luctatius your Consull first made with us, because it passed neither by consent of the nobles, nor graunt of the people.  Whereupon, there was another league anew drawne out, and by publick agreement enacted. If you then, be not tied to observe your leagues, unlesse they be auctorised by the nobles, or ratified by the people; no more can the league of Asdruball oblige us, which he concluded without our privitie and knowledge. Forbeare therefore to speake either of Saguntum, or Iberus; and what your mind hath so long conceived, let it hatch now at length, and bring it forth. Then Q. Fabius the Romane Embassador, having made a hollow lap within the plait and fold of his side gowne, Here quoth he, within this lappet, we present and offer warre and peace unto you, take whether ye will. At which word, they all cried out at once with as great stomacke and boldnesse: Mary even which you will your selfe. Whereat he let his robe loose againe, Why then, there is warre quoth he, take it amongst you; Let come say they all againe, and  welcome be it; and as willingly as we accept thereof, so shall we follow and manage it as throughly.
This direct demaund, and round denouncing of warre, seemed more for the honor of the Romans, than to make much dispute and argument about the right of the cause, and of the covenants; a vaine matter before, but now especially, after the winning and destruction of Saguntum. For if the question were to be decided by words and reasoning, that league of Asdruball which was exchanged for the former of Luctatius, was not the same, nor the tenor thereof to be compared: seeing that in the accord of Luctatius, this branch and proviso was expressely added, [That it should stand good, and be ratified, if the people approved thereof:] but in this of Asdruball, there was no such condition at all: and besides, the covenant for so many yeares space  during his life, was so established and confirmed, and no word to the contrarie; that when the very maker and author thereof was dead, there was no change and alteration. And yet, put case they should have stood upon the former alliance; the Saguntines were therein well enough comprised and provided for, in that the allies of either part were excepted and comprehended. For neither was this clause added [They who at that time were allies] nor yet were they excepted

against, who afterwards should become, or be admitted allies. And seeing that it was lawfull to  entertaine new confederates, who is it that would judge it reasonable, either that no man should be received unto amitie for any good desert whatsoever; or being once received into protection, should not be defended accordingly: Provided alwayes, that no allies of the Carthaginians should either be sollicited to rebellion, or received againe, if of themselves they once revolted.
The Romane Embassadors, as they were commanded at Rome, passed the seas from Carthage into Spaine, for to visit all the cities, and to see whether they could either draw them to their societie, or withdraw them from the Carthaginians. And first they came to the Bargusians, where being courteously entertained (for weary they were of the Carthaginians government) they stirred up many other nations beyond Iberus, to have a desire to change for a new world. From thence they came to the Volscians, whose notable answere reported throughout all  Spaine, ^span.^ turned away all other States from banding with the Romanes: for thus in a solemne assemblie a sage and auncient father among them framed his answere.
With what face can ye (Romans) require us to preferre your friendship and amitie before the Carthaginians? seeing that the Saguntines who did the same, have bene more cruelly by you their allies betrayed, than by their enemies the Carthaginians destroyed? By my advise go and seeke you consederates there, where the wofull calamitie and miserie of Saguntum is not knowne. The lamentable ruines of which citie, as it is a dolefull example, so it shall be a notable warning to all nations of Spaine, that no man ever after repose trust in the protection and societie of the Romanes. Whereupon, they were commanded to depart the borders of the Volscians immediatly, and in no Diet or Councell of Spaine, had they afterwards any better entertainement, and more courteous language. Thus having in vaine gone through all Spaine, they tooke their way into Gaule: where they saw a strange sight, and a fearefull fashion: for all in armour (such was the guise and manner of the countrie) they cameto their publick assemblies: and there, these embassadors after they had set out in goodly words the greatnesse and glorie of the people of Rome, and highly magnified their large empire and dominion, and thereupon made request, that they would not give the Carthaginians leave (who minded to make warre upon Italie) for to passe through their cities and townes: hereat they set up such a laughter, with a certaine grumbling and murmuring, that scarcely could the youth be stilled and quieted by the magistrates and elders; so sottish, so foolish, and shamelesse, seemed this demaund, in their conceit: that they should once imagine that the Gaules were such asses, as they would be content (rather than to let the warre passe into  Italie) to avert and turne it upon themselves, and to suffer, yea and offer their owne territories to be spoiled and harried, for the safetie (forsooth) of other mens lands, who were but meere aliens and strangers unto them.
The noyse and garboile being at length husht and appeased, this answere was returned to the Embassadors: That neither the Romanes had deserved so well, nor the Carthaginians so ill, at their hands, that they should take armes either for Romanes, or against Carthaginians. But contrariwise, they were advertised, that some of their nation, were by the people of Rome driven out of the marches and confines of Italie, put to pay tribute, yea, and indured other outrages and indignities. The like demaunds and answeres passed too and fro in other Councels and assemblies of Gaule: neither could they meete with any friendly enterteinement, or have peaceable words given them, before they came to ^Marfe^^es. Massilia: where, after diligent  inquirie, and faithfull search made by their allies, they had true advertisements, that Anniball aforehand had wrought the harts of the Gaules to his owne purpose, and was possessed of them: but they understood withall, that they were not like to continue long in good termes of kindnesse and favor even to him, (so fierce and savage, so untractable are they, and untamed by nature) unlesse their Princes and rulers be ever and anon well feed and plied with gold, whereof that nation of all other is most greedie and covetous. The Romane Embassadors, having thus gone their circuite over all the States of Spaine and Gaule, returned to Rome; not long after that the Coss. had taken their journey into their provinces: where they found the whole citie possessed with the expectation of warre: so rise and currant was the rumor and bruit abroad, that the Carthaginians were alreadie passed over the river Iberus.

Anniball after the winning of Saguntum had retired himselfe to winter in new Carthage: and there having intelligence what had bene done and decreed as well at Rome, as at Carthage [in Affrick] and that he was reputed not onely the Captaine generall and conductor, but also the very author and cause of all this warre; so soone as he had devided and sold the rest of the bootie

 and pillage that remained, thought good now to make no longer delaies, The speech of Annibali to his Spanish soldiors. but assembled the soldiours of the Spanish Nation, and to them he spake in this manner.
My trustie friends and loiall consederats, I am persuaded, that ye yourselves do see as well as I, now that all the States of Spain are in peace and quietnesse, that either yee are to make an end of souldierie, and all our forces to be cassed and discharged from service; or else that yee must remove the warre into other lands. For so shall these Nations prosper and flourish, and not onely enjoy the blessings of peace, but also reape the fruits of war; if we will seek to gain riches, and to acquire glorie and honor from others. Since therefore wee are to warre shortly far from home, and doubt it is, when you shall see again your houses, and whatsoever there, is deere unto you: if any of you bee desirous to visite home, his wife and children, kinsfolke, and friends, I give him licence and free pasport. But I commaund  you withall, to shew yourselves heere againe before mee, in the beginning of the next spring; that with the helpe of God, we may in hand with that warre, whereby wee shall purchase both worship and wealth. There was not one in a manner but well accepted of this libertie so franckly offered by himselfe, and were desirous^ have a sight of house and land, both for that overy one a readie longed for their friends and kindred, and foresaw in farther time to come, a greater misse, and cause of more longing after them.
This rest all Winter time, betweene their travailes past, and those they were soon after to endure, refreshed as wel their bodies as their minds, and prepared them to abide and endure all new paines whatsoever. So in the very prime of the spring, according to the Edict aforesaid, they all assembled together againe. Anniball having taken a muster and survey of the aides that were sent unto him from all those Nations, went to Cadiz, or Cales Males, or Cale^^ Gades; and there, to Hercules he paid his old vowes, and bound himselfe to new, if the rest of his enterprises should speed well and have good successe. After this, deviding and casting care indifferently, as well for offensive as defensive warre, doubting least whiles hee went by land through Spaine and France into Italie, Affricke should lie open and naked to the Romanes from Sicilie side; purposed to fortifie and make that part sure with strong garrisons. In lieu whereof, hee sent for fresh supplie out of Affricke, specially of Archers and Ia^^lotiers, and those lightly armed: to the end, that the Affricanes might serve in Spaine, and the Spaniards in Affrick; like (both the one and the other) to proove the better souldiours, farre from their owne countries, and being bound as it were, with mutuall and reciprocall pledges. So hee sent into Affricke 13850 footemen, armed with light targets, and 870 slingers of the islandsTwo islands^ Maiorica and Minorica. Of some, Columba and Nur^. Baleares, 1200 horsemen also  out of sundrie Nations. Which forces he disposed, partly for thedefense of Carthage, and partly to be devided through Affricke, for the guard thereof. Hee sent withall, certaine Commissioners into all their citties to take up souldiours, and enrolled 4000 of their chosen youths, who should be brought to Carthage, there to lie in garison, and to serve for hostages. And supposing that Spaine was not to be neglected, and the rather, because hee was not ignorant how the Romane Embassadours had visited the same round, to see how they could sollicite and worke the Princes and rulers to their mind, he committed the charge of that Province to his brother Asdrubal, a valiant and hardie man; and furnished him with good forces, especially out of Affrick, to wit, 11850 Affricans footmen, 300 Ligurians, 500 Balearo Islanders. To this power of footmen, three hundred horse of theWithin the kingdome of Tune^. Libyphoenicians, a Nation mixt of Carthaginians and Affricanes. Of Inhabitants Bio led-il-gerid. Numidians  and Mores, that coast upon the Ocean, 1900. with a small cornet of 200 horsemen of Ilergetes out of Spaine. And because hee should want no manner of land helpe, foureteene Elephants besides. Moreover, there was a fleet allowed him for the defence of the sea coasts. For by what forces and service the Romanes had before gotten victorie, thereby it was likely, that they would still maintaine and continue their warres. 50 gallies therefore of five bankes of oates, hee had at sea, two of four, and five of three. But of the five oared gallies aforesaid, he had no more but two and thirtie, fitted and well appointed with rowers and marriners, and so were the five of three banckes.
From Gades, the armie of Anniball returned to winter in Carthage: and from thence he passed by the citie Hi^ona of M^quinensa. Etovissa, and marched forward with his forces to Iberus and the sea coasts. Where  it is reported, that in his sleepe hee dreamed, and sawe a vision; namely, a young man of divine shape and semblance, The vision of Anniball. saying, That he was sent from Jupiter to guide him in his voiage into Italie, and willed him therefore to follow him, and in no wise to turne his eies from him one way or other. Also, that at the first he being skared and affrighted, durst not look either about or behind, but followed him still: afterwards (as men by nature are curious) when hee cast and discoursed in

his mind, what it might be, that hee was forbidden so to see behind him, hee could not hold and  rule his eyes, but must needes looke backe: and then hee beheld behind him, a serpent of huge greatnesse comming amaine, and all the way as it went, to beare downe trees, groves, and thickets: and after all that, he perceived a great storme and tempest ensuing, with mightie thunderclaps. Now when hee was desirous to know what this so great confusion and straunge fight might signifie, he heard a voice, saying, That it betokened the ruines and wasting of Italie: willing him therefore, to goe still forward with his voyage, and search no further into the secrets of the gods, but leave them to the hidden destinies. Anniball right joyous at this vision, passed over Iberus with his whole power, devided into three parts, having sent certaine before him with gifts and rewards, into all parts whereas he should march with his armie, to gaine the hearts of the Gaules; and withall, to seeke out and discover the passages of the Alpes. So he crossed the river Iberus with  90000 foot, and 12000 horse, strong. After this, he subdued the Ilergetes, the The people of T^er.us. Bargusians, Mera^^ in Catalenia. Auselanes, and Guienne Aquitain, which lyeth under the hils Pyrenei. The government of all these Nations, heeset over to Hanno, that hee might have at his commaund the streights which joined Fraunce and Spaine together. Vnto whome hee allowed 10000 footemen, and 1000 horse, for to defend and keepe in obedience those countries. After that his armie was on foote, and began to march through the forrest Pyreneus, and that there ran amongst the barbarous people a more certain bruit, That they were to make warre with the Romanes; three thousand footmen of the Carpenates, returned backe: and for certaine it was knowne, that they departed not, for feare so much of the warre, as the tedious journey and unpassable waies of the Alpes. Anniball, considering that either to recall them, or to keepe them by violence, was a daungerous matter; for fear least  thereby hee should provoke the fierce stomackes of the rest; sent home againe above 7000 of such, as he perceived to be wearie, and to have no mind to the service; and made semblance withall, that the Carpetanes were by his leave discharged. And doubting least long stay and ease there, might tempt his souldiours, and give occasion of mutinies, with the rest of his forces hee passed Pyreneus, and pitched his campe before the towne Granada, or A^nar^^. Illiberis. The Gaules, albeit they were advertised, that it was Italie, at which Anniball shot; yet because the bruit was blased, That the Spaniards beyond Iberus, were by force subdued, and strong garrisons placed in their citties: certaine Nations of them, for feare of servitude and bondage, rose up in armes, and assembled together at Rousi^ion. Ruscino.
Which being related to Anniball, hee fearing more that they would stay him in his journey, than endaunger him in sight; sent certaine Oratours or Embassadours to their Princes  and great Lords, to signifie unto them, That himselfe in person would gladly parle with them, and that it should bee in their choise whether they would come neerer to Illiberis, or himselfe goe forward to Ruscino: where, beeing neere together, they might more easily meere and conferre. For as hee was willing to receive them into his campe, and would bee glad to see them there: so hee would not thinke much of his paines, to repaire unto them himselfe, as one that was thither come, as a friend and guest unto Fraunce, and not as an enemie; and would not by his good will draw a sword (if the Gaules would let him alone) before hee were entered within Italie. And, thus much verilie pasied by messengers and courriers betweene. But so soone as the Lords of Fraunce, who presently remooved their campe to Illiberis, were come willingly enough to Anniball, as being bribed and corrupted with money  and presents, they gave his armie good leave to passe through their confines along the towne Ruscino.
In Italie this while, the embassadors of Marseilles had brought no other word to Rome, but that Anniball was only gone over Iberus: but, by that time, the Boij had stirred up the Insubrians to mutinie, and were revolted themselves, even as if hee had passed the Alpes alreadie: which they did not so much upon old rancour and mallice to the People of Rome, as for that, they tooke it ill and were discontented, that there were Colonies brought lately into the Gauls countrie, to be planted about The river To. Padus, The ci^ie Plaisance. Placentia and Cremona. Whereupon they arose suddainely, tooke armes, and entred by force into those parts, and made so soule worke and fearefull havocke, that not onely the countrey people and villagers, but also the three Romane Commissioners called Triumvirs, to wit, Caius Luctatius, Aul. Servilius, and Titus Annius, who were come to set out the lands and territorie to the said Colonies, not trusting the wals of Placentia, fled to Modena Mutina. That Luctatius was one of them, it is not doubted: but some records have Q. Acilius and C. Herennius, instead of A. Servilius and T. Annius: and others againe, nominate P. Cornelius Asina,

 and C. Papyrius Maso. It is uncertaine also, whether they were the Embassadours sent to the Boutbnoise, Boij, to reason or expostulate the matter, that had abuse offred them, and were evill intreated; or that the Triumvirs above said, were set upon and assailed, as they were measuring out the lands. But whiles they were thus besieged at Mutina, and those Bojans lying at siege (a nation unskilfull altogether in the seat of assaulting townes, and likewise of all other most cowardly, to attempt any martial exploits) whiles they lay ydely about the wals, and never once advanced against them, they began to make shew of a treatie for peace. Wherupon the Roman embassadors or Comissioners, being by the chiefe of the Gaules called out to parle, were not onely against law of nations, but with breach also of their faithfull promise, and word which they had given that time, apprehended: and the Gauls said plainly, they would not let them go, unless their hostageswere delivered them  again. These news touching the embassadors being reported, and Mutina with the garison in danger; L. Manli^s the Pretor, in great anger and indignation; brought his armie in more hast than good order, before Mutina^. There were in those daies great woods about the high way, and most part of the countrie wilds and wasts, not inhabited: where he having engaged himselfe without his espials, was intrapped within an ambush; lost many of his men, and hardly recovered the open champaine countrie. There he ^icamped himselfe strongly: and for that the Gaules had no heart to assault, nor hope to win the camp, his soldior's courages were refreshed; albeit it was well known, that they had received a shrowd foile, and knew their forces to be much empaired. Then began he to march on, in his journey afresh. And so long as he led his power through the open countrie, the enemies were not in sight: but when they were entred the forrests againe, they  set upon the reward of them: where, besides the great fright and damage of all the rest, 800 Romane soldiors were left dead in the place; and the enemies went away with fix ensignes. But afterwards, the Gaules ceased to molest and trouble, and the Romanes gave over to feare, so soone as they were passed, and escaped the rough, comberous, and unpassable forrests. And the Romans being now able in the open and champion counttie to march with safetie; made hast to get to Tanedo Tannerus a village neere unto the Po. There within a fort which they made for the time, with the helpe and provision of victuals by the river, and the aid also of certaine Gaules called Of Bris^^id. Brixians, they defended themselves against the enemies, whose number daily encreased. After this suddaine tumult was reported at Rome, and that the LL. of the Senate were advertised, that besides the war with the Carthaginians, the Gaules were up in armes: they gave order, that C. Attilius  the Pretour should goe (with one Romane Legion, and foure thousand allies, who were enrolled by the Consuls in a new levie) to aid Manlius: who without any skirmish (by reason that the enemies were fled for feare) came to Tanetus. Also P. Cornelius having newly levied one Legion in lieu of that which was sent with the Pretor, departed from the cittie of Rome, and passing with 60 Gaules along the costes of Tuscane, Liguria, and so forward of the Salyes, shortly arrived at Massilia, and encamped neere the next mouth of Rhosne^ Rhodanus, (for the river is devided into many branches, and so dischargeth it selfe into the sea) being not fully of beleefe that Anniball as yet had passed over the mountaines Pyrenei. But when he understood, that he was redie even then to passe Rhodanus also; and doubting in what place to encounter and meet him, his people as yet not well recovered, after their being sea-sick: he sent before, 300 elect men  of armes, guided by the Massilians, and certaine Gaules that came to aid; for to discover all, and to take a full view of the enemies safely without danger.
Anniball having appeased the rest of the countrie, either for feare or by meanes of mony, was now come into the countrie of the Avignen. Volcanes, a puisant people and a valiant. These inhabite along both the bankes of Rhodanus: and mistrusting that they were not able to defend their lands against the Carthaginians, on that side of the river which lay to them: because they might have the whole river to serve them for a good defence and rampier, transported over the Rhos^e all in manner that ever they had, and kept the banke on the other side. The rest of the inhabitants neere to the river, and even those also in whose territories Anniball had set foot alreadie, both he himselfe with gifts allured to get together from all parts shipping, and to frame new vessels: and they of themselves likewise, were as willing to have his armie transported, and their own countrie eased and delivered (they cared not how soone) of so great a multitude of troublesome guests. Whereupon, there was gotten together an huge number of lighters, barges, and boats especially, which were made in hast without great workemanship; in which the people inhabiting therby, use to transport wares and commodities from one to another. Other new whirries also, the

Gauls began first to make of the hollowed trunks of trees: and after them, the soldiors for that  they had both store of timber and saw the workmanship but sleight and easie, made in hast certain bottomes, such as they were, like troughs without forme or fashion, regarding no hansomensse at all, so they would but flote on the water, and receive burden, in which they might convey over themselves and that which they had.
Now when they had prepared and made all readie for their passage, the enemies on the other side right against them, kept and covered all the banke, along with men and horse putting them to much trouble and feare. Anniball therefore to withdraw them from that place, commaunded Hanno the sonne of Bomilcar, at the first watch of the night, to go up the streame along the river side, one daies journey, with part of the forces, and those most of them Spaniards: and wheresoever he first could espie a convenient place, to crosse the river, and to land as secretly as  he could: and then to fetch about with his men, that when need were he might charge upon the backe of the enemie. Hereunto were appointed certaine Gaules for guides: who from thence conducted them some 25 miles above, to a little yland compassed about with the river, which here spred out in bredth, by reason that it devided itselfe, and thereby the channell was not so deepe: where they shewed him a place of passage. There, in all hast they cut downe and (...) timber, and made botes, to set ouer horse and man and other burthen. The Spaniards made no more adoe, but fastning their apparrell to bouges of lether like bladders, full of wind, and laying their bucklers thereupon, sat alost and passed over nimbly. The rest of the armie also, with joyning planks and troughes together, was set over. Where having encamped neere the river, as being wearie with their night journey, and toilesome work, they rested one day to refresh themselves, whiles there captaine studied and was occupied, to execute his commission and his intended service in good and convenient time. The morrow after, they removed from thence, and gave knowledge by smoke that they were passed over and not farre of. Which when Anniball perceived, for that he would not loose the vantage of that time, he gave signall to his men also to get over the water. Now had the footmen alreadie their botes prepared and fitted. And the course and ranks of barges (which to receive and breake the force of the currant from above, transported the horsemen, besides the horses that swam after) made for the small botes that passed beneath, a gentle and calme water. For a number of horses swam after the ships, haled by the bridle raines which were tied to the poupes, besides those, which being sadled and bridled, and fitted to serve the men of armes so soone as ever they were landed, were bestowed in barges and fery botes. The Gaules stood upon the banke with dissant hooping, hollaing, yelling and singing after their manner, who shaking their targuets over their heads, brandishing and florishing their swords in their right hands, shewed themselves redie to receive them, albeit so great a number and world of barges and botes ful in their eie over against them, together with arrhideous roring of the water, might have skared them: besides sundrie noises of mariners and soldiors, who laboured and strived to break the power and force of the water, and who being on the other side of the banke encouraged their fellowes that were passing over. And thus frighted enough as they were, with the tumult and noise presented before their faces: behold there arose a more fearfull and terrible outcrie behind theis backs, upon the forcing and winning of their campe by Hanno. And, himhimselfe in person came soone after: so that they were put in feare on both sides. For not onely  out of the ships there was a great multitude gotten to land, but also a power at their backes unlooked for, came forward and charged them. The Gaules, after they had made some resistance, and saw they were easely put backe; brake through, where they espied the way to lie most open, and so in great feare they fled divers waies into their townes and villages. Anniball then, having conveied over the rest of his forces by leasure, cared no more now for any French sturres and tumults, and so encamped himselfe. But for the transporting of the Elephants, I suppose there were sundrie devises: and certainly, however it was, the thing is diversly recorded. Some say, that when the Elephantes were gathered together upon the banke, the most couragious and fiercest of them all, was chauffed, angred, and raised of purpose by his master or keeper: and when he was pursued of the beast, and to save himselfe fled from him, and tooke the river, thereupon the Elephant followed after him as hee swamme, and so drew after him the whole drove of the rest: and as any one of them (fearing the depth) failed to wade, the verie force of the river carried him to the other side. But it is more credibly and certainely reported, that they were conveyed over in certaine barges: which as it was a safer way

 safer way and surer course before it was practised, so when it was done and past, it was more easily credited. They caused therefore one vessell or barge, 200 foote long, and 50 foote broad, to reach from the strond side and the shore into the river; which because it should not be caried downe with the course and streame of the water, they fastned to the banke above with many strong ropes, and like as it had ben a bridge, they covered it over with earth, that the beasts might boldly gothereon as upon the firme ground. Now there was another barge full as broad, but of length only 100 foot; fitted and appointed to passe the river, and was tied and coupled therto: and when as the Elephants (driven after the females going before) upon the steadie barge, as it had bene upon a causey, were gone over into the lesser which was fastned unto it; then presently was it losed from the bonds where with it was slightly tyed, and so haled and drawne by certaine  galley boats, directed with oaresthrough to the other banke. Thus when the first were landed, they went for more stil, until they were all set over: and verily, so long as they were driven on still, as it were upon a long bridge, they nothing feared: the formost only were afrayed when the barge was losened, and they parted from their fellows, and so were caried away into the wide and deepe river, where thronging and struggling together, and iostling one another, they made some trouble, whiles they that were outmost gave back from the water as much as they could, untill such time as very feare (when they saw all about them nothing but water) caused them to be quiet. Some of them also like raging beasts as they were, and unruly, fell out into the river, but by reason of their heavinesse, they stood sure, and casting their governors, they fought the sounds foot by foot, by little and little, and got safe to land.
 Whiles the Elephants were thus transporting over, Anniball in the meane time had sent 500 Numidian light horsemen to the Romanes camp, as espials to discover the ground, where they were to learne what forces they had, and listen after their designes and purposes. This wing and troup was encountred by three hundred Romane horsemen, sent as is aforesayd, from the mouth of Rhodanus: where there was a more cruell skirmish than for so small a number, for besides many hurt, there were slaine on both sides in a maner alike: but in the end, the feare and flight of the Numidians gave the victorie to the Romanes; being now alreadie much travailed and wearied: on whose part (being the winners) were slaine 160, not all Romans, but some Gaules: and on the losers side who were overcome, there dyed above 200. This beginning and prognostication as it were of the warre, as it portended and presaged an happie end and successe of the  whole, unto the Romans: so it shewed plainely, that the victorie would hang long in equall balance, not without much effusion of bloud, and danger of their part. The conflict being thus determined, they returned each one to his owne Captaine. As for Scipio, he could not resolve to take any course himselfe; but according as he saw the plots and enterprises of the enemie, so to frame his own. And Annibal again being uncertain whether to go forward with his journy begun, into Italie, or to give battel unto the first armie of the Romans that came in his way and met him: was drawn away from all present conflict, by occasion of the comming of the Embassadors of the Boij, and of a great Lord and Potentate, called Matalus; who promising to be his guides unto him in his voyage, and companions in his perils, thought it good, and gave advise to invade and set upon Italie first of all before any other warre, whiles his forces were entier in harr, no where  put to the hazard, and to give them as it were the first hansell. The common multitude of the Carthaginians (for that the former warre was not cleane forgotten and out of remembrance) feared verily their enemies, but more their infinite journey, and the Alps especially, the name wherof to men not experienced, was very fearefull and terrible. Wherupon, Anniball being now resolute to march onward in his journey, and to passe into Italie, assembled his people to an audience, and by sundrie meanes, as well by way of rebuke, as also by encouragement, windeth and assayeth the minds of his souldiers.
I mervell (quoth he) what sodaine fright or new feare hath possessed your hearts; that ever before now have bene undaunted; who have served so many yeares, and alwaies won the victorie; who departed not out of Spaine, before that all those nations and lands, which lye enclosed between two divers seas, were brought in subjection to the  Carthaginians; who taking indignation and great disdaine; that the people of Rome should require all those to be yeelded unto justice (as offenders and malefactors) that had besieged Saguntum, have thereupon passed the river Iberus, with this intent even to destroy and extirp the Roman name, and to set free the whole world out of their servitude and bondage: no man thought it long then of his travaile from East to West, from the setting of the sunne, to the rising of the

same: now when as ye see the greater part (by farre) of our journey done and past, the forrest and  mountaine of Pyreneus, amid most fierce and cruell nations, surmounted; that great river Rhodanus, passed over, maugre the hearts of so many thousand Gaules that would have impeached your passage, yea and the force of his maine streame overcome; now I say, when you are within the fight of the Alps, to the other side whereof lieth Italie close; ye faint as it were, and stand still, tired at the very gates of the enemies. Why? what other thing take ye the Alps to be, but high hils? And imagine they be higher than the cliffes of Pyrenei, what? there is no land (I am sure) that reach up to heaven, and no place for men unsuperable. But for the Alps, they are inhabited, and they are tilled, they breede and feede living creatures and cattaile: and are they accessible in deede, and passable for some few, and unpassable for whole armies? These verie embassadors whom you see here, flew not over the Alps with wings, neither were their auncestors time out of mind  borne and bred there, but came from other parts as strangers, and inhabited Italie before; yea, and oftentimes haue gone over the same Alps in huge multitudes, together with their wives and children, in manner of travailers and pilgrimes that seeke new countries to inhabite: what should there be unpassable then or impossible for the armed souldiour, carying about him nothing but instruments of warre? For the winning of Saguntum, what perils were adventured, what travailes were endured and swallowed, for eight moneths space? should any thing then seeme so hard and difficult as to stay them in their enterprise once begun, who aime at no lesse than to conquer Rome, the head citie of the world? And have the Gaules indeede forced and woon that in times past, which the Carthaginians despaire now to come unto? Therefore, either ye must confesse your selves inferior in stomack and valor to that nation, which so ost (these dayes passed) by you  have ben vanquished; or else make reckoning with assured hope, that the goodly faire fields that lye betweene Tyberis and the walls of Rome, are the end of your iourney.
When in these termes he had exhorted and encouraged his souldiours, he commaunded them to take their repast and repose, to cherish and refresh their bodies, and to prepare themselves for the march. The morrow after he departed crosse from the banks of Rhodanus, and entred the inland parts of France: not for that it was the more direct way to the Alps, but because he thought the further he went from the sea side, in so much lesse danger he should be of meeting the Romans, with whom he was not minded to fight, before he was arrived into Italie. After that he had travailed foure dayes journey, he came to an Iland, where the two rivers The river Sa^^ne. Arar and Rhodanus, issuing out of sundrie parts of the Alps, and taking a direct course, after they have  run through a good part of the countrey, fall at length together and meete in one, and the ground lying betweene is called by the name of the Iland. Neere there, inhabite the The people of Sa^^ie according to Schudus. But Diulphinor. after Martianius, Rhenam^, and others. Allobroges, a nation even in those dayes nothing inferior, either in wealth and puissance, or in same and reputation to any people or state of the Gaules whatsoever. But at that very time there was some discord and variance among them, by occasion of two brethren who were at strife for the crowne and kingdome: the elder (whose name was Brancus, and had before enjoyed the Seignorie) was deposed and thrust out by his yonger brother, and a Iustie crew of the youth; who as they had lesse right on their side, so they were the mightier. The deciding of this variance, was referred and put over unto Anniball, in as good and fit a time for his purpose, as he could have wished: and he forsooth was made the umpire and judge, to determine whether of them should be king  who restored the elder to the kingdome; like as it would have bene adjudged by the award of the Senators and Nobles of the countrie. For which benefit and good turne, he was served with victuall, and store of all things aboundantly, yea and with rayment and apparell; which he was driven to provide aforehand, for the name that went of the Alps, which for their coldnesse were in great discredit.
Having thus appeased the debate of the Allobroges, and minding now to set forward to the Alps; he would not go the direct streight way, but turned on the left hand to the Entrecacie:^ix in Provance, saith Vigenereus. Tricastnies, and from thence passing by the frontires of the Val de viso, or the countrie of Belfort. Vocontians, he matched into the Those of Craux. Tricoriahs; and never was he stayed or impeached in his journey, before that he came to the river Durance. Druentia, which descending also out of the Alps, is of all other rivers in France most hard to be passed  over; for although it carie with it a mightie force of water, yet will it beare no vessell, because it is kept and restreined with no banks, but running at once by many divers chanels, maketh ever new sourds, and casteth up new shelves and whirlepits, (for which cause also a footeman hath much ado to wade therethrough, and knoweth not the fourds) besides, it rolleth downe round

 stones and pibbles, whereby there is no sure nor safe footing for him that would wade through. And it chaunced at that time, that it swelled and was risen high by fall of raine, and by landflouds, and caused them to have very much to doe, that passed over it: and over and besides all other difficulties, they were of themselves troubled and disquieted through their owne fearefulnesse and sundrie cries which they made. Publius Cornelius the Consull, about three daies after that Anniball dislodged from the banke of Rhodanus, was arrived with his armie (arraunged in a fouresquare battaille) as farre as the place where the enemie was lately encamped, purposing without any stay to give him battaile. But seeing the hold abandoned, and that hee was not like to overtake him, being so farre gone forwards; hee returned to his ships at sea, supposing by that meanes, with lesse daunger and difficultie, to encounter Anniball as hee descended  from the Alpes. But leastthat Spaine (which was the province allotted unto him) should be left disfurnished of Romane succours, he sent his brother Cn. Scipio with the greatest part of his forces against Asdruball: not so much to defend their old allies, and procure new, as to drive Asdruball out of Spaine. Himselfe with a verie small companie returned to Genes. Genua, with intent to guard Italie, with that armie which was about the Po.
Anniball being departed from Druentia, marched for the most part through the champion countries, and came in peace and quietly, to the foot of the Alpes, for any trouble from the peasants that there inhabited. And albeit he had some knowledge of the Alpes before by report, (which useth to make things that are uncertain, much more than indeed and truth they are) yet seeing now neere at hand the heigth of those thils, and the snowes, entermingled along with the  skie; the rude and mishapen houses set upon rockes; the cattell, sheepe, oxen, and horses, singed with cold; the people with long shagd haire, and without any trimming, both living and livelesse creatures, even parched stiffe and starke with frost; and all things else mo^e strange and ilfavoured, than can be spoken: then began his souldiours to feare afresh. So soone as they advaunced forward, and began to march up the first cliffes, there appeared over their heads the mountaine people, who had seized the hils: who if they had kept the secret and hidden vallies, and suddainly all at once charged upon them, they would have made a foule slaughter of them, and put them to flight. Then Anniball commaundeth the ensignes to stand stil, and sent certaine Gaules afore, as espials; by whom he understood, that there was no passage that way: whereupon, he pitched his campe amongst those craggie and steepe rough places, upon as large a plaine and valley as hee  could find. Then by the same Gaules (who much differed not in tongue and manners from the other, and had entermingled themselves in talke with the mountainers) he understood, that they kept the passage, but in the day time, and slipt away in the night, every one to his owne harbour. So at the break of day he mounted those steepe hils, as if he would openly in the day time march through the streights. Thus having spent the day in making semblance and shew of one thing, and intending another, hee encamped himselfe strongly in the place where hee had rested and staied: and so soone as hee perceived, that the mountaine people were departed from the steepe hils, and kept not so streight watch and ward; after that hee had made shewe of fires, more than for the number of those that remained behind; and left with the Cavallerie all the bag and baggage, with the greatest part of the footmen: himselfe in person took unto him the nimblest, most  active, and valiant souldiours lightly appointed, and with all speed passed through the streights aforesaid, and encamped on the very hils which the enemies before held and beset. Then in the morning betime his campe dislodged: and the armie behind, began to march and set forward. By which time the mountainers, at the ordinarie signall given, came foorth out of their castles and fortes, and met at the usuall place of their accustomed guards: but then all at once they might see some of the enemies over their heads, to have gained their own fortresse, and others also marching in the way. Both which objects at one time presented to their eye, made them blanke and to stand still in a muse a good while. But afterwards, when they saw Anniball his armie, distressed in the streights, and in great trouble and disorder among themselves in the march, by reason especially the horses were so affrighted: supposing, that the least fear and terror (besides) that they  could procure, would bee ynough for their enemies overthrow and confusion, they crossed the rockes overthwart, and (as they were accustomed and used to them) ran to and fro, up and down through the blind and unhaunted bywaies. But then verily, the Carthaginians were much encombred, as well by their enemies, as also by the disadvantage of the place, and more ado there was among them (whiles every one strived avie who should first escape the daunger) than with

the enemie. There was nothing that disordered and troubled the armie in the match, so much as  their owne horses, which (by reason of the dissonant and divers cries, that the ecchoes betweene the woods and vallies redoubled) were affrighted: and also if any of them chaunced to bee stricken, gauled, or wounded; they kept such winsing, and flinging about them, that they overthrew and made great havocke of men, and of all sorts of carriage. Besides, the preasse was so great, and the streights of both sides so steepe and craggie, that many a man was throwne down headlong a mightie heigth: yea, and some of them armed: and the sumpter horses and beastes for carriage, especially, tumbled downe amaine with their load, as if a house or castle had come downe with a mischeefe. Which, although it were terrible to behold, yet Anniball for a while stood still, and kept his owne men together, for feare of encreasing this disorder and affright. But after that hee saw his armie disbanded and marching in disarray, and that it was to no purpose  to lead his armie safe through the streights, if hee lost the carriages: for feare hereof, hee ran downe from the higher ground, and albeit, with the violence of his charge, hee discomfited the enemie, yet he encreased the trouble and feare of his owne people. But that was soone appeased in a verie moment, after the waies and passages were once cleared, by reason of the mountainers that were fled: so that within a while the whole hoast passed through, not onely at ease and leasure, but also in a manner without anie noise at all. This done, hee seized upon a castle, which was the cheefe strength of that countrie, with other villages lying about it: and for three daies space hee victualled and maintained his whole armie, with the cattell of his prisoners. And for that hee was now neither molested with the mountainers, who were at the first discomfited, nor greatly encombred with the difficulties of the waies, in those three daies  hee rid a good deale of ground, and journeied a great way into the countrey; untill at the length hee came to an^^her coast well peopled (for such mountaine and hillie quarters;) where hee had like to have been overtaken, not by open force, but even in his owne professed cunning: first, by a subtile practise, and after by a secret ambush. Certaine auncient men, the rulers and governours of the castles, repaired unto Anniball as Oratours, saying, That they having beene taught and made wise, by the profitable example of other mens harmes, made choise, rather to trie the amitie, than proove the force of the Carthaginians; and therefore were willing to doe his commaundement, and bee at his devotion: requesting him to take at their hands victuals and guides for their journey, yea, and hostages also for better assurance of promises to bee performed. Anniball neither overhastily and rashly beleeving them, nor yet  churlishly distrusting and refusing their offer, least being rejected and cast off, they might become open and professed enemies; gave them good language, and a courteous answere, received the hostages whom they gave, accepted victuals, which they had brought with them to maintaine his armie by the way, and followed their guides, but so, as his armie was not disarraied in their march, as if hee had beene amongst his friends, and in a peaceable countrey. First went in the vaunt-guard the Elephants, and the horsemen; himselfe marched after with the flower and strength of his footemen, looking all about him with an heedfull eye. So soone as hee was entered a narrow passage, which of the one side lay under a steepe hill that commanded them aloft, the barbarous people rose out of their ambush from all parts at once, both before and behind, and charged upon him both a far off and neere at hand; yea and rolled downe  mightie huge stones upon them as they marched. But the greatest number came behind upon their backes: against whom he turned and made head with the power of his footmen, and without all peradventure (if the taile both of his armie, had not beene strong and well fortified) they must needs have received in that lane and streights, an exceeding great overthrow. And even then, as it was, they came to an extremitie of daunger, and in manner fel into a present mischeefe. For whiles Annibal made long stay, and doubted whether he should engage the regiment of footmen within the streights, for that he had not left any succors in the reregard to back the footmen, like as himselfe was a defence to the horsemen; the mountainers came overthwart, and flancked them; and breaking through the files of the battaile, beset the way, and crossed upon him. So that Anniball took up his lodging for one night, without his cariages and horsemen. The morrow after, when as the barbarous people ran betweene them more coldly than before, he joined his  forces together, and passed the streight, not without great dammage and losse; but with more hurt of the sumpter horses than of men. After this, the mountainers (fewer in number, and in robbing wise rather than in warlike sort) ran in heapes, one while upon the vaward, other while

 upon the rereward, as any one of them could either get the vantage of ground, or by going one while afore, and by staying another while behind, winne and catch any occasion and opportunity. The elephants, as they were driven with great leasure, because through these narrow steights, they were readie ever and anone to run on their noses: so what way soever they went, they kept the army safe and sure from the enemies; who being not used unto them, durst not once come neer. The ninth day he woon the verie tops of the Alpes, through by-lanes and blind crankes: after he had wandred many times out of the way, either through the deceitfulnesse of their guides; or for that when they durst not trust them, they adventured rashly themselves upon the vallies, and guessed the way at adventure, and went by aime. Two daies abode he encamped upon the tops thereof, and the soldiors weried with travaile and fight rested that time: certaine also of the  sumpter horses (which had slipt aside from therockes) by following the tracks of the armie as it marched, came to the campe. When they were thus overtoiled and wearied with these tedious travailes, the snow that fell (for now the starre Vergilie, was set and gone downe out of that horizon) increased their feare exceedingly. Now when as at the breake of day the ensignes were set forward, and the armie marched slowly, through the thicke and deepe snow; and that there appeared in the countenance of them all, slouthfulnesse and desperation: Anniball advanced before the standerds, and commaunded his soldiours to stay upon a certaine high hill, (from whence they had a goodly prospect and might see a great way all about them) and there shewed unto them Italie, and the goodly champion fields about the Po, which lie hard under the foot of the Alpine mountains: saying, That even then they mounted the wals, not only of Italy, but also  of the cittie of Rome; as for all besides (faith hee) will be plaine and easie to be travelled: and after one or two battailes at the most, ye shall have at your command, the verie castle and head citie of all Italy. Then began the armie to march forward: and as yet the enemies verely themselves adventured nothing at all, but some pettie robberies by stealth, as opportunitie and occasion served. Howbeit they had much more difficult travailing down the hill, than in the climbing and getting up; for that most of the advenues to the Alpes from Italy side, as they be shorter, so they are more upright: for all the way in a manner was steepe, narrow, and slipperie, so as neither they could hold themselves from sliding, nor if any tripped and stumbled never so little, could they possibly (they staggered so) recover themselves and keep sure footing, but one fell upon another, as well horse as man. After this they came to a much narrower rocke, with crags and rags so steepe  downeright, that hardly a nimble soldiour without his armour and baggage (do what he could to take hold with hands upon the twigs and plants that there about grew forth) was able to creep down. This place being before naturally of it selfe steepe and pendant with a downe-fall, now was choked and dammed up with a new fall of earth, which left a bank behind it of a wonderful and monstrous heigth. There the horsmen stood still as if they had been come to their waies end. and when Anniball merveiled much what the matter might be that staied them so, as they marched not on: word was brought him, that the Rock was unaccessible and unpassable. Wherupon, he went himself in person to view the place, and then he saw indeed without all doubt, that although he had fetched a compasse about, yet he had gained nought thereby, but conducted his armie, to passe through wilds, and such places as before had never been beaten and troden. And verely that (of al other) was  such, as it was impossible to passe through. For, wher as there lay old snow untouched and not troddenon, and over it other snow newly fallen, of a smal depth; in this soft and tender snow, and the same not verie deep, their feet as they went, easely tooke hold: but that snow, being once with the gate of so many people and beasts upon it, fretted and thawed, they were faine to go upon the bare yce underneath, and in the slabberie snow-broth, as it relented and melted about their heeles. There they had foule a doe and much strugling, for that they could not tread sure upon the slipperie yce: and againe, going as they did (downe hill) their feetsooner failed them: and when they had helped themselves once in getting up, either with hands or knees; if they chanced to fal again, when those their props and staies deceived them, there were no twigs nor rootes about, whereon a man might take hold, and rest or stay himselfe, either by hand or foot. And therefore all that the  poore garrons and beasts could doe, was to tumble and wallow only, upon the slipperie and glassie yee, and the molten slabbie snow. Otherwhiles also, they perished, as they went in the deepe snow, whiles it was yet soft and tender: for when they were once slidden and fallen, with flinging out their heeles, and beating with their hoofes more forcibly for to take hold, they brake the yce through; so as most of them, as if they had ben caught fast and fettered, stucke still in the deepe,

hard frozen, and congealed yce. At last, when as both man and beast were weried and overtoiled, and  all to no purpose, they encamped upon the top of an hill, having with very much ado clensed the place aforehand for that purpose: such a deale of snow there was to be digged, faied, and thrown out. This done, the souldiors were brought to breake that rocke, through which was their onely waie: and against the time that it was to be hewed through, they felled and overthrew many huge trees that grew there about, and made a mightie heape and pile of wood: the wind served fuly for the time to kindle a fire, and then they set all a burning. Now when the rock was on fire and red hot, they powred thereon strong vineger for to calcine and dissolve it. When as the rock was thus baked (as it were) with fire, they digged into it, and opened it with pickeaxes, and made the descent gentle and easie, by meanes of moderate windings and turnings: so as not onely the horses and other beasts, but even the Elephants also might be able to go downe. Foure daies he  spent about the levelling of this rock: and the beasts were almost pined and lost for hunger. For the hill tops for the most part are bare of grasse; and looke what fog and forage there was, the snow overhilled it. The dales and lower grounds have some little banks lying to the sunne, and rivers withall, neere unto the woods, yea and places more meet and beseeming for men to inhabite. There were the labouring beasts put out to grasse and pasture, and the soldiors that were wearied with making the waies, had three daies allowed to rest in. From thence they went downe into the plaine countrie, where they found both the place more easie and pleasant, and the natures of the inhabitants more tractable.
In this manner, and by this meanes principally, entred the Carthaginians into Italy, five moneths after they departed from new Carthage (as some write): and within fifteene daies overcame  and passed the Alpes. What power Anniball had, when he was arrived in Italy, the historians doe not agree. They that speake with the most, write that hee was 100000 foot, and 20000 horse strong: they that make the least of it, say they were 20000 foot and 6000 horse. L. Cincius Alimentus, who hath delivered under his hand, that himselfe was taken prisoner by Anniball (a writer of great authoritie) would induce me sufficiently to beleeve him, but that he setteth downe the number so confusedly, by adding to the rest, the Gaules and Ligurians. Herecordeth, that counting them, the Infanterie was 80000, and the Cavallery 10000, which was conducted into Italy (but likely it is that from all parts there came more thither than so, and so some authors doe report) and that he heard from Anniball his owne mouth, that after he had passed Rhodanus, he had lost 36000 men, and a great number of horses and other beasts of burden, when he was come downe into the Taurines countrie, which was the next nation in Italy, adjoyning to the Gaules. Which being a thing agreed upon amongst all, I marvaile so much the more, that there is any doubt, on which side hee went over the Alpes: and that commonly it is beleeved, that he passed by a place called Penninum, and that thereupon the top of the Alpes tooke the name, and was so called. Celius saith, hee tooke his way over by the top of Cremon: both which passages surely would have brought him not into the Taurines countrey, but through the mountaine forrests, unto the Gaules called Libuj. But neither is it probable, that in those daies the same passages were open into Fraunce: considering, that the waies which lead to Penninum were environned with nations halfe Germanes. And certainely, the Veragrians, who inhabite this verie top (in case a man may build ought upon this conjecture) never knew that these mountaines tooke the name of any passage of the Carthaginians, that way: but of some one place consecrated in the top of the hill, which the pesants and mountainers called Penninum.
Very happily and fitly it sell out for the enterprise of his first designements, that the Taurines the next nation he came unto, made warre upon the Insubrians. But Anniball being busied in refreshing his armie (that now had most feeling of their harmes which they had caught before) could not arme the same to the aide and gratifying of either partie: for ease after travaile, plentie upon scarcitie, good keeping and delicate, after lothsome nastinesse, did by a sodaine change greatly alter and distemper their leane and pined bodies, welneere savage and wild growne. Which was the cause that P. Cornelius the Consul, being arrived and landed at Pisae, after he had received of Manlius Attilius an armie of new and raw souldiers, fearefull for some shamefull disgrace and defeature lately received, made hast and highed him to the Po, for to give battaile unto the enemie, before he were well refreshed and in heart again. But by that time that the Consul was come to Placentia, Anniball had dislodged and removed his camp, and woon by assault the

 chiefe citie or towne of the Taurines, because it willingly yeelded not to accept of his amitie and protection: and surely not by feare only, but also of voluntarie good will, he had gained unto him the Gaules that inhabited about the Po, but that the sodaine comming of the Consull interrupted and surprised them, as they were casting about to spie some opportunitie of rebellion. So Anniball dislodged, and removed out of the Taurines countrey, with this opinion, that the Gaules especially, being doubtfull as yet what part to take, would follow him being present in place. Now were the armies in manner one in sight of the other, and the Generals approched nigher together: and as they were not yet well knowne one unto the other, so they had alreadie both of them a great opinon, and reciprocall admiration one of the other. For as Anniball was much renowned, and his name right well knowne among the Romanes, even since before Saguntum  was lost: so Scipio was takenof him, and repured for some singular and excellent man, in that he especially above all other, was chosen Generall against him. Which mutuall conceit and impression they had, they augmented themselves one to the other: for that Scipio, albeit he was left behinde in France, yet he met Anniball, and was readie to make head against him, so soone as he was passed the Alps: and Anniball againe, because having enterprised so great an adventure, as to passe the Alps, had now brought the same to good effect. But Scipio to prevent Anniball in crossing the Po before him, removed his camp to the river Ticinus: and for to encourage his souldiours, before he brought them forth to battaile, he made an Oration unto them, and began in this manner.
My valiant souldiours and trustie friends, if I were now to leade that armie into the field, which  I had with me in France, I would have forborne to make any speech at all unto you: for to what purpose needed I to exhort, either that Cavallerie, which so valiantly had vanquished the horsemen of the enemies at the river Rhodanus: or those legions, with whom I followed in chase as it were, even these very enimies, and whose falling off and refusing battaile, I take to be a confession of victorie? But now for as much as that armie, being indeed levied for the province Spaine, serveth with my brother Cn. Scipio, under my name and commission, where it pleaseth the Senate and people of Rome, they should be employed; to the end that ye might have a Consull to be your Captaine against Anniball and the Carthaginians, I have willingly offred my selfe to this warre. If being then, your new Captaine, and you my new souldiours, meete it is and convenient I should use a few words unto you. And to the end you should not be ignorant, either of the  manner of this service, or qualitie of your enemie; with those men ye are to fight, whom in the former Punick warre ye overcame both by land and sea; of whome for these twentie yeares ye have received tribute; from whome ye have woon (as the due wages and reward of the warre) Sicile, and Sadinia both, and them do hold and occupie. In this battaile therefore, both you and they are to cary that mind, and so to be affected, as winners and loosers are to be: for never thinke that it is valor and hardinesse that provoketh them now to fight, but meere necessitie and compulsion enforceth them to the field. Vnlesse ye will beleeve, that they who when they had an entire armie, and unfoiled, refused battaile, should now have greater hope, and take more courage, after they have lost two parts of their horse and foote, in the very passage of the Alps; and of whome, there have more perished in a manner, than remaine alive. But will some man say, True it is, few  they are in number, but stout in heart, and tall of hand, whose strength and puissance, no force is hardly able to abide. Images they are, nay to say more truly, the very shadowes of men, and no better; with hunger bitten, with cold starved, lost for want of keeping, spoiled with nastinesse and filthie ordure, brused and weakened amongst hard rocks and craggie cliffs: over and besides, joints and marrow dried up and burnt, their sinews shrunke, storke, and striffe againe with cold and chilling snow, their limmes singed with bitter frost, their armor crushed, bruised, and their weapons broken: their horses, no other than lame jades and poore hidebound hildings. See what horsmen; lo what footmen ye are to fight withall. Beleeve me, ye shall have the verie reliques and last remnants of enemies, and not enemies indeed. And I assure you, nothing feare I more than this, that before ye shall skirmish with this kind of enemie, it will be thought thatthe Alpes alreadie  have vanquished and defaited Anniball. But peradventure it was so meete, and reason would, that the gods themselves without mans helpe, should against that captaine and nation, which had broken league and covenants, begin the warre first, set it in good forwardnesse, and bring it to the point of an end; and then we, who next to the gods have been offended and wronged, should finish the same thus begun to our hands, and brought to so good a passe, I feare not

that any man here doth thinke, that I utter these brave and glorious words onely for to harten  you, and that my selfe thinke otherwise in hart, than I speake with tongue. I might have gone myselfe well enough into Spaine, my proper and peculiar province, (where I had bene aforetime) and with an armie of mine owne: I should have had my brother there, both a counseller unto me in my distresses, and a companion with me in my dangers. I found Asdruball rather than Anniball mine enemie, and no doubt, the affaires and charge of the warre farre lesse than here. But when I sayled by the coast of France, and upon the bruit and newes of this enemie was set a land, I sent my Cavallerie before, and removed camp as farre as to Rhodanus, and in a battaile of horsemen (for with that part of my forces it was my hap to encounter and fight) I discomfited the enemie: and for that by land I could not overtake his infanterie, (so hastilie they marched away, like men that fled) I was faine to returneto the sea, and embarke againe into my ships: and with as great expedition and speed as I could make (considering so great compasse about of sea and land) at the very foote of the Alpes, I was readie to encounter and affront him. Can it be thought then, that whiles I shunned and avoided fight, I fell by chance and at unwares upon this drad and redoubted enimie? or rather, that I followed him hard at heeles? and chalenged him, to draw him forth unto a battaile, thereby to have it decided who should have the victorie in the end? I would gladly make tryall, whether all of a sodaine the earth hath brought forth for these twentie yeares, Carthaginians, of another mould or new stampe: or whether they be the same that fought neere the Ilands Aegates, and whom ye sent away, and let go from Eryx, valued after the rate of 18xi. (...).d.sterl. deniers apeece, and no more: and faine would I see, whether this Anniball be the concurrent of Hercules, to undertake his journeys and voyages, as he faith himselfe;  or one left by his father, a tributarie, a vassal, and slave of the people of Rome: who; but that he is tormented in conscience for the outrage and crueltie committed upon Saguntum, would have some respect and regard, if not of his native countrie (conquered and subdued) yet of his owne house, of the peace and covenants written by his father Amilear, and his owne hand: Amilear (I say) who at the commandement of our Consull, removed his garison from Eryx; who fuming and storming, received with sorrowfull heart the grievous and heavie conditions of peace imposed upon the conquered Carthaginians; who capitulated and covenanted to abandon Sicilie, and to pay a tribute to the people of Rome: I would have you therefore (my hardie souldiours) to fight against him, not onely with the same courage as ye do with other enimies, but in a certaine heate of choler and indignation, as if ye should see your owne servants and slaves on a sodaine to rise  up in armes against you. We might well if we had bene so minded, when they were enclosed and shut fast up within Eryx, have put them to the utmost extremitie of all worldly paine, and famished them. We might have passed over with our victorious Annado into Affrike, and within, few dayes forced and rased Carthage, without any battaile fought. We pardoned them at their humble request, and tooke them to mercie; we let them out where they were besieged and beleaguerd; and notwithstanding that they were by us subdued, we made peace, and contracted amitie with them: and afterward, when they were molested and distressed with the Africanes warre, we counted them within our protection. In recompense of these good favours and demerits; they come against us, under the leading of an humorous brainsick and furious yong man; to invade  and assaile our countrie. And I would it had pleased God that we had all this warre for our honor only and reputation, and not for our safetie and our lives. But we are to fight now, not for the holding and possession of Sicilie and Sardinia, as in times past; but for our freehold, and the inheritance of Italie: and that which more is, there is no armie behind our backs; to withstand and make head against the enemie, if we chaunce to faile of victorie: neither are there any more Alpes, which while he is getting over, we might have leisure in the meane time to assemble and prepare new forces. Here in this very place (souldiers) must we stand to it, and make resistance, as if we were fighting under Rome walls. Let every man thinke that he is not onely to defend and ward his owne bodie; but to protect his wife and little children: and let every one regard and take care, not for his private aff^ires and domesticall charge, but estsoones consider this; That even now the Senate and people of Rome beholdeth and seeth our hardie deeds; and look^ how  our force and valour now speedeth and sheweth itselfe; such from henceforth will the state and fortune be of that citie and Empire of Rome.
These words had the Consull to the Romans. But Anniball, supposing that his men were first to be encouraged by representation of some deedes, and then exhorted with words; having marshalled

 his armie in around compasse (as it were) to behold some spectacle in a Theatre: he set in the middest of them all, the prisoners mountainers, bound (as they were) hand and foot: and casting downe at their feet, the armour and weapons of the Gaules, hee demaunded of them by a a truchman, or an interpreter, Which of them (upon condition to be eased of his bands, and to have armor, and an horse of service, given him for a prise of victorie) would enter into combat, and fight at the utterance, for his life. And when they al answered with one voice, That they wold wish no better; and not one of them but called for a sword, and required to fight and therupon, the lots were shuffled to be cast, and not one there was but wished himselfe to be the man, whom fortune would chuse for the combate. Then every man as his lot fell, in token of cheerefulnesse and contentment of spirit, leapt for joy among his fellowes that rejoiced in his behalfe, fell a dauncing after  their manner, and so (hastily) took armes and weapons: all the while that they were in fight, there appeared such affection and disposition of mind, as well in them that were in the same state and condition, as also in those who stood there as spectators only in the multitude to looke on; that no lesse happie and fortunate were they accounted, whose chaunce it was to die in the place, than those who had the upper hand. Vpon the fight of some couples that were thus matched in combat, hee dismissed them: and whiles hee saw them in this good mind, so well affected and resolute, then hee assembled them all together to an audience, and thus by report hee spake unto them.
My valorous souldiors, if in the consideration of your owne fortune, yee will anon but beare that mind, which even now ye shewed in beholding the example of the state of others; the journey  is ours, and we have the victorie. For that was not a dumbe shew and bare pageant, but a very mirror and patterne of your owne condition: and I wote not, whether fortune hath compassed about with harder bonds and greater necessities, your owneselves, or your prisoners. On both hands, as well the right as the left, enclosed yee are, and shut up within two seas; and have not so much as one ship to embark in, for to escape away, and save yourselves. Before you neer at hand is the Po, a greater river, and more violent than Rhodanus: behind you are the Alpes to hemme you in; the Alpes, I say, which yee hardly passed when you were in heart and lustie. Here must yee either get victorie (sirs) or lose your lives, even where ye have first encountred your enemie: and the same fortune, which hath laid upon you necessitie of fight, presenteth and profereth unto you (if you go away with victorie) such rewards, as men use not to wish for greater and more honourable  at the hands of the immortall gods. If by our manhood and valour wee should but recover and win againe Sicilie and Sardinia, which were gotten from our fathers; those were rewards and prizes sufficient: but now, over and besides, what riches or treasure the Romanes in so manie triumphs, have gathered, laid up, and held in possession, all that will bee ours, yea, and the owners thereof themselves withall. Go to it then a gods name, and take arms, in assured hope of gaining so rich a bootie and reward. Yee have all this while beene long ynough a coursing and chasing the wild beasts in the wide and desart mountaines of Tortugall. Lusitania and Biscay, or as some thinke Arragon. Celtiberia, and have seene no recompence and fruit of your travailes and daungers: it is now high time for you to serve in the warres for good pay and rich rewards, and to receive great wages and prises for your labour and painful service; you that have measured so long a voiage, passed over so many mountains  and rivers, and marched through so many armed and warlike nations. Here is the place where fortune hath set down the utmost bound, and pitched the farthest point and limit of your labours; here will she give you a condign recompence and salarie, after you have served and followed the warres the full time, by order and law required. Never thinke that the victorie will be so hardly atchieved, as the warre in name is counted difficult. For oftentimes an enemie of small or no reckoning and regard, hath given a bloodie battaile; yea most noble States, most renowmed and glorious kings, have in the verie turning of an hand beene ouerthrowne. For, setting aside this goodly, gay, and glittering name onely of the Romanes, what is there wherein they are with you to be compared? To say nothing of that continual warfare of yours, for 20 years space, with such valiancie and happy successe: even from Hercules pillers, from the Ocean, from the utmost bounds  of the earth through so many nations of Spain, and most fell and cruell Gauls, ye are come thus farre with victorie. And now shall ye fight with an armie of new and untrained soldiors, who no longer ago than this verie Summer, were beaten, put to the sword, vanquished, and besieged by the Gaules; an armie (to say a truth) not knowne at all to their own captaine, and as little acquainted with him. And to speake of mine owne person, if not borne, yet at leastwise brought up in the

very tent and roiall pavilion of my father (a most noble warriour and renowmed captaine of his time) who have subdued Spaine, conquered Gaule, overcome not only the people of the Alpes, but that which is much more, the very Alpes themselves. Should I make comparison betweene my selfe, and this halfe-yeere-Captaine, who hath abandoned and left his owne campe and armie? Vnto whome, if a man should this day, present the Carthaginians and Romanes together, without their ensignes and colours, hee could not tell, I dare well say, of whether armie hee were the leader and Consull. For I make no small account, I tell you of this (my tall fellowes) that there is not one of you all, who hath not many a time and often seene and beheld my selfe in person, performing some warlike and militarie exploit; and unto whome I (as beholder and eye-witnesse of his valour) cannot recount the time and place of his worthie deed and service. Then yee praised and commended me, then ye rewarded and honoured me with divers gifts and  presents. And even I (who have been a souldior trained up and taught by you, before I was your generall) will march in battaile against them, that know not one another, and are unknowne likewise unto their captaine. Which way soever I turne and cast mine eyes, mee thinkes, I see all full of couragious stomacke, and forcible puissance. The footmen, old beaten and practised souldiours; launces, and men of armes, with bard horses, and the light horsemen likewise, chosen forth of most hardie and valiant Nations: of one side, most faithfull and resolute allies; on the other, doubtie Carthaginians, readie to fight, as well in countries defence, as also for most just and due revenge. Wee come of our selves to make warre, and wee descend into Italie with banners displaied, resolved to fight with so much more courage, as they commonly who are assailants, have greater stomacke and more hope than the defendants. Over and besides, our hearts are  kindled, and our minds pricked on and provoked with sence of injuries and indignities. First and formost they required, that I your Generall should be delivered unto them, as a condemned prisoner at the barre: then they would have had all you that were at the assault of Saguntum, yeelded up into their hands, to be put to most extreame tortures and execution. A people they are, full of all excessive crueltie, insolent and prowd beyond all measure; they would have but all in their power, and at their disposition: they must prescribe, limit, and set downe, with whome wee should warre; with whom we may make peace; restraining and enclosing us within the terms and bounds of hils and rivers; which, forsooth, we must not passe: and they themselves keepe not the limits, which they appoint. Passe not (say they) Iberus in any wise; meddle not at all with the Saguntines; come not neere them. Saguntum standeth upon the river Iberus, step not one foot forward, we advise you. It sufficeth not their turne, that they have taken from us our auncient Provinces, Sicilie and Sardinia, unlesse they may have away Spaine too. And if I should depart from thence, and quit that realme also, they would not stay there, but will passe over streight into Affricke: nay, they have sent over this yeare alreadie two Consuls, the one into Affricke, the other into Spaine: nothing have they left for us, but that which wee can win and hold with the swords point. Well may they bee cowards, and play the idle luskes, having a place of refuge to retire unto, who in their owne countrie and ground may be received, when they take their heels and run through waies without daunger, to save themselves. As for us, it stands us upon to play the men, and to make account of no meane dessignes betweene victorie and death, but upon certaine despaire of all shifts besides, either to obtaine victorie; or if fortune shall faile and give  us the soile, chuse rather to die fighting, than to be killed flying. If this be setled and deepely imprinted in your hearts, if this be your resolution, I will say once againe, The day is yours. A more poignant and sharper goad, than this, to provoke men to victorie, never gave the immortal gods to any whatsoever.
When by these Orations, the souldiours hearts of both sides were inflamed to fight, the Romanes made a bridge over Ticinus: and for defence of the bridge, erected a sconce and forte thereupon. But Anniball while the enemies were busie at worke, sent Maharball with a Comet of Numidians, to the number of 500 light horsemen, to overrun and wast the territories belonging to the allies of the people of Rome: commaunding him withall, to make as great-spare of the Gaules as he could, and to sollicite and persuade their Nobles and Lords unto rebellion. After the bridge was finished, the Romane armie passed over into the Insubrians countrey, encamped  themselves upon certaine hils, five miles off from a village where Anniball also lay in campe: who seeing there was a battaile toward, sent speedily for Maharball backe againe, and the horsemen; and thinking belike, that he could never say ynough to his souldiors, and admonish

 them sufficiently to do well and animate them to fight, he called them all again together to an audience; where he proposed, and promised unto them openly, certain assured rewards, the hope wherof might incite them to fight: namely, Imprimis, that he would indue them with faire lands, in Italy, Astrcke, or Spaine, where they would themselves, to have, and to enjoie to him and to his heires for ever, as free hold in frank tenure, without service: if anyone would chuse to have money rather than land, him he would content with silver. Item, of the Allies, as many as hereafter were desirous to be enfranchised citizens of Carthage, they should have their free burgeosie: and those that had a mind rather to returne home againe, he would endeavour and bring about that he should live so well, as not one of them would wish for to exchange his stare with any of his neighbours and countrimen whatsoever. Last of all, looke what bond-servants attended and  followed their maisters, tothem he promised freedome; and that in lieu of them, hee would deliver againe unto their maisters, two for one, of the slaves taken captives in warre. And that they might be assured, that he would performe all these behests and promises; he held with his left hand a Lambe, and in the right a flint stone, and praied solemnely, That if hee failed herein, Iupiter and the rest of the gods, would so kill him, as hee slew that Lambe: and presently after his praier done, he smote the Lambe on the head, and dasht out the braines. Whereat they all every one, conceived and embraced assured hope unto themselves, that the gods said Amen and were on their side: and supposing that the only stay of enjoying their hopes, and obtaining their rewards, was, because they had not fought alreadie; with one heart and voice they called for battell.
The Romanes for their part, were nothing so cheerefull and lustie: for besides other things,  they were affrighted with new prodigies and feareful fights. For it happened that a Wolfe entred their campe, and after he had worried and tome those that came in his way, escaped unhurt and untouched. Also a swarme of Bees setled upon a tree that grew over the Generall his pavilion. Which straunge tokens being purged and cleered by an expiatorie sacrifice, Scipio with his Cavallerie and darters lightly appointed, went toward the campe of the enemie, to view neere hand their forces, and to observe how many and of what condition and qualitie they were: and there he encountred Annibal, who also was gone forth with his horsmen to descrie and discover the countrie about. At the first they saw not one another, but afterwards, by reason of the thicke dust that rose upon the march of so many men and horses, they knew that enemies approached neere. On both sides the battaillons made a stand, and every man buckled himselfe to the skirmish. Scipio  placed his archers and horsemen of the Gaules in the forfront: the Romanes and strength of allies, he bestowed behind for succours in the reregard. Anniball set in this battaile, his great barbed horses with his launces and men of armes, and strengthned the wings with Numidian horsinen. The very first charge and showt was scarce done, when the archers aforesaid retired among the rereward in the second battaillon: by occasion wherof, the horsemen alone fought a good while in equall battaile: yea and afterwards, because the footmen that were intermingled among troubled and disordred the horses, many either fel, or else alighted from their horses, to go thither where they saw their fellows to be environed and overcharged. The medley became very doubtfull in many places until such time as the Numidians (who were in the wings) wheeling about by little and little, shewed themselves behind the backs of the Romanes; this feareful fight troubled them  greatly, and the feare was encreased by reason of the Consul his hurt; the extream danger wherof, was put by and avoided by the reskew of his sonne (then a verie stripling as yet, and scarce had airy haire upon his face) this youth is he, who had the honour of happy ending this warre, surnamed afterwards (upon the noble victorie and memorable conquest over Anniball and the Carthaginians) Assricanus. But the archers were they that fled fastest away, even those whom the Numidians set upon first. The rest that were horsemen, keeping thicke and close together, recovered the Consull within their files into the mids of them: and protecting him not onely with their weapons, but also with their bodies, brought him backe safe, unto the campe; retiring all the way, neither disorderly, nor like fearefull men overhastily. The honour of saving the Consull, Calius attributeth unto a bondslave of Liguria. But I verily would rather beleeve it of the sonne:  which also the greater number of authors doe affirme, but the common same goeth of the said bondslave. This was the first battaile with Anniball: wherein it easily appeared, that the Carthaginians were better in Cavallerie, and therefore the open plaine field such as were betweene the Po and the Alpes, were not so good for the Romanes to fight in. The night following therfore, Scipio commaunded his soldiors secretly without any noise to trusse up bag and baggage,

and to dislodge: and removed from Ticinus, and made hast to Po: that whiles his boats were not  yet unloosed one from the other, in which (as upon a bridge) he had brought over his armie, he might without any trouble and pursuit of the enemie, conduct the same backe againe. And they came to Placentia before that Anniball knew they were departed from Ticinus: howbeit, hee tooke some of them that made stay on the hether side of the banke, as they were too slow about disjoining and loosening the foresaid bridge of boates: upon which he could not passe over, by reason that when both ends were let loose, the planks and all, went downe the water with the streame. Caelius writeth, that Mago with his horses, and Spanish footmen, presently, swam over the river; and that Anniball himselfe led over his armie at the upper fourds of Po: for which purpose, hee set the Elephants along on arow to breake and beare off the violence and streame of the current. A thing surely that they were hardlyable to doe, who were skilfull and by long  experience knew the nature of the river verie well. For it soundeth not like a truth, that horsemen with their armor and horses safe, could overcome so great a rage of the river, although we should graunt that all the Spaniards gat over upon blown bladders or leather bouges; and besides, they had needed many daies to fetch a compasse for to find the fourds of Po, over which, the armie (laden with cariage) might be conveied. But those authors cary more credit and authoritie with me, who write that scarcely in two daies they found a place to make a bridge (of planks-joyned together) over the river, and that Mago and the Spanish light-horsemen were sent that way over before.
Whiles Anniball on this side the river, staied in giving audience to the embassages of the Gaules, he conducted over the regiments of footmen more heavily armed: in the meane while, Mago and the horsemen, after they had passed the river, marched one About 25 English mile^^ts appeareth before in this booke. daies journey apace toward daies journey apace toward the enemies at Placentia. And Anniball (few daies after) encamped himselfe strongly six miles from Placentia: and the morrow after in the sight of the enemies he put his men in array, and made them offer of battaile. The night following, there was a petie massacre committed in the Romans camp by the Gauls that came to aid: but greater was the garboile and tumult, than the harme indeed. For about 2000 footemen and 200 horsemen, having slaine the warders at the gates, fled away to Anniball: whom he spake courteously unto, and when he had drawne them on, in hope of great gifts and rewards, he dismissed every one into his owne citie and countrie, to sollicite and persuade their countriemen to side with him. Scipio taking that massacre as a foretoken and ouverture to the Gaules revolt in generall; and supposing, that now being once  guiltie and tainted with this offence, they would in a madnesse runne all to take arms and rise. Although still hee were sore of his late wound, yet the night following at the reliefe of the 4 watch, he marched stilly, and removed his campe neere the river Trebia, into the higher countries, and hils, that were more troublesome for men of armes. But he wrought not so closely and without the knowledge of the enemie, as hee did at Ticinus. For Anniball having sent out, first, the Numidian light horse, and then all his Cavallerie; without question had disordered and endammaged the rereward, but that the Numidians for greedinesse of prey and bootie, diverted aside, and turned into the tents, abandoned and forsaken of the Romanes. Where, whiles they spend time in ransaking and rifling everie corner of the campe (and when all was done, could find no pillage worth the stay) the enemie escaped their hands. And when as they had espied that the  Romanes were newly gotten over Trebia, and pitching out a plot for a campe, they intercepted a few of them that lingred about the river, and flew them. Scipio not able now to abide any longer the griefe and paine of his wound, by reason of the shaking and shogging of his bodie as he travailed, and thinking it good to expect the comming of the other Consull his Colleague, (whom he heard alreadie to be sent for out of Sicily) chose out a place neere the river which seemed most safe for to encampe in, and it he fortified. Anniball also lay nor farre off in campe; who as he was proud upon the late battaile of horsemen, so was he perplexed for want of victuals, which scarsitie encreased upon him everie day more and more, as he travailed through the enemies countrie, finding in no place provision aforehand. Whereupon, he went to Clastidium, a towne wherein the Romanes had bestowed and laid up great store of graine: where, as he prepared  with violence to force the towne, there appeared some hope of treason, by corrupting of P. Brundisinus, the captaine of the garison there, and that with no great summe of mony: for in consideration onely of 400 peeces of gold given unto him, Clastidium was betraied unto Anniball: the verie storehouse and garner of corne that the Carthaginians had, all the while they

 were in leaguer neere Trebia. Vpon those prisoners that were taken when the garrison and sort was betraied, he exercised no crueltie, because that in the beginning of his affaires, he would win himselfe a name and opinion of clemencie.
Whiles the warre by land continued thus at Trebia, there had bene some warlike exploits atchieved both by sea and land about Sicilie, and the Ilands that lye against Italie neere unto it, both by Sempronius the Consull, and also before his comming. Twentie gallies with five ranks of ores, and a thousand armed men, were sent from the Carthaginians to invade and wast the coasts of Italie. Nine of them arrived at Liparae, one of the Ilands Aeoliae. Liparae: eight fell with the Iland of Vulcano, another of the same Ilands. Vulcane, and three were driven by tempest into the streights of Sicilie. Against them, being descryed within kenning, there were twelve ships set out from Messina. Messana, by Hiero King of the Saracosians, who  hapned at that time to be in Messana, attending the Romane Consull his comming; and without any resistance made, he bourded those three ships, and brought them away into the haven of Messana. By those that were taken prisoners, it was knowne, that besides the 20. ships aforesaid, sent against Italy, (of which Fleetethey were) 35 gallies of 5 course of ores, made saile for Sicilie, to solicit and persuade the old allies there to revolt. Item, that the especiall point and designe that they shot at, was to seize upon Mansalla, a citie in Sicilie, and a cape there, called the Eye of Sicily. Lilybaeum: but they thought verily that by the same ghust of tempest wherein they were scattered, that other fleete also was cast upon the Iland Aegates. And according to this intelligence, the king from Messana writeth to Aemylius the Romane Pretor or governor of Sicilie, advising him to keepe a strong garison in Lilybaeum: whereupon the Lieutenants and Colonels about the Pretor, were sent from him with all speede to all the cities about, to  give order, that their people might be in readinesse, to keepe good ward, and above all, to hold Lilybaeum sure. And for preparation of war, there went forth a proclamation, that the sailers and mariners should bring into the ships ten dayes provision of victuals and meate readie dressed, to the end that upon the signall given at an houres warning, without all delay, they should a shipboord: Also that all those that dwelt along the coast, should from their Sentinels, watch-towers, and beacons, espie when the enemies fleete approched. Now (albeit the Carthaginians of purpose stayed the course of their ships, that they might come iust before day to Lilibaeum) they were discovered, both for that the Moone shone all night, and also because they came under sayle which they had haulsed up. So soone therefore as the signall was given out of the Sentinels and watch-towers, and alarme cryed in the towne, the mariners were soone embarked, the souldiers also  were bestowed, some to man and guard the walls, and guard the gates, others to serve in the ships. But the Carthaginians perceiving, they were to deale with them that were provided for them, (as being advertised of their comming) forbare to enter the haven untill day, and imployed the time in striking sayles, in untackling their ships, and in preparing them for a battaile. When it was broad day light, they retired into the deepe, to have sea roome enough to fight, and that the enemies ships might have free egresse out of the haven. The Romanes for their part refused not battaile, comforting themselves with the remembrance of the valiant exploits performed in that very place, and trusting also upon the number and valor of their souldiours. They were not so soone launched into the open sea, but the Romanes were desirous to grapple, and to come close to hand-fight: but contrarywise, the Carthaginians held off allose, willing to proceede  by cunning and pollicie, more than by strength and fine force; and to make triall rather of the nimblenesse and agilitie of their ships, than either of the prowesse of men, or goodnesse of armour: for as their fleete was sufficiently furnished and to the full, with a multitude of mariners, so was it ill provided of souldiors: and wheresoever they grappled together, and came to handfight, they had not an egall number of men armed to hold play with the enemies: which being once perceived, the Romanes gathered heart, and redoubled their courage, by reason of their number; the other side againe were discouraged and out of heart, for their default of souldiours. In so much as seven Carthaginian gallies were soone invested round and bourded, the rest fled. Of souldiours and mariners together, 1700 were in them taken; amongst whom, there were three great Gentlemen of Carthage. The Romane fleete stil entier and whole, save one vessell  onely that was bouged and pierced (yet able to be brought back) returned into the heaven.
Presently after this battaile, and before that they of Messana had knowledge thereof, T. Sempronius the Consull arrived at Messana: and as he entred within the sound, king Hiero met him, with a fleete well furnished, and richly decked, and comming forth of his royall ship into the Admirall of the Consuls, he welcomed him, and reioyced for the safe returne of his men and

ships, and prayed God, that his voiage into Sicilie might proove happie and fortunate. Then  shewed he unto him the present estate, and the affaires of the Iland; opened the designements of the Carthaginians; and promised withall, that with as good a mind and found hart, as in the former warre against the Carthaginians, when he was a yong man, he had aided the people of Rome; so now in his old age he would assist them: and for proofe hereof, he would of his owne free cost furnish both the Consuls legions, and also the mariners with corne and rayment. Among other matters, he enformed him how Lilybaeum, and other cities of the sea coast were in great danger, by reason of some among them that desired a change and alteration. Whereupon, the Consull though good to make no delay, but to set saile with all speede to Lilybaeum, whome the king and his royall fleete accompanyed: and as they were fayling, tidings came of the foresaid battaile before Lilybaeum, and how the enemies ships were either scattered and put to flight, or bourded and taken.
The Consull having bid king Hiero adieu, with his fleete set sayle from Lilybaeum, leaving behinde him the Pretor to defend the coast of Sicilie, and crossed the sea himselfe to the Iland Malta. Melita, which was held by the Carthaginians. At whose comming, Amilcar the sonne of Gisga, Captaine of the garrison there, rendered himselfe, and 2000 souldiours within a very few, together with the towne and the Iland. From whence, within few dayes he returned to Lilybaeum: where, the prisoners (excepting certain noble persons of high parentage) were by the Consull and the Pretor both, sold openly in portsale. When the Consul thought Sicilie on that coast sure enough, he set sayle from thence toward the Ilands of Vulcane, for that the bruit went that a fleete of Carthaginians there lay at roade: but there were no enimies to be found about  those Ilands: for it chanced they were alreadie passed over to wast along the river and coast of Italie; and having forayed the territorie of (...), or Vibona. Vibo, they put the citie also in great feare. As the Consull returned back againe to Sicilie, tidings came that the enimie had made rodes into the countrie of Vibona: and he received letters also from the Senate, concerning the comming of Anniball into Italie, and therefore that he should with all speede possible aid and succour his Colleague. The Consull being at once troubled with many cares, presently embarked his armie, and by the Adriatike sea, sent them away to (...) Ariminum. To Sext. Pomponius his Lieutenant, he gave the charge of 25 Gallies for the defence of the territorie of Vibo, and the sea coast of Italie. VVith M. Aemylius the Pretor, he left a fleete augmented to the number of fiftie sayle: which done, and all things set in order in Sicilie, himselfe with ten ships coasted along Italie, and  arived at Sictertio. Ariminum, from whence he put himselfe in his iourney, and marched with one armie to the river Sictertio. Trebia, where he joyned with his fellow Consull. Now were both Consuls, and the whole puissance and force of the Romanes opposed against Anniball, so as it appeared plainely, that either with that powre the empire of Rome might be defended, or else all their hope was gone. Howbeit, one of the Consuls being weakened and discourage with the defeature of his horsemen in one battaile, and dismayed besides with the hurt that he had received in his bodie, desired to have the fight deferred: but the other comming fresh and lustie, and thereby more hardie, would abide no delay.
It fell out so at that time, that the Gaules inhabited all the countrey betweene the two rivers Trebia, and Po: who whiles these two most puissant nations were at strife and warred, held off as  newters, and favoured neither side, making full account of the good will and grace of that part which should have the better. The Romanes because they would now make no stirre, and have no more yrons in the fire, tooke the matter well enough: but Anniball was very much thereat offended, geving out eftsoones, that he was sent for by the Gaules for their deliverance and libertie. Vpon this indignation and displeasure, and for that also he would feede his men with booties, he commaunded 2000 footmen, and a thousand horsemen, most of them Numidians, and some Gaules among, to overrun and spoile all the countrie forward, even to the banks of Po. The Gaules standing in need of helpe, and having untill that time kept themselves in doubtfull tearmes, were forced to turne from those that offered them wrong, and to encline and cleave unto the Romanes that should revenge their injuries and protect them. Whereupon they sent  Embassadours to the Consuls, requesting the Romanes helpe for their land, which by reason of the exceeding fidelitie, and too much loialtie of the inhabitants toward them, was now endaungered. Cornelius liked neither the cause, nor yet the time to deale in such affaires: he had the nation besides in suspition and jealousie, as well for many trecherous parts, as also (in case he would

 or could forget all other leaud pranckes of theirs) for the late disloialtie and falshood of the Boians. Sempronius contrariwise thought it the surest bond to keepe their allies, in faith and allegeance, to defend those that came first to band and side with him. But notwithstanding his Colleague cast doubts and held off, yet he sent his own Cavalletie, and a thousand well neere of footmen darters amongst them, to guard the countrie of Gaule beyond Trebia: who comming suddainely upon the enemies, and charging them at unwares, as they came scattered asunder, and out of order, yea, and most of them laden with spoile, mightily affrighted them, and made a foule slaughter, and pursued them in flight, as farre as to their standing campe, and corps de guard. From whence (neverthelesse) they were beaten backe by the multitude that issued forth: but by new succours from their owne companies, they renued the medley againe. The fight afterward  was doubtfull and variable: and although they made a saving bargain on both parts, yet the common voice gave the honour of victorie (such as it was) to the Romanes rather than the enemies. But no man made a greater matter of it, and reckoned it more to the full, than the Consull himselfe.
He joyed, he made his boast, that lie had gotten the better, with the helpe of the same forces, which under the conduct of the other Consull, came by the worse. And now (faith he) the souldiours are comforted and refreshed well ynough, and none there is but my brother Consull that would have the battaile differred: who no doubt is more hen-hearted than bodily hurt; and for the remembrance and smart of a little green wound, quaketh to hear of the field, and of all things cannot away with edge-tooles. But we must not thus sit still here, and wexe aged for the pleasure of one crasie and sickly person. For what reason is it, that we should drive off longer,  and spend more time in vaine? What other Consull expect we to make up the third? or what armie besides should we looke for? The Carthaginians lie encamped in Italie, and welneer within the view and sight of the citie of Rome: and it is neither Sicilie nor Sardinia taken from them by conquest, nor Spaine on this side Iberus, which they shoot at, to win again: but that the Romans should be thrust out of their native soile and countrie wherein they were borne, that is their drift and dessignement. Oh how deepely (quoth hee) would our fathers sigh, how hartily would they grone, they who were wont to mannage warre about the wals of Carthage, if they should see us their off-spring and children, two Consuls with Consular and roiall armies in the middest of Italie, frighted thus and panting for feare within our campe? And that Anniball hath subdued and brought under his subjection all the countrie betweene the Alpes and Apenninum? These and  such like speeches uttered he to his Colleague, as he sat by his beds side, where he lay sicke: thus spake he, as in an open audience, in the Coss. pavilion and all that quarter, to the souldiours. The time also of the Election of Magistrates at Rome, being so neere at hand, set him forward; for feare, least the war should be deferred unto the new Coss. and the opportunitie withall, of winning all the honor to himselfe-whiles his Collegue continued sick, pricked him on. VVhereupon, for all the contradiction of Cornelius, which he nothing weighed and regarded, commaundement hee gave to his souldiours to be readie, to give battaile anone unto the enemie. Anniball as one that knew and saw well ynough what was best and safest for his enemie, could hardly imagine or conceive any hope to himselfe, that the Consuls would enterprise any thing rashly, or without advisement: but when he understood by hear-say, that which afterwards by good proofe and experience  he found true, namely, that the one of them by nature was hote, hastie, prowd, and furious: and supposing, that he was the prowder and more furious for the late good hand hee had of his forragers; made no doubt and distrust of the happie successe and issue of a battaile, whensoever it should come. Marry, carefull hee was, that no good time and opportunitie presented unto him, should be overslipt: but to trie the hazard and fortune of the field, whiles the enemies soldiors were raw and untrained; and the better and wiser man of the two Generals, was unmeet for service, by reason of his wound as yet uncured; and the courages of the Gaules lustie and froward: for well he wist, that a mightie number of them would the more unwillingly follow, the further they were drawne from their owne home. Anniball, I say, hoping that by these and such like occasions, a battaile would be soone offered; desirous also himselfe to bid battaile, if the enemie  staied long; and being advertised besides by the Gaules, his espials (whom he emploied to hearken out and learne what he desired to know, and thought them more sure, because they served in both campes) that the Romans were readie for the field; then began he (crastie Carthaginian as he was) to seeke out a convenient place for an ambush. Now there was in the mid way betweene, a river running within the borders, having very high banks of either side, and therfore lying close

hidden, and all about overspread with moorie weeds, with briers, brambles, and brushwood, as for  the most part, such forlet places are overgrowne withall. Which when Anniball in person had ridden about, and well viewed, perceiving that it would affoord lurking holes handsome ynough even for horsemen there to be hidden, This shall bee the place (quoth he, to his brother Mago) which you shall keepe. Chuse therefore out of all the horse and foot a hundred lustie tal fellowes of each; and see you repaire with them to me at the first watch, for now is it time to take repast, and to refresh your bodies. And with that he sent out to the campe the criers, to call the souldiours to supper. And long it was not, but Mago was come with his chosen men. I see (quoth Anniball) yee are goodly men of person, and sufficient. And that yee may be as able in number, as hardie in courage, elect yee also out of the cornets of horse and squadrons of foot, nine a peece such as yourselves to sort withall. Mago shall shew you the ground where ye must lie in ambush: you shall find the enemie as blind as beetles, altogether unacquainted with these feats and cunning devises.
Thus Anniball having committed unto Mago^ thousand horsemen, and as many footmen, himselfe betimes in the morning, willed the Numidian Cavallerie, when they were passed over the river Trebia, to ride braving before the gates of the enemies, and by darting and shooting into their guards, to provoke and draw them foorth to fight: with this direction moreover, when the skirmish was begun, to fall off, and seeme to retire by little and little, and so to traine them on this side the river. This charge had the Numidians. But the other captaines, as well of foot as horse, were commaunded to set their companies all to their breakfast: which done, to arm themselves, and with their horses readie sadled, to attend the signall of battaile. Sempronius upon the  al'arme and hurliburlie of the Numidians, as being forward and desirous of fight, first brought forth all his horsemen, and bare himselfe bold and confident in that service; after that, sixe thousand footmen; and at last, all his whole forces; and led them to a place which before, he had dessigned and appointed in his mind. It fell out to be in VVinter, about the middest of December, and a snowie day it was in those parts lying betweene the Alpes and Apenninum. Now by reason of the rivers and moores so neere, both horse and men were exceeding cold: also for that they were hastily on a suddaine, called foorth fasting, and unprovided of all meanes against the cold, they had never a whit of heare left in them: and the neerer they came to the aire and vapour of the river, the sharper cold pinched and pierced them through. But when as once they followed upon the Numidians that gave backe, and were entred into the water (which by reason  of the raine that fell by night was risen breast-high) they were not so soone gotten out againe of the river, but all their bodies began to chill, and be stiffe againe for cold, that scarcely they could hold their weapons: and withall, as the day went furtheron, for very hunger they fainted. But Anniball his souldiours, who in the meane time had made fires before their tents, and had oyle sent them to every companie, for to supple and soften their joints and lims, had taken their repast, and eaten at leasure; when they heard say, that the enemies were passed the river, with hearts couragious and bodies fresh and lustie, take them to their weapons, and came foorth to fight in ordinance of battel. The Baleares, and light armed men, to the number almost of 8000, he raunged before the standards in the front: after them he placed the footmen, better appointed and armed to the proofe, even the very strength and manhood of all his forces: about the wings he set 10000  horsemen, and behind those wings, hee devided and appointed his Elephants both on the one side and the other.
The Consull Sempronius seeing his horsemen following the chase on the spur, and out of order; and how at unwares they were charged againe by the Numidians, who upon a suddain turned and made head upon them, sounded the retreat: and when they were rallied about him, hee compassed his footmen with them. The Romanes were in number 18000, of Allies and Latines 20000, besides the aides of the Pays de Main. Cenomanes: which Nation of the Gaules onely, continued faithful and true to the Romans. VVith these forces came they into the field, and began the barrell: The first charge of the skirmish was given by the Ilanders of Baleares, upon whom, when the legions made head with greater violence, their light armed men were quickly brought into the wings: which was a cause that the Romane horsemen presently were surcharged and distressed. For where as of themselves they were but 4000 horse, and hardly able to withstand the shock of ten thousand horsemen of theother, the Romanes also were wearied, but most of the Carthaginians fresh and untainted: over and besides, they were overwhelmed with a cloud (as it were) of

 darts, flong and shot by the Beleare Ilanders: Mooreover the Elephants which appeared alost from the hinmost ends of the wings frighted the horses especially, and not onely with the straunge sight, but also with as uncouth a sent and favor; made them flie everie way. The battaile of the Infanterie was egall in courage of heart, rather than in strength of bodie which the Carthaginians, (as having a little afore taken repast) brought fresh with them into the field: but contrariwise the Romanes were fasting and wearie, and for cold even starke and benummed. Howheit their stomacks would have served to have held out and withstood to the end, if they might have fought with footmen onely. But both the Baleares, having disordred the horsemen, flanked them with their shot, and also the elephants by this time were entred into the middle battaillon of footmen: and withall, Mago and the Numidian light horse (so soone as this battaillon was unawares gone past  their ambushment and lurkingholes) start up and arose from behind, and put them in exceeding trouble and fright. Yet for all these inconveniences and disvantages (so many on everie side) the maine battaile a good while stood unmoveable and stirred not, but kept the array; and especially (beyond the expectation of all men) against the Elephants. For certaine footmen placed for the purpose, by flinging of darts forced them to turne head: and when they were once turned from wards, they followed hard upon them, pricking and gaulling them under the tailes, in which place by reason of the tender skin they are soon wounded. Whom when Annibal saw thus feared and readie to turne upon their owne part, from the maine battaile to the flancks and outsides, he commanded them to be driven to the left wing upon the Gauls that came to aid, and presently enforced them to run away. The Romanes seeing their auxiliarie Gaules put to flight, were driven  into a new feare. Whereupon fighting now as it werein a ring and round on both sides, there were among them to the number almost of ten thousand, who seeing no way else to escape, brake through the middle battaillon of the Africanes, which was strengthned with the aide of the Gaules, and that, with a great slaughter of their enemies: and seeing they neither could returne into their campe (the river being between) nor for the raine well discerne how to succour their fellowes, they tooke the way straight to Placentia. After this, the rest brake forth in all parts. They that tooke the river either perished in the streames and whirlepooles: or such as made stay to enter, were by the enemie overtaken and slaine. But as many as here and there fled skattering through the fields, following the footing and tracks of the battaillon that retired backe, came to Placentia. Some for feare of the enemie, aduentured boldly to take the river, and being once  over, recovered the campe. The raine and snow together, and the intollerable cold killed many as well men as beastes: and in manner all the Elephants. The Carthaginians followed the enemies in chase as farre as Trebia, and there gave over: and returned into the campe so clumsie and frozen, as scarcely they felt the joy of their victorie. By reason whereof, the night following, when as the gard of the Romane campe, and the remnant of that great companie of soldiors passed Trebia with float-boats and flat barges, the Carthaginians either perceived them not indeed for the noise the tempesteous raine made, or for wearinesse and sore wounds were not able to stirre, and therfore made semblance, as though they knew not of it. And so whiles the Carthaginians were at rest, the armie was by Scipio the Consull brought (in a still march) to Placentia: and from thence having crossed the Po, came to Cremona, because one Colonie alone should not be  charged with the wintering of two armies at one time.
Vpon this defeature and overthrow, there arrived such fearefull tidings to Rome, that they beleeved verily and looked for no other but that the enemie would come with banner displaied streight to the verie cittie: and that there was no hope or help left behind to defend their gates and wals from assault and violence. For seeing that the one Consull was vanquished at Ticinus, and the other also, who was called unto him from out of Sicily; since both Consuls, and two consular armies were thus defeated, what other captains, what Legions remained now to be sent for, to aid? As they were in this agonie and feare, Sempronius, the Consull came home: who with verie great daunger had passed through the enemies Cavallerie, which was spread heere there all about, to fetch in booties; and more by venterous hardinesse than good advise and hope, either to misse  them unespied, or to resist if he had hapned upon them, he got away. And after he had held the assemblie for electon of the Consuls (the onely thing above all other for that present most desired) he returned into his standing campe to winter in. Now there were created Consuls, Cn.Servilius, and Cn. Flaminius the second time.
Howbeit the Romanes were not in quiet within their wintering campe: for the Numidian

horsmen raunged about, and made excursions into every quarter, and (those who troubled and  empeached them, more than they) the Celtiberians and Portugals. Whereby all convoy of victuals from everie part was stopped, but onely that which came by the Po, in Keeles and such like vessels. Neere to Placentia there was a merchants towne, both fortified strong (...) and also well furnished with a good garrison: upon hope to force that castle or towne, Anniball went with his horse and foot, lightly armed; and supposing that to cary the matter coyertly, would availe much to the effecting of his purposed enterprise, he came upon them in the night; howbeit he was not so close and secret, but he was descried by the watch: who sodainly set up such an al'arme, that it was heard as farre as Placentia. Whereby, the Consull somewhat before day was there with his Cavallerie, having commaunded the Infanterie to march on after, raunged in a square battaillon. In the meane while, the horsemen skirmished, wherein Anniball was hurt, and departed out of the medley, by which meanes the enemies were frighted, and the castle and hold manfully defended. After few daies that he had taken his ease, before he was well cured of his wound, he went forward to assault Vicunvie. That was a towne also of merchandise (or mart towne) and had beene fortified by the Romanes in the Gaules warre. Whereupon, the people bordring thereabout on everie side, used thither to make repaire, and much frequented the same: and even then for feare of rodes and excursions many of the pesants and rural people retired themselves thither for refuge. This multitude (such as they were) upon the report of the valiant holding and defence of the fort by Placentia, were encouraged, and tooke armes, and went forth to encounter Anniball. And in the mid-way they chaunced to affront him and skirmish, in no battaile ray, but as they marched disorderly: whereas therfore they were on the one side, none but a  rude and confused sort; and on the other side, both a captaine that might trust his soldiours, and soldiors also that might reckon upon their captain, there were to the number of 35000, discomfited and put to flight, even by a few of their enemies. The morrow after, they yeelded themselves, and received a garrison within the wals: and so soone as upon commandement to give up their armour, they had obeied and so done; presently a signal was given to the conquerors to sade and spoile the towne, as if it had been forced by assault: where there was not forgotten and omitted any calamitie whatsoever, that might afford in such as case, memorable matter and sufficient argument for writers to record. So pitifull examples were practised upon the poore seely wretches, of all loosenesse and lust, crueltie, and inhumaine pride and outrage. And these were the expeditions and emprises of Anniball atchieved for this wintertime.

After this, the soldiours tooke repose, but no longer than the intollerable cold lasted: For imimmediatly upon the verie first and doubtfull tokens of spring, he departed from his wintring hold, and led his armie into Tuscane, purposing to adioine unto him (either by force or love) that nation also, as wel as the Gauls and Ligurians. But as he passed over Apeninum, there arose so terrible a storme and tempest, and surprised him, that it surmounted well neer the foule trouble and encombrance endured in the Alpes. For the wind and raine together did beat and drive upon their verie faces. At the first, for that either they were to lay away their armour, or else in striving and labouring to march on against the weather, and by the whirlepuffes of wind turned round about, and readie to beeborne downe, they stood still: but when as nowe the violence and furie of the storme, stopped their breaths, and suffered them not to take their wind at will, they were faine to  turne their backes, and sit them downe on the ground for a time. Then see, the skie thundred amaine, and made an horrible noise, and amid those terrible crackes redoubled, it lightened thick. Whereupon, they lost their hearing and seeing; and for feare, all of them became astonied. At length it poured downe, and thereby the wind and storme encreased more forceablie upon them. Whereupon they were driven to this necessitie, even to pitch their camp'in that verie place where they were so suddainely caught and overtaken by tempest. But that was to them the beginning of a new toile and travaile: for neither could they spread and display ought, nor pitch any thing surely: neither would that which was pight downe, continue and abide the wind, which rent, tare, and broke everie thing, and hurried it cleane away. And within a while, the water that fell, and by reason of the wind was raised alost, being congealed once upon the cold tops of the hils, turned into a kind of haile and snow together, and came upon them with such a force, that leaving all things els, the men were forced to lie along, groveling upon their faces, rather stifled and smothered; than covered with their hillings. Hereupon insued a frost, so violent and outrageous, that of that miserable and pittifull heape of men and beasts, that lay there along, there was not one

 for a good while could raise and lift up himselfe when hee would; by reason, that for starke cold their sinewes were benummed; that they could hardly bend and bow their joints. Afterwards, at length, when with bestirring and chausing their limmes, they gat some heat, and came againe to themselves and that here and there in some places they began to make fires; every one that had no meanes so to doe, ran and fled to the succour and helpe of others. Thus for two daies they remained there pinned up as if they had beene besieged. Many a man and beast, and seven Elephants also of them that remained after the battaile at Trebia, were starved and perished.
By occasion hereof, Anniball departed from Apenninus, back againe toward Placentia: and when he had marched ten miles on his way, he sate him downe and encamped. The morrow after, he led against the enemie 12000 foot, and 5000 horse. Sempronius the Consull also, beeing  now returned from Rome, refused not battaile: and the same day, the enemies were distant but three miles asunder. The morrow after they fought on each side most fiercely and courageously, and with variable event and fortune. At the first onset, the Romanes had the better hand, so farre forth, as that not onely in fight they overcame their enemies, but also after they had discomfited them, and put them backe, they chased them into their campe, and anone assailed the same. Anniball having ordained some few to defend the rampier and the gates, retired the rest thicke and close together into the mids of the campe, and commaunded them to give care, and bee intentive to the signal, when he would have them issue forth. Now was it the Three of the clock after noone. ninth hower of the day, when the Romane Consull having toiled and wearied his souldiours to no purpose, and seeing no hope to win the campe, sounded the retreat. Which so soone as Anniball heard, and saw the  fight withall to slake and waxe cold, and the enemie retired backe from the campe, presently sallied forth himselfe with the whole strength of his Infanterie, for hee had sent out his horsemen both on the right hand and the left after the enemies. There had not beene lightly a more fierce and cruell battaile strucken, and more memorable, for the finall mischeefe of both parts, if the day would have given them time to have fought longer. But the night parted the medley, which was hotely begun with exceeding stomacke and courage. Whereupon, the confronting and charging one of another, was more eager, than the slaughter bloudie betweene them; and as the fight in manner was egall, so they parted with losse alike. For of each side there died above sixe hundred footmen, and halfe as many horsemen. But the losse on the Romans side was greater than in proportion of the number, because certaine of the degree and calling of knights, and  five Colonels, and three Captaines of the Allies, were slaine.
After this iourney, Anniball went into the countrey of the Ligurians, and Sempronius to Luca. To welcome Anniball at his first comming into Liguria, there were delivered unto him two Romane Questors or Treasurers, Cn. Fulvius, and L. Lucretius, who were intercepted by the Ligurians, and taken in a traine of ambush, with two Colonels, and five others besides, whose fathers by calling were as good as Senators fellowes: and this was done, because he should assure himselfe the better, that the peace and amitie contracted with them, would be faithfully kept and observed.
Whiles these things thus passed in Italie, Cn. Scipio who was sent into Spaine with a fleete and armie for sea and land; having set saile from the mouth of Rhodanus, and compassed the mountaines  Pyrenei, arrived at a place called Emporia: where he disbarked and landed his forces, and reduced unto the Romane empire all the countrey, beginning at the Laceranes, and so from thence all the sea coast as farre as to the river Iberus, partly by renewing the ancient leagues, and partly by devising meanes to contract new. Whereupon, there rose a great name of him for his clemencie; whereby he prevailed not only with the States by the sea side, but also amongst the inlanders and mounteiners, even to the nations that were more fierce and savage: with whom he not onely made peace, but also wrought them so, that they tooke armes in his quarell; and there were levied from among them, certaine strong cohorts and bands for to aid and succour him. Hanno, whom Anniball had left for defense of that province, was not ignorant hereof: and therefore, before all was gone, and the countrey alienated, he thought good to meete with this mischiefe: and  having pitched his campe in sight of the enemies, set his men in ordinance of battaile. The Romane captaine likewise resolved not to deferre the fight; knowing that so, he might be forced to encounter both with Hanno and Asdruball, and rather yet he desired to deale with them one after the other single, than at once with both. But this battaile was not so much dangerous. Sixe thousand enemies were left behinde slaine, and two thousand taken prisoners, together with

those that were left for the gard of the camp. For both the camp was forced and woon, and also the  General himself with certain guards was taken prisoner. Moreover Stissum, a towne neere unto the camp, was woon by assault: howbeit, the spoile and pillage of the towne were matters of small worth and value, namely, the houshold stuffe, and such pelfe and trumpery of barbarous people, and certaine poore base slaves. It was the camp that enriched the souldiers: by reason that not onely the armie which was now vanquished, but that also which with Anniball served in Italie, had left behind them about Pyreneus, all good things to speake of, that they set store by, because they would go lightly, and not be encombred with cariages. Before any certaine report of this overthrow came to Asdruball, he had passed over Iberus with 8000 footemen, and 1000 horsemen, as purposing, to make head against the Romanes at their first comming: but when he heard how the field was lost, and the camp withall, he turned his iourney to the sea. And not farre  from Tarragona. Tarracon, he found the souldiers of the Armado, and the mariners besides, wandering and straggling over the fields (for usuall it is, that happie successe should breede carelesse negligence) whereupon he sent out his horsemen every way, and with great slaughter and flight he chased them to their ships: and not adventuring to make any longer stay thereabout, for feare to be surprised by Scipio, he retyred back to the other side of Iberus. Scipio also upon the first report of these new enemies, having rallied his forces together in great hast, after he had slightly chastifed a few captaines, and left behinde him a small garrison at Tarracon, returned with his fleete to Emporiae. He had no sooner departed from thence, but Asdruball was there in his place; and having induced and incited the State of the Ilergetes (who had given hostages to Scipio) for to revolt and rebell, even with their owne youth wasted the territories of all  those that continued faithfull confederates to the Romanes. Afterwards, when Scipio was roused once out of the place where he wintered, the enemie retyred againe, and quit all the countrey on that side Iberus. Then Scipio having in hostile manner invaded the countries, abandoned and left by him that was the author and cause of their rebellion, and by that meanes the nation likewise of the Ilergetes, after he had driven them all within Athanagia, which is their capitall towne, he layd siege unto it round about, and within few dayes brought the whole seignorie of the Ilergetes under his obedience: and besides a greater number of hostages than before (which they were constreined to deliver) he condemned them in a good round summe of money. From thence he went forward against the Auseranes, neere to Iberus, being associates also to the Carthaginians: and having beleaguered their citie, he forlaied and intercepted the Lacetanes as they came by night to succour their neighbours, not farre from the towne, even as they were at the point to enter in. There were slaine of them 12000, and the rest being welneere all disarmed, fled every way scattering here and there over the fields home to their houses. All the help and defense that they had who were within, was only the foule and cold winter weather, evermore naught and hurtfull to assailants that lye forth. The siege lasted thirtie dayes, during which time, seldome fell the snow lesse than foure foote deepe, and so covered the pentises and mantilets of the Romanes, that when the enemies flung fire sundrie times thereupon, that alone saved the same, and nothing else. In the end, upon the departure of their Prince Amursitus, who was fled to Asdruball, they yelded, upon condition to pay 3750. pound sterling, according to the lesse Attick Talent. twentie talents of silver, and so Scipio returned to Tarracon, there to winter.

But that yeare, at Rome and about the citie, were many strange and prodigious signes seene, or at leastwise (a thing usuall when mens minds are once touched with religion, and given to make scruple) many were reported, and soone beleeved. Among which, this was one; that a babe of condition free borne, and but halfe yeere old, cryed with a loud voice in the hearbe market lo Triumphe. Also in the beasts market, an Oxe of himselfe undriven, climbed up to the third lost or storie of an house, and from thence being frighted with the stirre and noyse of the dwellers by, cast himselfe downe. Moreover, there was seene in the welkin or element, the resemblance of a navie of ships: and the temple of Lady The goddesse Hope. Spes, standing in the hearbe market, was smitten with lightning. Likewise at Lanuvium the speare of Iuno shooke and brandished of it selfe: and a Raven flew into Iunoes church, and lighted upon the very Shrine or Alter of Iuno. In the territorie  of Pescara. Amiternum, in many places were seene men as it were in white garments, but only a farre off; for as folke went neerer and neerer, they appeared not, and could not be met withall. In Picenum it rained stones: and at Cere the lots were found diminished; and in Gaule, a VVolfe drew forth a watchman his sword out of his scaberd, and caryed it away. For other prodigious tokens,

 order was given to the Decemvirs to peruse the books of Sibylla. But for the raining of stones in Picenum, there was ordeined a Novendial feast for nine dayes: and for the expiation of the other prodigies, the whole citie in manner was occupied in their devotions. And now above all other things the citie was solemnly purged, and greater beasts killed in sacrifice in the honor of those gods, for whom they were ordeined, and a present of gold weighing 1440 lib. Fierl. 40 pound, was caried unto Iuno at Lanuvium. And the dames and matrons of Rome erected a molten image of brasse for Iuno in Aventinum: and at Caere where the lots were diminished, was appointed a Lectisterne, and a procession or supplication to Fortune in Algidum. At Rome also there was a Lectisterne solemnified to Iuventa [the goddesse of youth] and a solemne procession at the church of Hercules. Moreover, expresse commaundement was given to all the people, to make procession  and supplication at every altar and Shrine of their gods. And to god Genius, they sacrificed five greater beasts. And C. Attilius Serranus the Pretor, was commaunded to pronounce a solemne vow, in case the Commonweale continued in the same good estate, ten yeares, and decayed not. These portentuous prodigies thus expiated, and vowes made according to Sibyls bookes, eased mens hearts mightily of their religious feare. Then one of the elect Consuls, to wit, Flaminius, to whome were allotted those Legions which wintered at Placentia, sent an Edict with letters to the Consull, that the armie should bee in campe at Ariminum, upon the 15 day of March. Ides of March. His purpose was, to enter into his Consulship in the province, remembring the old contentions and debates which hee had with the Nobles, first when hee was a Tribune of the Com. and afterwards when he was Cos. as wel about the Consulship (of which,  they would have deprived him) as also, about the triumph, which they denied him. Hated he was besides of the Senate, for the new Act or Law, which Q. Claudius (a Tribune of the Commons) had made, so prejudiciall to the Senate; and onely C. Flaminius, of all the Nobles, supported it and set it forward: namely, That no Senator, or father of a Senator, should have a ship at sea, bearing above Of eight Tun and better. 300 Amphores: for that was thought sufficient to transport their commodities and fruits to Rome, rising out of their lands and livings. And as for all other gaine by trafficke, it was not beseeming a Nobleman and Senator. This matter having been debated with great contention, caused the proposer of this law (Flaminius) to incur much evill will and displeasure with the Nobilitie, but it procured him the affection and love of the Commons, and in processe of time a second Consulship. Supposing therefore, that with iterating the Auspices, and putting  him to take the presages anew by the flight of birds, and by finding other delaies, upon occasion of the Latine holy daies, and one businesse or other belonging to the Consuls charge, they would detaine and keepe him backe still in the cittie; he set a countenance, as though hee would take a journey like a private person, and so departed secretly into the Province. Which thing, when it was once blazed abroad, made the Nobles who were afore maliciously bent against him, to be angrie anew; and they gave out, that it was not the Senate onely, that C. Flaminius warred against, but the immorrall gods also. For hee, who before time had been made Cos. without regard of taking Auspices, and having the approbation of the birds, when he was reclaimed and called both by God and man out of the field, obeied not: and now, having a heavie conscience, surcharged with offences past, hath fled from the Capitoll and the solemne nuncupation and making  of vowes, for that he would not upon the ordinarie day of entering his Magistracie, visite the Temple of Iup. Opt. Max. nor (because he was odious to the Senate, and they likewise hated of him alone) see them, and aske their advise and counsaile; nor proclaime the Latine holydayes, and celebrate to Iup. Latialis, the solemne yearely sacrifice upon the Alban hill: ne yet, after he had entred into the Capitoll by the luckie flight and token of birds, pronounce his vowes there, and depart from thence in his rich coate-armor toward the province. They sayd moreover, that he was slipt and stolne secretly away like a drudge that followeth the camp, without the ensignes and ornaments of authoritie, without Sergeants and officers, as if hee had bene banished, and so left his countrie, minding belike to enter his governement more for the honor and dignitie of Ariminum than of Rome, and to put upon him his purple robe of estate, embrodred with  skarlet rather in an hostelrie, and common Inne, than in his owne house. They all every one opined and judged, that he should be recalled and brought back againe peremptorily, yea and be forced personally at home to performe all duties belonging to God and man, before that he went forth to the province and to the armie. About this embassage (for they thought meete to send embassadors) went Q. Terentius, and M. Antislius: but they prevailed no more than in his

former Consulship the letters missive had done, which were sent from the Senate. A few dayes  after he entred his office, and as he was sacrificing, the calfe or yong bullock being alreadie stickt, got away from the hands of the sacrificers, and spotted many of the standers by with bloud: But they that stood farre off, not knowing what the matter was of that sturre, fled away, and ran too and fro: which of most men was judged a foretoken and presage of some great affright and trouble. After this, when he had received the two legions of Sempronius the Consull of the yeare before, and other two, of C. Attilius the Pretor, hee began to conduct his armie into Tuskane by the way of Apenninum.


THE XXII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the two and twentith Booke.
ANniball came into Hetruria, after he had lost one of his eies by occasion of continuall watching in the marishes, through which he marched foure daies and three nights, without taking his repose and sleepe. C. Flaminius the Consull, a rash and inconsiderate man, went forth, contrarie to the warrant and approbation of the Auspices, and caused the field-ensignes to be digged out of the ground, when other wise they could not bee plucked up: and being mounted  on horsebacke, fell with his head forward from his horse. His fortune was to bee surprised in (...) ambush by Anniball, which he had laid for him neere the Lake called Thrasymenus: where be and his armie were defaited, and fell upon the edge of the sword. Sixe thousand Romans, who brake through and made an escape, notwithstanding the faithfull promise that Maharball had made unto them, were by the falsbood of Anniball put in prison. When upon the newes of this overthrow, there was great mourning and sorrow at Rome, there fortuned two mothers to die for very joy, that beyond their hope and expectation, they recovered their sons, and saw them alive, whom they supposed to have been slaine in that field. In regard of the foresaid defeature, there was vowed a sacred spring, according to the bookes of Sibylla. After this, when Q. Fabius Maximus the Dictator, sent against Anniball, would not come to a set battaile with him, for feare he should hazard in fight the souldiors lately terrified and daunted with adverse overthrowes, against an enemie lustie and prowd of so many victories, and by making head, and opposing himselfe onely against Anniball, empeached his attempts and enterprises: M. Minutius the Generall of his horse, a man of a prowd spirit and brainesicke humour, with charging the Dictator, and accusing him unto the people for a fearfull and cowardly person, prevailed so much, that by vertue of their power and authoritie, he was ioined in equall commission and command with the Dicta
tor. By meanes whereof, the armie and the forces were parted indifferently betweene them, and Minutius gave the enemie battaile in a place of great disadvantage, whereupon his Legions were distressed, and in great hazard: but Fabius Maximus came in time to his rescue with his part of the armie, and saved him out of the present danger. By occasion of which good turne, he was overcome, and his stomacke came downe, in so much, as hee was content to ioin in campe with him, and saluted him by the name of Father: commanding all his own soldiors, to do the same to their fellow souldiours under Fabius Maximus. Anniball after hee had wasted and overrun Campaine, chaunced betweene the towne Casilinum, and the mountaine Calicula to be enclosed and compassed about by Fabius: but by a devise of tying little bavins of drie stickes unto oxes hornes, and setting them on fire, put to flight and chased away the guards of the Romanes, which kept the streights of Calicula, and by that meanes gat through the passage of that forrest. The same  Anniball, at what time as he made havocke and burned all the territorie about, for bare to touch the land of Q. Fabius Maximus the Dictator, to the end, that he might bring him into suspition of treason to the State. After this, when Aemylius Paulus, and Terentius Va^ro were Consuls and Generals of the armie, there was a battell fought with Anniball, to their exceeding losse and utter overthrow, neere unto a village called Canna. At which field there were slaine of Romanes, 45000, together with Paulus the Consulls and fourescore Senatours, besides thirtie other brave personages that had beene;

 Consuls or Pretours, or at least wise Aediles of State. After this defeature, when the Noble yong gentlemen of the citie (for very despaire of the State) were in counsell to abandon Italie, P. Cornelius Scipio (a Colonel, who afterwards was surnamed Affricanus) held his naked sword over their heads, as they sat in consultation, and sware a great oth, that be would repute him for a mortal enemie, that would not sweare after him: and hereby effected thus much at their hands, that by vertue of an oth, they obliged themselves not to depart out of Italy and forsake their native countrie. This booke containeth besides, the fright and lamentation made within the cittie, and the affaires and exploits atchieved in Spaine, with more happie successe. Opimia and Feronia, two professed vestall virgins, were convicted of Incest, and condemned. By reason of the small number of soldiors and serviceable men for the warres, there were 8000 slaves put in armes. The Captives taken prisoners in the warres, when they mought have beene redeemed, were not ransomed for all that. A solemne meeting there was for Varro his welcome home, with great thanksgiving, because he had not despaired of the Commonweale.

NOW aproched the spring, when Hanniball removed out of his wintering holds, after he had affaied before to passe over the Apennine, but in vaine, by reason of the intollerable cold; where also he staied in great feare and danger of his owne person. By which time, the Gaules, who having risen up in armes on his side, for hope of spoile and pillage, seeing now in stead of harrying and carying away of booties out of other mens lands, that their owne countrie was become the place of the warre, troubled and molested as well with the one armie as the other which abode there all winter, turned their hatred and malice from the Romanes backe againe upon Anniball: In such sort, as after he had beene sundrie times forelaid by the secret traines of their princes, and  in danger to be murdred, he escaped onely by the deceiptfulnesse and falshood practised among their owne selves. For with what incononstancie and levitie they had conspired together, with the same they bewraied one another, and detected the conspiracie unto him. By meanes whereof, as also by changing one while his apparrell, another while the bonet and attire of his head, by errour also and mistaking, he avoided the perill, and saved himselfe. But so it was, that even this feare in which he stood, caused him to remove the sooner out of his wintering harbour.
About the same time Cn. Servilius entred into his Consulship at Rome, on the 15 day of March. Ides of March: where, after he had propounded to the Senate concerning the affaires of the Common-weale, the hatred and malice which the LL. had conceived against C. Flaminius, was renewed afresh. For they said, that they created two Consuls, and had but one. For that lawfull government and authoritie  which Flaminius should have had, that auspice of Magistracie which was meet and due, he ought to have caried with him from the cittie, from the publike and private habitations, after he had celebrated the Latine holidaies, and offred sacrifice upon the mountaine Albane, and made his solemne vowes accordingly, within the Capitoll. But since for default herein, he departed from the cittie a private person, the Auspices of government could not follow and accompanie him: and being gone without them, he might not lawfully take the same anew in forren soile. Now there were sundrie straunge prodigious tokens besides, reported from many places at once, which much encreased their feare; namely, that in Sicily certaine soldiours javelins were on fire: an (...) Sardinia, a horsemans walking staffe, as he went the round, and visited the watch upon the wall, burned in his hand: That upon the strand and sea shore, there were  seene many light fires, so as all the costes shone again with all: That two shields swetblood: That (...) ere some soldiours smitten dead with lightning: That the circle and bodie of the sunne appeared in sight lesse in compasse and eclipsed: Also, that there fell from the skie burning (...) Preneste: And at Arpi there were seen in the Element, Palme or Date trees: and the sun (...) with the moone: Moreover, at Capena two moones arose and shewed in the day time: and that at Cere, the waters ran mingled with blood: That the verie fountaine of Hercules yeelded and cast up water bespotted with blood: That as folke reaped in Antium fields, certain bloodie ears of corne light into their baskets: At Falerij the heaven seemed to cleave in sunder and open, and to shew as it were a great chink; and out of the place where it gaped, there shone a great light: That the lots of their own selves diminished, and one fell out of the pitcher, with theis inscription. Mars brandisheth and shaketh his speare. And about the same time at Rome the Statue of Mars swet in the high way Appia, neere to the images of the wolves: and at Capua the welkin seemed to be on fire, and the forme of a moone to fall downe in a raine or shewer. After this, men gave beleefe also to prodigies of farre lesse importance: namely, that some mens gotes, in steed of haire bare, wooll: that a hen turned into a cocke, and a cocke proved to be a hen. These things as folke reported,

were declared abroad, and the authors brought into the Senate: where the Consul propounded  before the LL. and required their advise, as touching matters of religion. Wherupon, there passed a decree that these straunge tokens, some should be purged and expiated with greater sacrifices, other with young sucklings: and that for three daies there should be supplications at all the Shrines and Alters of the gods. As for other matters, after that the Decemvirs had looked into their bookes, such provision was to be made, as the gods in their verses should foretell to stand with their pleasure and contentment. So, by the advertisements and directions of the Decemvirs it was decreed as followeth: First and foremost, that to Iupiter there should be made of gold a thunderbolt or forme of lightning weighing 1^00.li.ster. 50 pounds, and another of silver, presented unto Iuno and Minerva. Item to Iuno Regina there should be sacrifice offred in the mount Aventine, and to Iuno Hospita in Lanuvium, of greater beastes: Item that the dames of Rome, making  a contribution (everie one to their abilitie) of a summe of money, should offer an Oblation unto Iuno Regina and bring it into Aventine, and there solemnise a Lectisterne: Item, that the verie Libertine or enfranchised women also, should according to their power, lay their money together and make a present for the goddesse Feronia. These things accomplished, the Decemvirs sacrificed in the market place of Ardea, and for that purpose killed greater beasts. Last of all, by direction out of the books of Sybilla, now in the month December, they celebrated a sacrifice at Rome in the temple of Saturne: and commandement was given that a Lectisterne should be solemnized (which bed and table the Senators themselves spred and set out with all the furniture) and a publicke feast besides, in any hand: and throughout the citie both by day and night were proclaimed the solemne Saturnalia: and order directed, that the people should hold and observe that day, as holy and festivall, for ever.
Whiles the Consull was busied at Rome in pacifying the gods, and levying soldiours, Anniball (who was departed from his wintering fort, because the rumor ran that Flaminius the Consul was come as farre as Arretium) albeit he saw another way more readie and commodious (though it were somewhat farther about) yet chose that which was the neerer, through the marishes, whereas the river Arnus at the same time had overflowed his bankes more than usually. As for the Spaniards, Affricanes, and all his old beaten souldiours (the verie flower and strength of his armie) he commaunded to march formost together with all their baggage and cariages among them, to this end, that if they were forced any where to stay, they should not faile and want necessaries about them: the Gaules he appointed to follow next: and because he was desirous  that those kind of people, should be in the middle ward, and the horsemen likewise to go after them hindmost in the reregard, he charged Mago with the lighthorsmen of the Numidians, to guard the armie and keepe them close together in their march, but especially to have ancie to the Gaules, and keepe them in, for feare least they for tediousnesse of travaile, and wearinesse of long way (as they are a nation tender enough and not able to abide any hardnesse) should either slinke away, or else stand still. They of the vantgard; what way soever the guides led them and went afore, passed through thicke and thinne, waded through great rivers and deepe quicksands; and albeit they were mired and in manner overwhelmed and (...) up of bogs and muddie quavemires, yet they followed still their colours. But the Gaules, if their feet chanced to slip, could not hold themselves, and when they were downe, they were not able to arise out of  the durtie sloughes and holes neither could any of them comfort his corps with courage, (...) his heart with hope of better. Some of them hardly haled their heavie hammes, and drew with much a doe their lazie legs and lagging limmes after them: others, whose hearts were (...) tedious toile and travaile, when they were once downe, lay dying amongst the jades and (...) beastes, which also were couched along every where. But that which hurt and undid them most, was their want of sleepe, for they had watched foure daies and three nights continually without a winke. Now when as the water had so coverd and overspred every place, that they could find no drie ground, to lay their wearied bodies on, they were faine to pile their packs one upon another in the waters, and to cast themselves aloft upon them. All the way as they went, they might see the garons and horses lie everie where on heapes overthrowne and dead: which served them a while, in steed of couches for want of other meanes, who sought but onely for some thing or  other, that appeared above water to repose themselves upon, for to take a nap. As for Anniball himselfe, (who had already an infirmitie in his eies, which came first by the distemperature of the spring season, now hot and then cold) he was mounted upon an Elephant, the onely Elephant

 that lest alive: this beast bare him a good way above the water: but by reason that he had overwatched himselfe, and the moist nights besides together with the dampe and mist of the foggie fens stuffed his head and filled him full of thewmes, and because neither time nor place served for any cure and to take physicke, he lost one of his eyes quite.
Thus after many a man lost, many a horse piteously perished, when he was gotten out at length of these foule fennes and miry marishes, in the first dry ground that he came unto, he pitched his camp: and was certified by his espials and vauntcourriers whom he had sent out before, that the Romane armie lay about the wals of A^rretium. Then with great diligence and carefull enquirie he endeavoured, to found the entent and dessignes of the Consull, to know the costes and site of the countrie; to hearken what waies he travailed; to learne what forces he had; to  be advertised how he was stored and provided of victuals; and to understand all other things expedient for his purpose in such a cafe, and necessary to be knowne. The countrey was most fertile and fruitful, as any one in all Italy, to wit, the goodly champion fields of Tuscane, lying betweene Fesulae, and Arretium, plentiful in corne, abundant in cattaile, and richly stored with al good things. The Consull was stout and prowd, by reason of the former Consulship that he had borne: little account he made of the majestie of lawes, and authoritie of Senators, and as small regard and reverence he had of the gods themselves: which rashnesse, as it cost him nought, but was ingrassed in him by nature, so fortune had nourished and mainteined the same with prosperous successe in his affaires at home, and warres abroad; so as it appeared evidently, that since he respected neither God nor man, and deigned not to take their counsell and advise, he would go rashly to  worke, and do all in hast, hand over head, without discretion. And to the end he might be more forward to plunge himselfe headlong into these his infirmities and imperfections, Anniball devised to anger him, and to move his patience. Leaving the enemie therefore on his left hand, he put himselfe into the way to Fesulae for to wast and spoyle the countrie of Tuscane; and shewed to the Consull a farre off, what soule worke and havock he possible could make, with fire and sword. Then Flaminius who of himselfe would not have rested and fate still, in case Anniball had bene quiet; seeing once the goods of his allies and friends, harried and driven away even before his eyes, and thinking it tended greatly to his shame and dishonor, that a Carthaginian should march thus at his pleasure, through the mids of Italie, and without any empeaching and controulement, to passe on forward, even to besiege and assault the walls of Rome; when all others about  him sitting in counsaile, gave advise for profit and safetie, rather than for shew and braverie; namely to pause a while, and expect the comming of his Colleague, that they might with ioynt armies, with one heart, and with common accord of counsell, conduct and mannage the warre: and in the meane time, with the Cavallerie, with Auxiliarie or aid souldiers lightly armed, represse the enemie, and stay him from spoyling so licentiously at his pleasure; in a great chase and choler be rose up, anddeparted out of the counsell, and presently founded the march, and gave the signall of battaile: and withall, Nay we were best(quoth he) to remaine and sit here still before the walls of Arretium: for this, be like, is our native countrey, and here is our place of habitation: as for Anniball, let him escape forth of our hands, and wast all Italy; let him spoyle afore him, and overrun all with fire and sword, untill he be as farre as Rome walls: and let not us, in any  case once stirre from hence, before that the Senators send for C. Flaminius from Arretium, as sometimes they called Camillus from Veij. With these and such like reprochfull and taunting words, he commaunded in all hast the standerds and ensignes to be plucked up, and called for his horse. He was not so soone mounted on his back, but the horse fell presently, cast the rider over and over with his head forward; and there lay Flaminius the Consull under foote. As they all, that attended about him, were affrighted and troubled in mind, at this unluckie prefage and foretoken, in the very beginning of his enterprise; word moreover was brought unto him, that one of the port-ensignes was not able to pull up his ensigne, do what he could, and putting his whole strength unto it. The Consul turning to the messenger, What? hast thou any letters besides (quoth he) from the Senat, to prohibit me for geving battaile? go thy wayes, and bid them dig up  the ensigne, with help of spade and mattock, if their hands be so benummed for feare, that they cannot pluck it up: and with that began the armie to march. The principall leaders and captaines, besides that they agreed not, but gain said this course, were much dismayed and terrified with this twofold prodigious signe: but the common souldiers rejoyced and tooke great pleasure, to see this forwardnesse and animositie of their Generall: having an eye rather to the end of their hope,

than to the cause which they had to hope so. Now Anniball wasted in all manner of hostilitie  that he could devise, the territories betweene the towne Cotona, and the lake Thrasymenus, and all to whet the edge of the Consuls stomacke, to chase his hote bloud, and to provoke him for to be revenged, for the harmes and wrongs done to his good friends and allies. And come alreadie they were to certaine places, naturally made as it were for an ambush, whereas the lake Thrasymenus lyeth hard at the foote of the hils of Corrona: for there is betweene, but a very straight and narrow passage, as if there had bene left so much space of ground, only for that purpose, and nothing else. For if a man go but a little further, the plaine lieth more open, and groweth larger, and from thence the hils begin to arise aloft. Anniball in the open ground pitched his campe, for himselfe with his Africanes onely and the Spanyards to lodge in, and make abode. The Balearians, and the other light armed souldiers, he led about behinde the  mountaines: the horsemen he placed at the very gullet of the streight passage, where the little hils handsomely covered and hid them close; to the end that so soone as the Romanes were entred in, when he had put forth his horsemen against the gullet of the streight, all might be enclosed within the lake and the mountaines. Flaminius being come to the lake the day before at the sunne setting; the morrow after, before it was full day light, without discovering and cleering the coasts by any skouts and espials sent out before, passed through the streights. After that his armie began to be spread and displayed more at large, as the plaine opened wider, he espied and perceived those enimies only which he had before his face: for the ambushes lay close hidden, both behind his back, and over his head. Anniball having once gotten the enemie (as he would) enclosed thus within the lake and the mountaines, and environed with his forces, gave the  signall to them all for to charge:The battaile at Thrasymenus. who came downe every man the neerest way he could: and so much the more were the Romanes affrighted and troubled with this sodaine occurrent, by reason that the mist which arose out of the lake, was setled thicker in the plaine, than upon the hils: whereby the companies and squadrons of their enemies comming out of many vallies, were seene well enough one of another, and therefore more jointly gave the charge all at once together. The Romanes hearing the cry and shout which arose from all parts, before they could well discerne and see, perceived themselves compassed all about and surprised, and were assailed both afront, and on their flancks, ere they could put themselves in battaile ray, as they ought, make their armour and weapons readie, and draw their swords.
When all the rest were thus amazed, and at their wits end, the Consull alone, for all this imminent danger, shewed himselfe nothing  daunted or afrayd, but set in order the rancks and files which were shuffled and blended together, according as time and place would give him leave; and marshalleth his soldiers, (who turned every way as they heard the sundry and divers noyses) and in the best manner he could devise, he comforted and encouraged them, willing them to stand to it, and fight like men, for that there was now no meanes else to escape. All the vowes and invocations upon the gods for their help, would not serve, but only it was fine force and meere manhood must do the deede: and they were to make way by dint of sword, through the midst of their enemies battaillons: and the lesse men feared, the lesse danger commonly betided them. Howbeit, by reason of the noyse and hurliburly, neither counsell nor commaund could be heard: and so farre off were the souldiers from knowing their owne ensignes, their rancks and places, that scarcely their heart would serve them  to take armes, and to buckle them, as they should, fitly for fight in such sort, as some of them were surprised and borne downe, laden rather with their harnesse, then covered and defended therewith. And in so great a mist and darkenesse, more use they had of eares than eyes; for at the grones of their wounded fellowes, at the blowes and strokes upon the bodies and armour resounding againe, at the confused shoutes and shrikes of hardie and fearefull men one with another, they turned their faces, and cast their eyes every way. Some as they would have fled, light into the prease of those that were fighting, and there were set fast: some againe as they returned for to fight, were borne backward by companies that ran away. Afterwards, when they had assayed in vaine every way to get forth, and saw well, that on both sides and flanks the mountaines and the lake; that afront and behind, the enemies battailons hemmed them in; then they knew evidently  there was no hope of life but in their right hand and force of armes. Then every man became a captaine, and encouraged himselfe to fight manfully: so as the battaile began afresh, not in order by the Principes, Hastati, and Triarij, nor according to the accustomed manner, whereby the avantgard should fight before the maine battaile and the standerds, and behind them the arreregard,

 and that the souldiour should keepe his owne legion, his owne cohort, band, and companie; but at a venture, even as it happened, so they went to it and buckled, pell mell: and as everie mans heart served him, so hee marshalled himselfe to fight, either before or behind. Their courage and animositie was so ardent, their spirits and minds so intentive to the medley, that being as there was, a terrible earthquake at that verie instant, which overthrew and turned upside down, a great part of many cities in Italie, turned aside the courses of great rivers out of their channels, and drave their streams against the current, forced the sea into fresh rivers, yea, and overturned mountains with mightie fals, and laid them flat; yet there was not a man who fought in that battaile, that once heard or perceived it. The conflict lasted almost three houres. Sharpe it was in every place, but about the Consull most cruell: and looke in what part soever hee saw  his men distressed and in hazard, there courageously hee aided them. By reason that the flower and bravest gallants followed him, and was himselfe for his owne person goodly beseene in his rich armour, he both assailed the enemie most furiously, and also defended his owne cittizens as valiantly; so long, untill a certaine Insubrian, a man of armes (Ducarius was his name) one that knew his visage well ynough, This is (quoth he to his countrymen) the Consul that defeated our armie, put to the sword our Legions, wasted our territories, and hee that destroied and sacked our citie. Now will I offer him as a sacrifice out of hand to the ghosts and spirits of those our fellow citizens, who by his meanes have been piteously slaine: and therewith setting spurs to his horse, hee rode through the thickest troupe and prease of his enemies: and when hee had first slaine his Esquier outright (who opposed his bodie betweene, and set himselfe against him, seeing  him comming so furiously) hee ran the Consull quite through the bodie with his launce. And when he would rather than his life have disarmed and rifted him, the Triarij stept with their targuets over his corpes, and so kept him off. Hereupon from hence first many began to flie; but anone, neither deepe lake nor high mountaine, could impeach and stop their fearefull flight: like blind men they ran and sought meanes to make escapes, were the lane never so narrow, were the hils never so steepe and craggie, horse and man, man and armour, fell headlong one upon another. A number of them seeing no way els to escape, entred into the Lake by the first edges and shallow brimmes thereof, waded so farre, and went up so high, that they left their heades and shoulders onely above the water. Some there were, who unadvisedly (such was their feare) sought to save themselves by swimming. Which being an endlesse peece of worke,  and beyond all hope, their wind and breath failing them, they were either slifted and swallowed up of the goulfes, or after that with too much hast, they had over-laboured and toiled out themselves, they did what they could to swimme backe againe, and with much adoe to recover the land: and there, by the enemies horsemen who had taken the water, were they killed every where, and cut in peeces. Sixe thousand or there about, of the vaward, who lustily brake through the mids, maugre the heads of their enemies, unwitting of all that was done behind, escaped safe out of the gullet: and having seized the top of a little hill, there they stood, and might heare onely the outcries of men, the ratling and rustling sound of their armor, but how the battel went or sped, neither could they know, not yet discerne for the thicknesse of the darke mist. But now, when they were come to some ods, and one side went down and had the worse, by which time the heat of the  sunne had broken and dispatched the mist, and the bright day appeared; then through the clear light, the hils and dales shewed evidently the havocke and overthrow that was made, and how the Romane armie was fouliediscomfited and defeated. For feare therefore, that the enemie (having descried and seene them a farre off) should send out against them the Cavallerie, up they went with their ensignes in all hast, and got them away with all speed possiblie they could. The morrow after, when over and besides all other calamities, they were in daunger of extreame famine, and that Maharball (who with all his power of horse pursued them by night, and overtook them) had given his faithfull word and promise, that if they delivered up their armour, he would suffer them to depart in their single garments, they yeelded themselves. Which promise Anniball sawe performed as truly, as all Carthaginians use to doe, and false Carthaginian as  he was, he clapt them all into prison, and hung yrons upon them. This is that noble and famous battell fought at the Lake Thrasymenus, and of those few overthrowes that the Romanes had, the most memorable of all others. 15000 Romanes were there slaine in fight: 10000 were scattered: and flying through sundrie parts of Tuscane; gat to Rome. 1500 of the enemies lost their lives in the field. But many more of both sides afterwards died of their wounds. Others there be

that report much murder and carnage on both sides. For mine owne part (besides that, I love not  to write vaine untruths, nor any thing without good warrant, and yet the humour of writers for the most part is too much given that way) I have followed for mine authour Fabius especially, who lived about the time of this warre. Anniball having enlarged without raunsome as many of his prisoners as were Latines, and put the Romanes in streight ward, culled out from among the heapes of his enemies that lay one upon another, the dead bodies of his own men, and commanded they should be buried: and having with great care and diligence made search also, for the dead corps of Flaminius to interre it, he could never find it.
At the first newes in Rome of this overthrow, the people ran together in exceeding fear and trouble, into the common place of Assemblies. The wives and Dames of the citie, went up and downe to and fro in the streets, and enquired of whomsoever they met, what suddaine calamitie  this was, whereof the bruit went; and what was become of the armie? And when as the multitude assembled thicke (as it were) to a publicke audience, turning to the Comitium and the Senat house, and called upon the Magistrats: at lenght somewhat before the sun-set, Marcus Pomponius the Pretor came forth and said, A great battell hath ben fought, and we have lost the field. And albeit they heard of him no more than this of certaintie, yet they filled one anothers ears with rumors, and caried home with them these newes, to wit, that the Consull was killed, and a great part of his armie with him slaine: that there were but a few left alive, and those either fled and scattered up and downe in Tuscane, or else taken prisoners by the enemie. And looke how many casualties and misfortunes follow the overthrow of an armie, into so many cares and perplexities were the spirits and minds of all those plunged, who had any kinsfolke that served under Flaminius the Cos. all the whiles they were ignorant, what was the fortune of their friends. And no man knew for certaine, what he was to hope for, or to feare. The morrow and certaine daies following, there stood at the gates a sort of people, and those were women more than men, waiting to see their friends themselves, or those that could tell tidings of them: and ever as they met-with any, they would flocke about them, and bee very inquisitive: neither could they bee plucked away from them of their acquaintance and knowledge, before they had questioned every particular circumstance, from point to point in order. There might a man have seene an alphabet of faces, in those that departed from the messengers, according as the tidings was joifull or wofull: there might a man have seen a number comming about them to accompany them as they returned to their houses, either rejoicing for their good hap, or comforting them for their misfortune and calamitie. The  women especially, as well in joy, as also in sorrow, were in their extremities. One above the rest (as it is reported) standing at the gate, upon the suddain fight of her sonne alive and safe, fell downe dead at his very feete. Another, who had received an untrue report of her sonnes death, as shee sat mourning at home within her house in great sorrow of hart, so soon as ever she saw him comming into the house, for exceeding joy yeelded her last breath, and died. And for certaine daies the Pretors kept the Senators together in counsel, from the sun rising to the setting, consulting under whose conduct, and with what forces they might be able to withstand the puissance of these victorious Carthaginians. But before they wer throughly resolved of any determinat purpose and course to be taken, suddainly there arrived other news of a second losse, namely, that 4000 horsemen under the leading of C. Centronius the Propretor, sent from C. Servilius the Cos. unto his Collegue, were inclosed by Anniball in Vmbria. For thither they had taken their way, upon the newes they heard of the battaile at Thrasymenus. The brute and rumor hereof hammered diversly in mens heads. Some, whose minds were possessed alreadie with greese of a greater calamitie, thought the losse of that Cavallerie but small, in comparison of the former defeature. Others esteemed that which happened, not according to the importance of the thing it selfe: but like as it falleth out in the naturall bodie of man, that if it be crasie and weake, every occasion, be it never so small and light, is more offensive unto it and sooner felt, than a greater cause and object in a found and strong constitution: even so, when any crosse or adversitie happeneth unto the politicke bodie of a cittie or C.W. diseased (as it were) and sickly, wee are not to measure and weigh the same by the greatnesse of the accidents, but according to the seeble and decaied estate thereof, able to  endure and abide no new matter, that may surcharge and greeve it, whatsoever. And therefore, the cittie of Rome toke her selfe to the soveraigne salve and approved remedie, which shee had long desired, and yet not applied and used of late, namely, to the nomination of a Dictator. And because the Consull himselfe was absent, by whom alone it was thought hee might be named; and

 by reason that Italle was so overspread and forlaied with the P^^^icke forces, there might no courier be well dispatched, nor letters safely sent unto him: and for that the people had not authoritie of themselves to create a Dictatour, they therefore elected a Pro-dictatour (a thing that was never seene and practised before that day) namely, Q. Fabius Maximius, and for his Generall of the Cavallerie, M. Minuthus R^^^^. These had commission from the Senate, to fortifie the wals and towers of the cittie, to plant and bestow guards thereon, where they though meet, and to cut up and breake downe the bridges upon the great rivers; shewing hereby, that since they were not able to keepe and defend Italie, they were now to fight for house and home, and to gard the very citie.
^^^Anniball in this meane time was come directly by the way of Vmbria, as farre as to Spoletum.  And after he had grievously wasted and spoiled the territorie, the assaied to give assault to that citie but from thence he had the repulse with the losse of many of his men. And guessing by the strength of that one Colonie (where heesped but badly in the attempt of it) how great and difficult the enterprise might be of assailing the citie of Rome; he turned another way into the Marca Ancona Picenecountrie, not onely abounding in plentie of all kind of corne and graine, but also affourding rich spoile and pillage: which the hungrie and needie soldiours haried and caried away as gredily; beyond all measure. And therefor certaine daies he kept a standing campe, and refreshed his soldiours, toiled as well with winter journeies and boggie waies; as also in the late battell, which was more joious and fortunat in the loose and parting, than light and easie in the conflict and fighting. After he had rested and refreshed his soldiours sufficiently, who tooke  more pleasure in booties and reises, than in case and repose, hee dislodged, and journied forward; wasting and spoiling first the Abruzzo: Pretutian and Adrian territories, and then the Marsians, Marrucines and Valuenses. Pelignians: and all about Arpi and Luceria, being a region next adjoining unto Puglia. Apulia.
Cn. Servilius the other Consull, having had some light skirmishes with the Gauls, and woon from them one meane towne of small importance, after he was advertised once of the death of his Colleague, and the defeature of the armie, fearing even then what danger might be^ide the wals of his native countrie, least peradventure hee should bee absent in the hazard of the maine chaunce, put himselfe in his journey toward the cittie of Rome. Q. Fabius Max. the Pro-dictatour aforesaid, the same day that he entred his office, assembled the Senate; and began first with  matters of religion, and concerning the gods: and after he had laid open unto the LL. of the Senate, that the Consull Flaminius had faulted more in the neglect and contempt of divine ceremonies, and the Auspices, than otherwise in rashnesse and for want of skill in fears of warre; and that the gods themselves were to bee consulted about the purging and expiation of sinnes and offences, and what might appease their wrath; gained and obtained this one point, That the Decemvirs were commaunded to repaire unto the bookes of Sibylla, (a thing not usually decreed, but when strange signes and prodigious wonders are reported) who having perused the bookes of destinies, made relation and informed the Senators, first, That the vow made unto Mars, for the good cheevance of that war, was not performed with due complements, and therfore ought to bee accomplished anew, and in more ample manner: also, that the great Games and Plaies  should be vowed unto Iupiter, with temples likewise to Venus Erycina, and to The goddesse of Vnderstanding. Mens. Moreover, that a solemne supplication and a Lectisterne should be celebrated, and a sacred Spring vowed, if the gods graunted them an happie end of warre, and the Commonweale to remaine in the same estate, wherein it stood before the warre began. The Senate gave order, that for as much as Fabius was to bee emploied in the warres, M. Aemylius the Pretour, should have in charge to see all the premisses performed with all good speed, according to the will and mind of the Colledge of the Bishops or Prelates. These Ordinances of the Senate being enacted, Lucias Cornelius Le^tulus the Arch-prelate, with the advise of the whole Colledge of the Prelates, thought good and gave advise, that first above all other things the opinion and pleasure of the people (as touching the sacred spring) should be knowne, for that without the voices and consent of the people  it could not bee vowed, And in this forme of wordes was the bill propounded unto the people. PLEASETH IT YOU, THAT THIS GRACE MAY PASSE AND THE THING DONE* WITH YOUR ASSENT IN THIS WISH? IF THE STATE OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME AND THE QUIRITES, FOR FIVE YEARES NEXT ENSUING, CONTINUE SAFELY PRESERVED IN THESE VVARS, AS I DESIRE IT SHOULD, THEN THAT THE PEOPLE OF ROME, AND

QVIRITES, PERFORME AN OBLATION AND GIFT VOVVED AND PROMISED; NAMELY, IN THE VVARRE BETVVEENE THE PEOPLE: OF ROME AND THE CARTHAGINNIANS: AND IN THE VVARS VVITH THE GAVLES ON THIS SIDE. THE AL^^^ TO VVIT, THAT THE ENCREASE VVHICH THE SPRING SHALL Y^ELD AND AFFOORD, OVT OF SHEEPE AND SVVINE, (...) AND ^INE, AND ALL THINGS THAT SHALBE PROPHANE, BE SACRIFICED UNTO I (...), ACCOUNTING FROM THAT DAY THAT THE SENATE AND PEOPLE (...) ORDAINE: (...) VVHICH SHALL SACRIFICE, MAY DOE IT WHEN HE VVILL AND IN VVHAT MANER HE WILL: AND IN VVHAT SOR^ SO EVER HE SHALL SACRIFICE, THAT IT MAY STAND FOR GOOD AND RIGHT (...) IT DID THAT SHOULD BE SACRIFICED, LET IT BE COVNTED PROPHANE, AND NOT AS VVICKED: I (...) MAN LANE  OR MAIME, OR KILL THE SAME (...) UNTO HIM AS CRIMINALL: IF ANY PERSON CONCE^^^ AVVAY (...) SAME OR HIDE IT OUT OF THE VVAY, LET IT NOT BE IMPUTED FOR VVICKEDNESSE UNTO THE PEOPLE, NOR TO HIM, FROM VVHOM IT SHALBE SO STOLLEN OR HIDDEN IF ONE CHAUNCE BY IGNORANCE TO SACRIFICE UPON AN UNLUCKIE AND DISMA^ DAY, LET IT BEE ACCOUNTED GOOD AND LAVVFULL: VVHETHER BY NIGHT OR DAY, VVHETHER BOND OR FREE SHAL SACRIFICE, LET IT BE TAKEN AND HELD GOOD. IF BEFORE IT, THE SENAT AND PEOPLE SHALL ORDAIN THOSE SACRIFICES TO BE DONE, OR SHALL SACRIFICE, LET THE PEOPLE BE ASSOILED AND DISCHARGED FREELY THERFORE. And for the same purpose, were the great games (before vowed) performed with the expertise  of 1041^^^.14.sh 4 d s^^^. 333333 asses, and one third part of an Asse; besides the sacrifice of 300 oxento Iupiter, and of white oxen and other sacrifices, unto many other saints. After these vows pronounced and made accordingly, the supplication was proclaimed and in procession there went with their wives and children, not onely the multitude of the cittie, but also of the countrie, so many as had their private estate, any way depending upon the publicke. The Lectisterne likewise was prepared and trimmed, and continued for three daies: and the Decemvirs deputed for holy ceremonies had the ordering thereof. The sacred beds were openly to be seene: one for Iupiter and Iuno, another for Neptune and Minerva: a third for Mars and Venus: a fourth for Apollo and Diana: a fifth for Vulcane and Vesla: and a sixth for Mercury and Ceres. Then were the temples vowed: unto Venus Erycina, Q. Fabius Max. the Dictator, vowed one temple. For so it was delivered from out  of the bookes of destinies, that he should vow it, who had the soveraign rule in the citie, and unto The goddesse of Vnderstanding. Mens, Atilius the Pretor vowed another. Thus when Chruch matters touching religion were finished, the Dictatour propounded concerning war and the State: namely, with what Legions and how many, the Senat thought good to withstand the victorious enemie. And a decree passed; that he should receive the armie at the hands of Cn. Servilius the Cos. and enroll besides of the citizens and allies, as many horsemen and footmen as he thought convenient: and that hee should do and order all other things at his owne discretion, for the good of the Commonweale: Fabius said, That he would adjoine unto the armie of Servilius, two Legions more: which beeing levied by the Generall of the horsemen, he proclaimed; that they should meet together upon a certain day at Tybur: and when he had published a proclamation, That whosoever inhabited within any  townes or castles unsensed, should depart into places of safetie: and that all should remoove out of the villages of that countrie, through which Annibal was to go (but first to set on fire their houses, and spoile their corne that hee might find nothing there when he came) he went himselfe forward by the high way or causey Flaminta, to meete with the Consull and the armie. And when hee discovered them marching about Orriculum by the river Tyberis, and saw the Consull with his horsemen comming forward to him, he sent a Sergeant, to give warning to the Consull, for to come without his Lictors to the Dictatour: who obeyed his commaundement. And as their meeting together, represented an exceeding great shew of the Dictatourship unto citizens and allies both, who by reason of discontinuance so long time, had welneere forgotten that government: behold, there came letters from the citie importing newes, that certaineships  of burden, transporting victuals from Hostia into Spaine for the armie there, were by the navie of the Carthaginians bourded and taken about the sound or haven of Coffa. Whereupon immediatly the Consull was commaunded to go to Hostia, to take up all shipping at Rome or at Hostia, to furnish them with saylers, and man them with souldiers and so to pursue the Armado

 of the enemies, and to keepe the coasts of Italie. A mightie number of men was levied at Rome. The Libertines also, who had children, and were of lawfull age to serve, sware allegeance unto him, to be his true souldiours. Out of this armie of citizens, as many as were under 35 yeares of age, were shipped; the rest were left behind to guard the citie. The Dictatour having received the Consuls armie at the hands of Fulvius Flaccus his Lieutenant, went through the Sabines countrey, and arived at Tybur, whether he had commaunded the new souldiours to repaire at a day. From thence by crosse wayes he returned into the high way or causey Latina, even to Preneste: from whence (having searched diligently by his espials; all the wayes) he led forward toward the enemie, purposing in no place to hazard the fortune of battaile, but upon necessities The very first day that he encamped not far from Arpi, within the sight of his enemies, there was  no ho with Anniball, but without furtherdelay, he came forth into the field in battaile array bad him battaile, and offred^fight. But seeing his enemies quiet, and no stirring in the camp, he fell to taunting and reviling them: saying, That now at length yet, the martiall h^^rts of the Romanes were daunted and tamed; and seeing they refused fight, they confessed plainely, and graunted themselves inferior unto him in valor, prowesse, and glorie: which said, he retyred into his campe. Howbeit, chasing and fretting secretly in his mind, for anger that he had to deald hereafter with a Captaine, far unlike to Flaminius and Sempronius: and that the Romanes now at last, being schooled and taught by their owne harmes, and to their great cost, had sought out and gotten a Captaine to match Anniball; streightwayes he began to seare the wisedome of the Dictatour, and not his force: but having had as yet no triall of his constant resolution, he fell  to disquiet his mind, and to tempt him with often removing his own tents, and wasting thefields of his allies even under his nose: one while he seemed to march away apace out of all sight, another while he would of a sodaine stay, and lye close in some by-place and cranke, out of the way, to spy when he could take him in some plaine and even ground. But Fabius led his armie, and marched above on the higher grounds, a pretie distance off from the enemie, so as neither he would let him go cleane and abandon him, nor yet encounter with him. He kept his souldiours for the most part within the camp, save onely when necessitie otherwise constreined. For purveyance of forage and fewell, they went neither few in number, nor straggling asunder. The wards of horsemen and those that were lightly armed, standing alwayes in order of battaile, and readie prepared and furnished for sodaine impressions and tumults, yelded both securitie to his  owne souldiours, and also danger to his enemies, as they raunged all abroad and foraied the countrey. In this maner never was the maine chance put to the venture all at once of fortune: and the small trials of light skussling and skirmishes (begun in safetie and securitie, by reason of the recourse of reskue so neere) inured and hartned the souldiers, frighted with former foiles, and made them at lenght to distrust lesse either their owne valour, or fortune. But Anniball was not more discontented and displeased, nor more readie to crosse and thwart these so holsome policies and counsels of his, as his owne Generall of horsemen: who wanted nothing else but soveraigne commaund, to overturne headlong the Commonweale: a man in all his designements violent and hastie, and of tongue intemperate. And first secretly among some few, but afterwards openly in the hearing of all men, he termed Fabius, instead of a stayed and soberman, slow  and dull: insteed of wary and heedfull; timorous and fearefull: attributing unto vertues, the names of vices of neere semblance: and having a singular dexteritie to debate his betters and superiours, exalted himselfe thereby: a cunning cast, of all others the worst, and vet hath mightily prevailed and sped too well in many that have used it. Anniball from Arpi passeth into Samnium, wasteth the countrie of Beneventum, winneth the citie Telesia, and still provoketh (of set purpose) the Romane captaine, if happely he could incense him by so many indignities and losses of his allies, and so draw him to fight on even hand.
Amongst a great number of Italian confederates and allies, whom Anniball had taken prisoners at Thrasymenus and dismissed, there were three Campane horsemen, whom Anniball even then had tolled on, and allured with gifts and faire promises to win unto him the hearts of their  countrimen: These brought word unto him, that in case he would leade and bring his armie into Campania, he should soone be Lord of Capua. And albeit the thing in itselfe seemed greater than the qualitie of the persons that counselled him thereto: and therefore stood in mammering, one while in good hope and assurance, another while in feare and distrust: yet they persuaded him at last to remove out of Samnium into Campania. After he had admonished

shed them estsoones, to see that they made their word and promises good by deede, and commaunded  them withall to returne unto him with some of their principall citizens and countreymen, he sent them away. Himselfe gave commaundement to his guide, to conduct him into the territorie of S. Germano. Casinum: being advised by those that were skilfull and acquainted with the coasts of those parts, that if he could gaine aforehand that pase and forest, he might exclude the Romanes from comming to rescue and succour their confederates. But the ambiguitie of the name, and the Carthaginian language far differing from the Latine, caused the guide to mistake Casilinum for Casinum: and so missing of his intended journey, he came downe, through the Alifane, Calatine, and Calene countries, into the plaine champion region of Stella. Where seeing all the coasts environed round about with mountaines and rivers, he called the guide unto him, and demaunded where he was: and when he answered, that he should that day lodge in  Casilinum, then and not before, the error was found, and he knew that he was far out of his way, for that Casinum was distant in another countrey far off. And after he had beaten the guide with rods, and hanged him up by the head, for an example to terrifie all others, he fortified himselfe within campe, and sent out Maharball with the horsemen into the Falerne countrie, to fetch in booties. So they wasted and spoyled as farre as the waters of Sinnessa. Much harme did these Numidians, but the flight and fright of the people was far greater. And yet notwithstanding that great feare, when all was on a light fire as it were, and nothing but warre, the Romane allies continued still firme in their faithful allegeance: and the reason was, because they were ruled under a just and moderate government, and neither refused, not thought much to be subject unto their betters, the only bond of loyall fidelitie. But so soone as he had pitched his camp by the river Voli^^n^. Vulturnus, and that the most goodly and pleasant countrie of all Italie was on fire, and the villages every where burned and smoked againe; whiles Fabius led his powre over the ridge of the mountaine Massicus, the sedition was like to have broken out againe, and certain captaines of the mutinie began to be enkindled afresh. For there had ben great quietnesse, and all was still for some few dayes; because seeing the armie march faster than their usuall manner was, they supposed verily, that they made more speede and hastened, to save Campania from being spoyled and wasted. But when they were come to the formost edge and point of the mountaine Massicus, and that the enemies were within sight, burning the dwelling houses of the Coloners and inhabitants of Sinuessa, and likewise of the Falerne countrie, and all this while not one word of battaile;
And are we come hither indeede, The mutinous (...) of Minutius. quoth Minutius, to behold only and to see, and seede our eyes  with looking on our allies, consumed and wasted with fire and sword? and if we bash at nothing else, can we for shame abide to see the calamitie of these citizens here, whome our fore fathers planted in Sinuessa as coloners there to inhabite, to the end that all this tract and coast should be safe from the invasion of the Samnites? But behold, it is not a neighbour enimie (the Samnir) that fireth it; but a foreine and alien, even the Carthaginian, who from the farthest and most remote parts of the world, (whiles we stand at a bay, trifle off still, and for lazinesse doe nothing) is come forward even hither unto us. And ate we so farre degenerate (with sorrow of heart I speake it) from our progenitours and fathers, that along which coast they thought it dishonorable unto their empire, for the Carthaginian Armadoes and ships to flote, faile, and ride; wee should see the same now pestered full of enemies, the Numidians and Moores? Wee, who ere while taking foule  scorne and great disdeine to see Saguntum besieged, called not only upon men, but also upon the faith of alliances and the gods to witnesse; stand still gazing upon Anniball marching against the walls of a Romane Colonie, and readie to assault it. The smoke of the villages and the fields now on fire, is readie to put out our eyes, and to choke us up: our eares resound and ring againe with the piteous cryes of our allies that weepe and lament, and call oftner unto us than unto the gods for help. And we here leade our armie as if they were a stock of sheepe, over the shadowe forests, and hils out of the way, hidden among the clouds and thick woods to keepe them from the heate of sunne. If Furius Camillus had bene of mind, by raunging and wandering over hils and forests in this maner, to win againe the citie out of the hands of the Gaules; as this our new Camillus forsooth (sought out of purpose to be our only Dictator in this our distresse and hard estate) goeth about to recover Italie from Anniball, Rome had bene French at this day; which I  feare me, if we go thus coldly to worke, our auncestors have saved and reserved so often, for Annibal and the Carthaginians. But he, a brave man, and a Romane indeede, that very day when word was brought to Veij, that he was chosen Dictatour by the suffrages of the people, and approbation

 of the Senators, although Ianiculum was high ynough, where he might have set him down and beheld the enemie at ease, descended into the plain and even ground, and the same day in the very mids and heart of the citie, where now Gaulebury or Busta Gallica standeth, and the morrow after, betweene Rome and Gabes, slew the Legions of the Gaules. And what should I say of that, which happened many yeares after, when at the streights of Caudium wee were put under the yoke by the Samnites our enemies? Whither I pray you, did L. Papyrius Cursor seeke out the mountaines of Samnium, or rather lie hard upon Luceria and besiege it, provoking and challenging the victorious en^emie; and thereby shooke off the yoke from the Romanes necke, and laid it upon the prowd Samnites? And what other thing else of late daies but expedition, gave the victorie to Consul Luctatius? Who the morrow after that he discovered the enemie, set upon  his fleet heavilie fraught with victuals: and overcharged as it was with her owne munition, furniture and provision, funcke, and destroied the same. It is meere follie to beleeve and thinke, by sitting still, by bare praiers and vowes, to vanquish and subdue the enemie. Our forces must bee put into armes, and brought downe into the plaine, that man to man may cope and buckle together. By adventuring boldly, by action and execution, hath the Romane Empire growne to this height; and not by these conceits and devises, which fearefull cowards tearme the warie policies of warre. As Minutius spake these words in preaching wise, a number of Romane Colonels and horsemen came flocking about him. Yea, and these Iustie and rash speeches of his, came even unto the eares of the footmen: So as, if it had lien in the voices and election of the soldiors, out of all question they seemed willing to prefer Minutius before their Generall Fabius. But Fabius  againe, regarding alwaies with good eie his owne men, no lesse than his enimies, carrying a resolute mind, invincible ever before of any other; albeit he was well ware, that not onely within his own campe, but also now at Rome, he heard ill for his temporizing and slow proceedings: yet drew he out the rest of the summer, and held on sliffely the same course and purpose, and never altered his former manner: untill that Anniball being cleane disappointed of long desired battaile, bethought himselfe anone, and looked about for some places of winter abode, considering, That the countrie where now he was, rather yeelded plentie for the present, than store for long continuance: as standing upon Hortyards and Vineyards, and all things planted, rather for fruits of pleasure and delight, than for necessitie and profit. Intelligence hereof being given to Fabius, by his espials, for that he knew well ynough, that Anniball was to returne through the same streights,  by which hee had entered the Falerne countrey; hee holdeth and keeth the hill Calicula, with sufficient garrizons, and likewise Casilinum, a citie devided by the river Vulturnus, and parteth the Falerne and Campane countries a sunder. Himselfe bringeth backe his power through the same hils, having sent out to escout and espie 400 horsemen of confederats, under the conduct of Lu. Hostilius Mancinus, who being one of the crue of those lustie youths, that oftentimes heard the Generall of the horsemen, giving out abroad brave words and stout speeches, at first went forward in manner of an espiall, to discover and espie the enemie from a place of safetie and securitie: and when as he saw the Numidians raunging all about the villages, and flew some of them also whom he took at a vantage, streightwaies his mind was wholly possessed and set upon fight; and so forgat the charge and direction of the Dictatour, who had commaunded him to goe forward as warily and as closely as hee possible could, and to retire himselfe againe before hee came within  fight of the enemies. The Numidians charging and recharging him afront one while, and flying from him another while, drew him almost unto their very campe, when as both horse and man were outwearied. From whence Cartalo, who then had the conduct and commaund of the Cavallerie, set out against him lustily upon the spur, and before they came within dart-short, put the enemies to flight, and followed them continually in chase almost five miles. Mancinus seeing neither the enemie to give over pursure, nor any hope to escape away, exhorted his men, and turned head upon them, overmatched as he was every way: where hee himselfe and his choisest horsemen were beset round and slaine: the other taking themselves againe to flie for life, first came to Cales, and after through by-lanes and difficult waies, to the Dictatour. That day,  as hap was, Minutius had joined himselfe to Fabius, having beene afore sent to keepe with a strong guard, the forest or pase, which above Tarracina, groweth into a narrow gullet, and reacheth to the sea; for feare least of the advenue of the way Appia, were without defence, Anniball might enter and invade the countrie of Rome. When the Dictatour and the Generall of horsemen had joined their forces together, they encamped upon the very high way, that Anniball

was to passe with his armie. Now were the enemies two miles off. The morrow after, the Carthaginians  tooke up with their armie all the way betweene the one campe and the other. When as the Romanes were quartered even under their very trench and rampier, in a place no doubt of great advantage, yet for all that approched Anniball with his light horsemen: and to provoke his enemies, fought by starts and fits, charging upon them, and retrying back againe with great nimblenesse. The Romanes kept still their standing, embattailed as they were. The fight was cold and lingering, to the mind and liking of the Dictatour, rather than of Anniball: and where there were of the Romanes part 200 slaine, there dyed 800 of the enemies. Then seemed Annibal after, to be enclosed and shut up as it were and besieged within Cartilluzzo. Casilinum, seeing that Capua, Samnium, and many rich and mightie nations confederate with the Romanes, were on their backs to furnish them with store ofvictuals. And Anniball contrariwise was like to take up his  wintering place, within the crags and rocks of Formij, amid the sands of Linternum, and the mosly standing pooles. Well wist Anniball now that he was layd unto hardly, by the same cunning sleights, that he had used himself. And therefore when as he could not escape away by Casilinum, and seeing that he must needs to the mountains, and passe over the top of Callicula: for feare least that the Romanes should set upon his armie enclosed in the vallies betweene the mountaines, he devised a stratageme, by way of a ridiculous illusion, to beguile the eyesight of his enemies, and to frustrate and deceive them of their expectation: by meanes wherof, he purposed in the beginning of the night, closely and by stealth to gaine the mountaines. The manner of his craftie devise was this. He caused to be gathered out of all the villages thereby many firebrands; then tooke he certaine bavins or small fagots of brush-wood, dry sticks, and such like trash, and tyed  them fast to the hornes of the oxen, whereof he had tame and wild, a great number that he drave before him amongst other prizes gotten out of the countrey: so as he might make welneere two thousand head. To Asdruball he gave in charge, that so soone as it grew to be darke night, he should drive those oxen with their hornes set a fire toward the mountaines, and especially if he possible could, to the very streights and gullet which the enemie kept. It began no sooner to be darke, but Anniball with great silence dislodged and removed his campe, and the oxen aforesaid were driven a good way before the ensignes and the armie. When they were come to the foote of the mountaines, and to the streight passages, immediatly the signall or watchword was given to fire the oxes hornes, and to chase them up against the hill. The beasts, what with feare to see a light fire blazing over their heads, and what with paine  to feele the heate now come to the quick flesh and the rootes of their hornes, fell running up and downe, as if they had bene mad. By this their gadding thus all at once every way, all the coppises and springs thereabout were set on a light fire, and seemed as if the whole woods and hils had burnt withall: the shaking of their heads also too and fro without stay, made the blaze greater, and gave shew and semblance of men running from one place to another. They who were appointed and set to keepe the passages of the streights, so soone as they saw certaine fires upon the tops of the hils, and over their heads, supposing themselves to be entrapped and enclosed with fire on every side, abandoned their hold, and kept their standing no longer: and whereas the flambe shone most our, thinking that to be the safest way, they sped them thither, even to the top and ridge of the mountaines. Then and there, they light upon certaine of the  oxen wandring astray from their companie, and at first seeing them a farre off, but not well discerning them, they imagined that they spit fire, and breathed these blazing flames out of their mouthes; and wondering at the strange sight, stood still amazed and astonied. But when as afterwards they discovered the devise, and found it out to be a subtile and deceitfull invention, proceeding from mans brain, they mistrusted with all some secret traines and ambush, and with an exceeding noyse fled away as fast as ever they could, and stumbled upon the vantcurriers of their enemies, that were lightly armed. But they were affraid as well of the one side as the other, to begin any skirmish in the night season, and stayed untill day light. In the meane while, Anniball having conducted his whole armie through the streights, and killed some of his enemies in the very pase, encamped himself in the territorie of Alifas. Fabius descryed this tumult well enough, but doubting some privie ambush, and abhorring utterly all night battailes, kept his men within the strength of their campiers. At the breake of day there began a skirmish on the side of the hill, in which the Romanes as being far more in number, had environed on every side the lightarmed souldiers of the enemies, and soone defeated them, but that a band of Spanyards, sent

 back of purpose from Anniball, came to rescue them: who being better acquainted with the mountaines, and more light and nimble in running among the craggs and cliffs, by reason as well of the agilitie of bodie, as the fashion of their light harnesse; easily in that kind of skirmish, avoided and shifted from their enimie, heavily armed at all peeces, and used to fight upon the plaine, and to stand firmely and keepe their ground. Whereupon in the end they parted asunder one from the other, but nothing neere on even hand: for the Spanyards in a manner all, went cleere away unhurt, the Romanes lost some of their men: and so on both parts they returned to their camps. Fabius likewise removed, and having passed over the streights of the forest, encamped in an high ground, and strongly situate even over Alifas. Then Anniball making as though he would march through Samnium toward Rome, returned back, wasting and  spoyling the countrey as farre as to the Peligni. And Fabius hovered still upon the hill tops betweene the armie of his enemies and the citie of Rome; leading his host so, as neither he departed farre, nor yet encountred and affronted his enemie. Then Anniball turned his way, and departed from the Peligni, and retyred himselfe into Apulia, untill he was come as farre as Gerion, a citie abandoned and forlorne of the inhabitants, by reason that a part of their wall was fallen downe, decayed and ruined. The Dictatour fortified his camp in the territorie of Larinum.
Now was he sent for home from thence to Rome, by occasion of certaine solemne sacrifices: whereupon, he conferred and dealt with the Generall of the Cavallerie, not onely by way of absolute commaundement, but also with advise and persuasions, yea and as one would say, by prayer and intreatie, That he would trust more upon considerate counsell, than doubtfull fortune; and be directed  and guided rather by him, than follow the steps of Sempronius and Flaminius; and not thinke there was nothing done and effected, and make no reckning of this, That the enemie had ben dallied withall, and trifted out, mocked and deluded, almost all the sommer long. Why, even Physicians (quoth he) many times do more good to the sick bodie of the patient, by giving rest and repose, than by stirring and disquieting the humors therein. And no small matter is it, that we are vanquished and overcome no more, at an enimies hands so often used to victorie. And after continuall foyles and overthrowes, to have had rest, and a time of breathing. Having in this wise admonished the Generall of horse aforehand (but all in vaine) he tooke his way to Rome.
In the beginning of this summer, wherein these exploits were performed, warre began also in Spaine both by sea and land. Asdruball to that number of ships which he had received readie  rigged and well appointed of his brother, joyned other ten. To Himilco he gave the charge of a fleete of fortie faile: and so, losing from Carthage, whiles his ships kept neere to land, he conducted his armie along the river upon the strond, readie to give battaile to the enemie, howsoever he should happen to encounter him either by land or sea. Cn. Scipio after he had intelligence that the enemie was removed out of his wintering harbour, at the first had likewise the same intention and purpose, but afterwards doubting to encounter by land, upon the exceeding great report that went of new aides, he embarked his best and most choyse souldiours, and with a fleete of 35 sayle, set forward to meete the enemie. And the second day after that he had loosed from Taracone, he came to the rode distant ten milesfrom the mouth of the river Iberus. From whence, two Pinnaces of the Massiliens were sent out afore, and brought word, that  the Carthaginian Armado rode in the mouth of the river, and that the tents were pitched upon the banke. And therefore to the end that he might surprise them at unwares, and unlooking for them, with all the fearefull terrour at once, that he could possibly, he weyed ancker, and set fayle toward the enemie. In Spaine there are many towres standing upon high grounds, which serve the inhabitants of the countrie in good steed, both as watch towres to discover, and also as skonses to withstand theeves and rovers. From whence the enemies ships were descryed first, and a signall given to Asdruball: in such sort, as the tumult and trouble arose upon the land, and in the camp, before any was seene on the sea and amongst the ships: for as yet neither noyse of oares, nor any ordinarie stirre else of marriners, was heard; ne yet the capes and promontories betweene suffered the fleete to be seene. But then, all on a suddaine, certaine horsemen sent  from Asdruball one after another, commaunded the souldiours (who either wandred along the strond, or fate quiet within their pavilions, looking for nothing lesse than fight that day) presently in all haste to goe abourd, and to arme, for that the Romane fleete was not farre from the haven. This commaundement the horsemen that were sent, gave every where. And within a while Asdruball came in person with the whole armie. All was on a hurrie, and

full of sundrie al'armes; whiles both marriners and souldiours, made hast to be shipped, rather  like men that fled from land, than went to fight. Scarce were they all embarked, when some of them loosed from the shoare, and plucked up anchors, others cut the anchor cables, for that nothing should stay them: and all that they did, was with such haste; that whiles the souldiours were occupied in making themselves readie to fight, the marriners were hindered in their businesse: and whiles the marriners made speed, the souldiours were kept from taking their armour, and fitting themselves therewith. By which time Scipio was not onely approached neere, but also had marshalled and ordered his shippes readie to fight. So as the Carthaginians were troubled as well with the hurlyburlie and tumult of their owne people, as with the assault and bartell of their enemies. And having (to say a truth) made an assay and proffer of fight, rather than begun any indeed, they turned away their fleet, and fled. And seeing, when they were once put to  flight (by reason they were parted asunder all abroad, and lay open to so many of their enemies, following them upon the poupe all at once) that they were readie and easie to bee bouged and piersed, they rowed on all hands to the shore. Some were fain to wade to land, others lept on drie ground; one sort armed, another sort unarmed; and so escaped to their companie, embattailed along the strond. Howbeit, in the very first encounter and onser, two Carthaginian shippes were taken, and foure suncke. The Romanes, albeit they saw the enemies, maisters of the land, and might behold them stand in battaile array all along the river side upon the banckes, yet made they no stay, but chased the fearefull fleet of their enemies: and so as many ships, as either had not cracked, splitted, and broken their stems, with dashing upon the shore, or were not run a ground, and stucke fast by their keeles in the shelves, those they drew up, and warped into the deepe, with  ropes fastened to their poupes; and so of thirtie they took five and twentie. And yet, the taking off these vessels was not the best and goodliest cheate of their victorie: but this passed all, that with one light skirmish they became LL. of all the sea along those coasts. And therfore arriving with their whole navie before Villa (...). Honosca, they landed their men, woon the citie by forcible assault, sacked it, and from thence went forward toward Carthage. And after they had harried and wasted all the territorie about, at the last, they fired the very houses that joined to the wals and gates of the citie. From thence the Armada laden now and charged with rich pillage, failed as far as Guadama^, or the cape of Helchi. Longuntica. Where they found great store of Spart [to make cables] provided and laid up there by Asdruball to serve the navie: and when they had taken thereof as much as they needed, they made a light fire of all the rest. Neither coasted the Roman fleet along the continent and maine  onely, and scoured those parts which lay out into the sea, but passed also unto the Isle (...). Ebusus: where they assaulted hotely for two daies space, the head citie of the Island, with much ado, and small effect. And when they perceived, that they spent time in vain, and were past all hope to win it, they fell to rob and spoile the countrie: and after they had rifled and burned certaine villages, and gotten a greater bootie and pillage than they had out of the maine, they retired themselves to their ships: and thither came Embassadours from the Islands Baleares unto Scipio, craving peace. From thence hee came backe with the fleet, and returned into the hether part of the province; whether resorted unto him the Embassadours of all the Nations that inhabite about Iberus, yea, and of many also, from the fardest parts of all Spaine. But of States, that absolutly came under the obedience of the people of Rome, doing fealtie and homage unto them, and giving  hostages for assurance of their alleageance, there were above 120. Scipio therefore, taking himselfe strong ynough in land forces, went on as farre as to the chase of Caslona la veis. Castulo. And Asdruball retired himselfe into Portugall. Lusitania, neere the Ocean sea. Hereupon the rest of the summer was like to be quiet: and quiet had it been, for any thing that the Carthaginians did to the contrarie. But, (over and besides the naturall disposition of all Spaniards, unconstant, busie, and evermore desirous of novelties and alterations) Mardonius a Nobleman, who before time had beene the Lord and Prince of the Ilergetes, seeing the Romanes retired backe from the forrest, toward the seacoast, stirred up the people of his countrey, and invaded the peaceable territories of the Romane associates, for to spoile and wast the same. Against whom there were sent from Scipio three thousand Romanes, besides certaine auxiliarie souldiours also, lightly armed; who in a light skirmish discomsited his forces, (as being a power gathered in hast, and disordered) flew many, tooke some prisoners, and disarmed the greater part of them. Neverthelesse, the rumour of this al'arme caused Asdruball, as hee departed to the Ocean, to crosse the river Iberus backe againe, for the rescue and defence of his friends and allies. The Carthaginians were encamped in the

 territorie of the Ilercaonians, and the Romanes neere the new Armada, when suddaine newes diverted the warre another way. The Princes of the Celtiberians, who had sent the Embassadors of their countrie, and hostages unto the Romans, upon a messenger dispatched unto them from Scipio, arose up in armes, and entred the province of the Carthaginians with a strong and puissant armie, wan three townes by assault; and afterwards, in two battailes which they fought with Asdruball right valiantly, flew 15000 enemies, and tooke 4000 prisoners, and many militarie ensignes they bare away.
Whiles Spaine stood in these tearms, P. Scipio came as L. Deputie into that Province, continuing still his government after his Consulship expired, and was sent from the Senat with thirtie ships of warre, eight thousand souldiors, and great store of victuals. This great fleet, in regard  of many hulkes and ships of burden which accompanied it, was kenned and discovered a farre off, to the great joy both of Romanes, and also of their friends and associates, and arrived within the port and haven of Tarracon. Where the souldiours were disbarked, and Scipio joined with his brother: and from that time forward they agreed together, and with one accord managed the warre. And whiles the Carthaginians were amused with the Celtiberian warre, they made no stay, but passed over Iberus, and seeing no enemie, they marched on toward Saguntum; for that the bruit went, that the hostages of all Spaine, delivered unto the custodie of Anniball, were kept there in hold within the castle, but with a smallguard about them. That was the onely pledge which staied all the citties of Spaine, whose minds were well affected and enclined to entertaine league and societie with the Romanes, but they feared least if they should revolt, it would cost  the lives of their children. This bond which held Spaine in awe, one man eased them of, by means of a devise and practise more wittie and subtile than honest and loiall. There was at Saguntum, turn, one Acedux a Nobleman of Spain, trustie and faithful aforetime unto the Carthaginians: but then (as the nature is for the most part of these Barbarians) as fortune altered her countenance, so chaunged hee his alleageance. And supposing, that if hee should flie unto the enemies, without performing some notable treason, and delivering into their hands one thing or other of great importance, hee should bee counted no better than a vile, base, and infamous creature, hee cast about how hee might wind himselfe into these new Allies, and win them by some singular goodservice, unto their best and greatest-behoofe. And considering all the meanes that Fortune might bring within his compasse to effect, he emploied himselfe especially at the length, to set free and  deliver those hostages, thinking that the onely way, to win and procure unto the Romanes the amitie of all the Princes and great men of Spaine. But knowing assuredly, that without warrant from Bostar the Constable of the castle, the keepers of those hostages would doe nothing, hee setteth in hand and cunningly goeth to worke with Bostar himselfe. Now lay Bostar in camp without the cittie by the water side, to impeach the Romanes for entring the haven. Thither came Acedux to him, withdrew him apart into a secret place, and declared unto him as a man ignorant, in what state things stood.
Namely, that it was feare and nothing els, that kept the Spaniards unto that day in obedience, because the Romanes were so farre off; but now the Romanes were encamped on this side Iberus, as a sure fortresse and place of refuge unto them, if they minded any innovation and change of State: and therefore seeing they could not long bee kept by feare,  they were to bee obliged and bound unto Anniball by some favour and good turne. When Bostar mervailed and demaunded, what suddaine demerite this might bee, and of so great consequence. Marrie (quoth hee) send backe the hostages into their owne citties.
An acceptable present that will bee, both particularly to their parents, who are of greatest calling and reputation in their owne countries, and also generally to all the citties and Nations. Everie man (you know) is desirous to bee trusted: and for the most part, credite given franckely unto one bindeth him surely to bee most faithfull. The ministerie and charge of conducting the hostages home to their owne houses, I will require to hand mine owne selfe, that I may farther a plot and deuise of my owne, with mine owne proper seruice and emploiment: and the thing which of itselfe in nature is acceptable, I will in what I can grace and commend the same, and make  it more meritorious. Hauing thus persuaded the man, being not altogether so wilie, as other Carthaginians naturally are, hee went by night secretly as farre as the Corps de guard of the enemies, and after hee had met and talked with some Spaniards that were auxiliarie souldiours in the campe, and by them was brought before Scipio, hee declared unto him his whole intent and designement, and the cause of his comming. And after they had given and

received faithfull promise mutually between them, and agreed of time and place for the deliuerie  of the hostages unto Scipio, he returned againe to Saguntum. The daie following hee spent with Bestar, in receiving commission from him, for the execution of this matter. And thus being dismissed and having his dispatch, he purposed to go in the night, to the end that he might (forfooth) avoid the watch and wards of the enimies, the Romanes: and at the house appointed he raised those who had the guard and custodie of the children, and put himselfe on his way; and (simple man he) as if he had been altogether ignorant of that which hapned, brought them within the compasse of an Ambushment, forelaied before hand by his owne wilie and craftie devise: and so were they brought into the Romane campe. All other points besides, concerning the rendring of the hostages, according to the agreement and appointment with Bostar, were performed in the same order, as they should haue passed, in case all had been done in the name of  the Carthaginians and to their behoofe. But the Romanes wan much more thanke and gained greater favour therby, than the Carthaginians could haue atteined in the semblable curtesie. For the Carthaginians (whom in their prosperous successe the Spaniards had found by experience to be rigorous unto them and proud) might haue been supposed if they had done it nowe, to have been mollified and made more bonair and gratious through adverse fortunate and feare: but Scipio the Romaine generall, at his first comming, and unknowne before time, beganne with a notable example and testimonie of clemencie and liberalitie. And Acedux besides, reputed a wise and prudent man, seemed not without great reason to haue made exchange of his Allies and Friends. Wherevpon they all desired with one accord to revolt, and presently they had taken armes in deede and rebelled, but for the approch of winter which forced as well Romanes  as Carthaginians to betake themselves to their winter harbours.
These were the occurrents that fell out also in Spaine, in the second summer of the Punick war: whiles in Italie the wise and warie delaies, the industrious temporizing of Fabius in the manner of his warfar, gave the Romanes some respite and intermission of their foiles and overthrowes. Which as it wrought in Anniball no small trouble of mind and perplexitie, to see that the Romanes at the last had chosen for their Generall, a man who mannaged war, by discourse and guidance of found reson, and not by adventure of sickle fortune; so it was despised of his own citizens, as wel those that were armed abroad, as gowned at home: and namely, when during the absence of the Dictator, there hapned to be a field fought through the rashness of the Generall of the Cauallery, with more joyfull successe (to speake truly) than happy and fortunat. Two other things there were besides, that caused the Dictator to be worse thought of, and in great disgrace and obloquie. The one through the deceitfull and wylie pollicie of Anniball: who being enformed by certain fugitive traitours (that fled from Rome unto him) which were the lands and possessions of the Dictator; gave expresse commandement when he had destroied the countrey about, and made all even with the grovnd, to forbeare all kind of hostilitie there onely, and to touch nothing of his, either by fire or sworde: to the end it might be thought, there had been some packing between him and Anniball; and that this was the hire and consideration agreed uppon between them two. Theother arose from an action of his own: namely, about the exchange and coursing of certein prisoners or captives: which peradventure at the first appearance, might have seemed doubtfull and suspicious, (because there in he staied not for to have the commission and approbation of the Senat) but in the end and up-shot it turned, no doubt, to his singular praise and commendation. In that interchaunge above sayd, it was capitulate between both Generals, of Romanes and Carthaginians, (like as it had been afore in the first Punick war) That whether side received more Captives than they gave again, should yeild for every one soldiour 7. lib. 16. sh. 3.d. ster. accounting 100 drachmes or Romane denarij to 4 lib. two pound and a halfe of silver. When it fel out therfore that the Romane Dictator Fabius, had received more prisoners by 247 than Anniball, and the paiment of the silver for them due; after much debate in the Senate house, (because he had not direction therin from the LL.) was delated, and no order taken therfore; he sent his sonne to Rome of purpose, to make sale of his lands, which had not been endammaged by Anniball: and so to his owne cost, and out of his private purse, discharged a publick debt.
Anniball now laie in leaguer, before the walls of Gerion, a citie which he had won and set on fire, and reserved a fewe houses standing, to serue him in stead of barnes and gamers for his graine. From thence he sent out two third parts of his forces to purvey corne: and remained himselfe in gard with one third part, redy in armes, (but lightly appointed and without any bag and baggage) in a meet and convenient place; both for defence of the camp, and also for discoverie of all the

 costs about, that no assault were made vpon the purveyors.
The Romaine armie lay then in the territorie of Larinum, and the Captain generall was Minutius, Commander of the horsemen, because the Dictator (as is above sayd) was gone to the citie of Rome. But whereas these had usually encamped before, upon some high hill and strong place of scatritie; now they began to drawe downe into the vale and the plaine ground, and to deuise craftie meanes and slatagems beyond the naturall reach of the Commander himselfe; namely, how they might assaile either the purveyors as they stragled about in the countrey, or set upon the camp of their enemies, left with a small power and guard to defend it. Anniball was no ignorant, that togither with the Generall, the whole maner and conduct of their warfar was chaunged: and that the enemie would fight rather more rashly and hastilie, than wisely and warily. And himselfe (who woulde have  thought it, considering the enemie was approched neerer) sent out a third part onely of his soldiers to provide come andsorage, and kept the other twaine with him in the camp: he remoued also his tents neerer to the Romanes, almost two miles off from Gerion, to a little hill within the fight of the enemies, to the end they might know, he was minded and readie to reskue and defend the purveiors, is haply they should be charged upon. Then espied Anniball another hill neerer, and standing even over the yerie camp of the Romaines. For the gaming wherof, (seing that if he should haue gone by daie time openly, he had been no doubt prevented by the enemies, who would have seized it first, by reason it was neerer unto them) he sent certein Numidians by night, who surprised it and kept it. But the Romanes making little or no account of their small number, (...) drawe them the morrow after from thence, and thither removed their owne tents: so as  then, there was but a little distance between one camp and the other, and the same, in a maner, wholly taken up and replenished with Romanes: and withall, at the same time, the horsemen of the Romans with certeine footmen lightly armed, we sent out at a postern gate of the camp, (which opened not upon the Carthaginians) against the forragers, whom they discomfited, put to flight and flew a great number of them. Neither durst Anniball yssue foorth to skirmish, for, hauing so few about him, hee was hardly able to defend his camp, in case it had been assaulted. So: he was driuen now to use the pollicie and shifts of Fabius, (for part of his forces were away) and managed his war, sitting still as it were and keeping the enemie at a bay and at staves end: and so retyred with his soldiers to the former camp, under the walls of Geryon. Some write, that ther was a field pitched, and a set battaile fought with banners displaied, wherein Anniball at the first encounter  was discomfited and chased to his camp: but from thence, they yssued foorth who were within, and so the feare turned upon the Romanes, who on a sodain were put to the worse: but by the comming of Numerius Decimus (a Samnite) with succour, the fight was reenforced and renewed. This man, not onely nobly descended, but also of great power and wealth, as well in Bovianum his native country, where he was born, as throughout al Samnium (by order and commandement from the Dictator) came with a power of 8000 foot and 200 horse, toward the camp: and being espied by Anniball on the backside, gaue both parties good hope of fresh and new aid. But when the voice went, that Fabius at the same time was comming also from Rome, Anniball for feare of being entrapped within some Ambush, retired backe with his owne men, and the Romanes made pursuite after him; and with the help of Numerius the Samnite, wan in one day by  force, two fortresses. So ther were 6000 enemies slaine, and 5000 Romanes. And yet as equall in a manner as the losse was of both parts, the rumour ran to Rome of a brave victorie, with letters also in post from the Generall of horsemen, full of follie and vanitie. Much arguing ther was and debate about these matters, both in Senate, and before the people sundry times.
And when all the cittie besides was joious, and the Dictator (alone) gave no credit either to the bruit that was blased, The speech of Metellus against Fabius. or to the letters; saying withall, That if all were true, yet hee feared more the sawning than frowning of fortune: then M. Metellus a Tribune of the Commons, stepped forth and sayd, That this above all was not to besuffred: that the Dictator not only whiles hee lay in camp, opposed himselfe against all goodnes, and stained all valerous service; but also being absent from thence, crossed and disgraced that which was well done and worthily atchieved: and that he, of  purpose drew the war in length and prolonged the time, to the end he might continue the longer in government, and be the man alone to commaund all, both in the citie and abroad in the armie: for one of the Consuls was slaine in battaile, the other under a pretense and colour of pursuing the Carthaginians fleete, was sent out of the way, far enough off from Italie: as for the two Praetours, they were imployed both, in Sicilie and Sardinia: and yet neither of those two provinces

had any need of a L. Deputie there. And M. Minutius Generall of the horsemen, was kept  prisoner as it were, and might neither see enemie, nor do any martiall exploit. And hereupon it is (qd.he) that not only Samnium (whereof the possession was surrender unto the Carthaginians, as if it were a territorie lying beyond Iberus) but the Campane, Caleno, and (...) territories were utterly overrun and wasted, whiles the Dictator abode still at Casilinum, and with the legions of the people of Rome defended his own lands and possessions only. And when the Armie and General of the Cavallery were desirous of battaile, they were kept back enclosed in a maner within the compasse of the camp, and their weapons taken from them, as if they had been captiue enemies: And at length when the Dictator was once departed from them, they yssued forth of the camp, like men, dilivered from siege and so discomsited and put to flight their enemies. In consideration of all these things, (he said) if the Commons of Rome were of that courage, as sometime they had  ben, be would have boldly put up a bill for to deprive C. Fabius of his government. But now for this time, he would propound a morein different and reasonable law, by vertue wherof the Commader of horsemen may be made equall with the Dictator in authority and power. Yet so as that Q. Fabius might not be sent unto the Armie, before that he had substituted and ordeined another Col. in the rowne of C. Flaminius. The Dictatour forbare altogether to come into any of these assemblies of the people, as a man in action and pleading nothing popular, and who framed not himselfe to the humor of the common people.
Neither was he in the Senate house heard with patience, at what time as he either magnified and extolled the valor of the enemie; or rehersed and reckned up the losses and foiles received for two yeers space, Fabius his words in the Senate. through the rashnes and unskilfulnes of the Commanders: and said withall, that the Generall of the horsemen was to answere and  give accompt for fighting against hisredict and expresse commandement. Moreover (qd. her) it I were in place of soveraign rule and government, and to do all according as I thought good I would effect and bring to passe, within few daies, that men should know, that a good warrior was to make small reckning of fortune: but wisdome, wit, and counsell were to guide and direct all. And for mine own part, I deem it a greater honor and glorie, to have preserved an armie in a time of trouble and danger, from shame and ignominie, than to have slaine many thousands of enemies. After he had made these and such like speeches and reasons in vaine, and created for Col. M. Astilius Regulus: for that he would not be present, to debate the question concerning the right and authoritie of his owne government, he departed by night season toward the armie; even the very day before that the foresaid law should be propounded. The morning came, and the commons were  assembled to an audience: wherin men seemed rather secretly in their harts to malice the Dictatour, and to affect and favour the Generall of the horsemen, than durst come fonh and be seen to persuade and set forward that which pleased them all in common. And notwithstanding the bill was exceedingly well liked of, yet there wanted one to giue some credite and authoritie there unto. At length, one stepped forth to set it on foot, namely, C. Terrentius Varro, who the yere before had beene Proetour, a man not onely of obscure degree by calling, but also of vile and base parentage descended. His father was (they say) a Butcher, who kept shop and sold meat himselfe, and trained up his sonne as his apprentise in the same mecanicall and servile occupation. This Varro being a young man, and well left by his father (who was growne rich, and gained greatly by his trade) gave his mind and conceived some hope to live more gentlemanlike: and tooke  a great liking to the common place, and pleading at the bar: exercising himselfe in enterteining causes of base persons, against the estate and name of honest citizens and of good reputation: by meanes wherof he grew to be knowne among the people, and afterwards was advanced to place of worship and honour. And hauing been Treasurer of the cittie, and horne both Aedileships, as well that of the chaire, as the other of the Commons: and at length gone through one Pretourship, he aspired now higher, in hope to be a Consull: and full craftily waited his time, and fought to wind himselfe within the favour of the people, by meanes of the yll opinion and hard conceis they had of the Dictatour: and thus he alone went away withall the affectionat love of the Commons. All men that were either at Rome or in the armie, both good and bad, in generall (excepting the Dictatour himselfe) received and admitted that bill, as made to his disgrace and shamefull  reproch. But he, with the very same gravitie and constancie of heart, endured this injurious; course and dealing of the people raging against him, wherewith he had born his adversaries slandering and charging him before the multitude: and having received in the way as he journied, letters importing the decree of the Senate, for deviding his authoritie equally with the Generall of

 the horsemen, and being assured that notwithstanding his commission were parted and communicated with another, yet his skill and sufficiencie of conduct and command, remained still with himselfe; with a mind invincible as wel against citizens as enemies, he returned to the armie.
But Minutius who before that time was hardly to be endured, both for his fortunate successe, and also for the favour of the common sort; now verily beyond al measure and bounds of modestie, vaunted and gloried, in that he had conquered and got the maistrie over Fabius as webas lover Annibal: That Fabius (I say) who in time of distresse and calamitie, was the only warriour and captain that could be found out to match Annibal: that the superior magistrate, was by the consent and approbation of the people, (a thing never to be found in any record of Chronicles) made but even and equall with the inferior; to wit, the Dictator with the General of horsemen: and in that cittie, wherin the  Commanders of the Cavallerie were wont to quake and tremble at the rods and Axes of the Dictatour. So conspicuous and evident in the eies of the world, was his felicitie and prowes above al others. And therefore minded was he to follow his own fortune, and to take his time: in case the Dictatour still continued lingting in slouth and idlenes, condemned in the judgment both of God and man. Wherupon, the very first day that he and Fabius were met together, he said that they were above all things to determine and set down in what sort they might order this their equall authority of government. He for his part thought it best, that each other day (or if longer time between were supposed better) they should one after the other alternatively have the full and whole command of all for the time to their severall turns that if any occasion of fighting a battaile were presented, they might bee able to countervaile the enemie, not only in counsell but also in power  and strength.
Q. Fabius liked not of this, supposing that whatsoever lay in the hands and disposition of his rash colleague, must needs be subject unto the arbitrement of Fortune: Saying moreover unto him, that he was indeed to impart unto him government and rule, but not wholy to depart the rafro, and shut himself out. And therfore he would never willingly faile, but (to his power) manage by counsell and discretion one part or other: neither would hee devide with him either times or daies, but the forces and armies that Minutius might have one moietie; and himselfe another: and since he might not preserved all by his own counsell and pollicie, yet he would endevour (so far as he could) to save somewhat. And so much he prevailed, that they parted the legions between them, as the matter of the Consuls was. The first and fourth fell to Minutius, the second and third to Fabius. In like manner they devided the horsemen number for number, and  the auxiliar soldiors of Allies and Latines. The Generall of the horsemen would needs likewise, that they should be encamped a funder.
Anniball conceived hereupon a two fold joy, (for he was not ignorant of all that was done among the enimies, partly by intelligence given him from thence by fugitives, and partly by meanes of his owne escouts and spies) for he made this reckning, both that he should deale welenough with the layish rashnesse of Minutius, and handle him in his kind; and also that the prudent pollicie of Fabius was abridged and diminished by the one halfe. Now there was a little hill betweene the camp of Minutius and of the Carthaginians: and no doubt there was, but that he who could gaine it aforehand should have the vantage of the enemie, in regard of the ground. That hill Anniball was not so desirous to get without skirmish, (and yet it had bene a  matter of good importance) as willing thereby to give some occasion of fighting and skuffling with Minutius, whome hee wish very well to be alwayes forward enough to encounter him and make resistance.
The plaine all betweene, seemed at first fight nothing commodious nor good for men that would lay an ambushment, because it was neither over growne with any woods, nor yet, in any part roughly overspread and covered, so much as with briers and brambles. But in very deede the ground was naturally made for to cover and hide an Ambuscador and the rather; because in so naked and bare a valley, none would have imagined and suspected any deceitfull traines, and forelaying of wait. And yet there were in diversnonks and corners thereof, certaine hollow rocks and caves, and some of them of sufficient capacitie to receive ^ob armed mour: In these lurking holes there were bestowed 5000 of horsemen and footemen one with another,  some in one place, some in another, according as they might commodiously lye there closely hidden. And yet, least that the sitting of any one that might chance to go forth unadyisedly or the glittering of armour, should bewray the traines in so open a valley, Anniball; by feading out at the breake of day some (...) for to (...) the aforesaid hill, withdrew the eyes of his enemies another way. These at the first view were despised of the Romanes for their small number, and (...)

every man was desirous to be doing with them, and their fingers itched for to set the enemies  back, and drive them from thence. The Generall himselfe Minutius, as foole-hardie and forward as he that was most, sounded the alarme, and commaunded to go to the winning of the place, braving and threatning the enemies full vainely. First, he sent forth his light armed men to skirmish, but afterwards, the Cornets of horsemen, set close and jointlie together in aray: and at the last, seeing the enemies seconded with new succours and supplies, he advanced forward himselfe with his legions in order of battaile. And Anniball, wheresoever he perceived his men to be distressed, made out continually fresh aides one after another, both of horse and foote, ever as the fight increased and grew hoter: so as now he had his full armie in field, and they mainteined battaile on both sides with al their powre and maine forces. First, the light armed Romans, notwithstanding the disadvantage of the ground, desirous to get up against the hill, (possessed aforehand  by the enemie) were put back, and beaten down againe: in somuch, as in their retire, they put the horsemen in feare that followed hard upon them, and fled for refuge to the ensignes of the Infantery. The maine battaile of the legionarie footemen, among all the rest that were affrighted, only remained without feare, undaunted; and seemed in a plaine, set, and downeright field without ambush, likely enough to have held their owne, and in no respect to have bene overmarched; so couragious they were, and had taken such hart, upon their late victorie, some few dayes before. But the enemies starting sodainely out of their Emboscadoes, so troubled, disordred, and terrified them, flanking them on both sides, and charging withal behind, that neither their heart served any of them to fight, nor their hope remained to flye and escape away.
Then Fabius hearing their first cry, and knowing thereby, that they were in great feare, and seeing besides a farre  off their battaile disordred and in disaray, I thought even as much (quoth he) and no sooner than I feared, it is fallen out: Fortune I see wel, hath overraught foole-hardinesse, and taken it tardie. The man, forsooth, that must needes be made equall with Fabius in government, seeth by this time, that Anniball is his good maister, and his better by ods, in prowesse and fortune: but we shal find out some other time to chide and to be angry. Come on now, forth with your standerds and ensignes, let us wrest from our enemies hands the victorie, and wring from our citizens mouths, confession of their error and trespasse. Now when some of them were slaine, and other looked about which way to make escape and flye: Fabius with his forces shewed himselfe, as sent downe from heaven to rescue them. And before he came to launce one javelin, or began to joyne battaile and fight one stroke, he not onely stayed his fellowes from running away, but also his enemies from further  heate of fight. As many of the Romanes as were disbanded and scattered asunder all abroad; repaired againe speedily from all parts, and rallied themselves to the entier battaile: the rest who by whole troupes had turned their backs, made head againe upon the enemie: and one while geving ground and retyring by little and little, another while standing in a ring and round together stedfast, kept this order by turnes: so as now, both they that were discomfited, and those that were unfoiled, became reduced into one bodie of a battaile, and advanced their ensignes against the enemie. By which time Anniball founded the retreat, and openly confessed and sayd, that as he had vanquished Minutius, so was he foyled and overcome of Fabius. Thus when the more part of the day was spent with variable fortune, The words of Minutius to hi
s sou^diours. and all retyred againe to their camps, Minutius called together his souldiours, and spake unto them after this manner.
I have oftentimes  heard it spoken (my good souldiers) that he is the best man and most sufficient, who knoweth himself what is best to do: next to him is he esteemed, that will be ruled and directed by sage reede and counsell: but he that neither hath the skil to advise another, nor the grace to be advised by another, is simply of the worst nature, and good for nothing. Since that we therefore are not so happie as to attaine unto the highest degree of wit, and perfection of nature, let us content our selves with the second place, and keepe a meane betweene: and whiles we learne to rule, let us settle our selves and resolve to obey him that is wiser than our selves. Let us joyne in camp with Fabius, and when we have presented our selves and our ensignes before his pavilion and tribunall, see that when I salute him by the name of Father, (as is beseeming his excellent majestie, and the benefit by us of him received) that yee also call those souldiours your Patrones, whose valiant hands and trustie  armes erewhile protected you: that this day may give us yet, if nothing else, the honor and name of thankfull persons. Having thus said, he gave commandement to pack up bag and baggage, and to dislodge: and as they marched in good aray toward the camp of the Dictatour, they stucke both him and also all about him into a wonder and admiration.
And having pitched their

 ensigns before the Tribunall: then Minutius the Generall of the horse, went forth before the rests and after he had greeted Fabius himselfe as his Father, and the whole armie likewise saluted those about Fabius, by the name of Patrones: To my parents (quoth he) o Dictator, unto whom I have made you equall in name only (as much as my tongue will give me leave) I am bound and beholden for my owne life only and no more: His speech to the Dictator. but to you, I am indebted for saving both my life and all these here. The Act therefore and ordinance of the commons which hath been a clogge and burden to me rather than an honour, here of myselfe I renounce, revoke and abolish: and (that which I pray God may prove to the good, both of you and me, of my armie and yours, as well that which is preserved, as that which is the preserver) lo I submit and surrender again my selfe under your commaund and government, together with these ensignes and legions thereto belonging;  beseeching you to pardon me, and to entertaine me in the roume of the Generall of the Cavallerie, and those here with me, every man in his former place. Then interchangeably they gave their hands one to another: and the souldiours (after the assembly dismissed) were courteously invited, and friendly entertained as well by them that were unknowen unto them, as of their acquaintance, and so the day, dolorous, heavie, and almost dismall and accursed, turned to be joyfull and festivall.
So soone as tidings came to Rome of these occurrents, and the same confirmed as well by the letters of the Generals themselves, as also by the common voice of soldiors from both armies, every man the best hee could, praised and extolled Maximus up to the skie; whose honour and reputation was as great in the opinion of Anniball and the Carthaginians, for then and never  before, they found, that they had to deale and war in Italie, and with Romanes. As for the two yeers space before, they set so light both by Romane captaines and souldiors, that they could be hardly persuaded, that they warred with that Nation, whereof there went so great a fame, and of whom their forefathers had reported such wonders and terrible things.
They say also, that Anniball as he returned out of the field, gave out these words, That the cloud which setled on the hill tops, hoveredso long in the wind, that it proved a tempestuous storme in the end.
Whiles these things were doing in Italie, Cn. Servilius Geminus the Consull, having sailed about the coasts of Sardinia and Corsica with his fleet, and received hostages both of the one Isle and the other, passed over into Affricke: and before that he landed in the continent and firme land, he wasted the Island G^bi, or Zerbi. Meninx, and having received 1875 lib. (...) according to the lesser Atticke talent. ten talents of silver of the inhabitants  thereabout, for feare least their territorie also should be consumed with fire, and spoiled as well as the rest; he came to Affricke, and there set his forces ashore. From thence hee led his souldiours and marriners likewise, one with another, disbanded and out of order, as if they were to rob and spoile some desert Islands, unpeopled and void of inhabitants. Whereupon they fell unadvisedly into an ambush; and being unskilfull of the countrie, and therewith but few and scattered, they were soon enclosed among many, and with much slaughter and shamefull flight, were driven and beaten backe to their ships. (...) The fleet thus having lost a thousand men, and one treasurer of the armie among them, called Sempronius Blaesus, losed in great hast from the shore (which now was overspread by enemies) and held their course for Sicilie, and at Marsalls. Lilybaeum was set over and delivered to T. Ottacilius the Pretour, for to be brought backe againe to Rome, by P. Sura his Lieutenant. Cn. Servilius himselfe journeied through Sicilie by land, and crossed the narrow seas into Italie: for both hee and his Collegue M. Attilius were sent for by the letters of Fabius, to receive the armie at his hands, now that his six-moneths-soveraine governement was wellneere expired. All the Annales in a manner doe record, that Fabius was the man, who during his Dictatorship, fought and waged warre with Anniball. Coelius writeth also, that he was created Dictator by the people. But both Coelius and the rest, either knew not or els forgot, that the Consul Servilius, who then was farre from Rome, and in the province of Fraunce, had the lawfull right and authoritie onely, to nominate a Dictatour: and because the cittie so affrighted, by reason of that notable overthrow could not stay so long, they were driven to this shift, That there should bee created by the people a Pro-dictator or Dictatour his Deputie. But the noble acts and glorious renowne  of that Generall, together with the title of his image, which might recommend his house more honourable to posteritie, gained easily this point, and caused the Pro-dictator to be reputed Dictatour, and so-called.
The Consuls, M. Attilius Regulus, and Cn. Servilius Geminus, having received the armie (as is beforesaid) fortified in good time the places for wintering harbours (for it was then the Autumne

season) conducted and managed the warres together in great concord, and followed the  same politicke course that Fabius had done before them. For as Annibal made rodes at any time to purvey corne, they would meet him just at every turne, in sundrie places, and either cut off the taile of his men, or intercept and catch them as they went scattering, but never hazard all in one set field; the onely thing that the enemie shot at, by all the meanes hee could devise. And so neere driven was Anniball, and to those tearines of want and scarsitie, that but for very shame (least by his dislodging and departure hee might be thought to flie) hee would have retired backe into Gallia, as being out of all hope to maintaine and sustaine his armie with victuals in those parts, in case the new Consuls who next succeeded, should hold on still the same policie and manner of warfare.
Winter now approched, and all the war that was, continued and rested about Cirign^la, The Embassadors of Naples in the Senate of Rome. Gerion: at what time there arrived at Rome, Embassadors from Naples, who brought with them, and  presented into the counsell house, fortie massie bols of beaten gold: and with all delivered this speech and said, That they knew full well, how the treasure of the people of Rome was wasted and consumed by long warres. And for as much as the said warres were maintained, as wel for the defence of the citties and lands of allies, as for Rome, the very head, mother cittie, and principall citadell (as it were) of all Italie, and for the soveraigne dominion and Empire thereof; the Neapolitanes thought it meet and reason, that what store of gold their auncestors had left unto them, were it for to adorne and deck themselves, or to releeve them in time of need and necessitie, with it they were to aid and helpe the people of Rome in their adversitie. And if they could have bethought themselves of any other meanes besides, wherein they might steed and befriend them, they would as willingly and franckely have made presentment therof: saying, moreover, that the  Senatours of Rome should doe them an high pleasure, if they would make account of all that the men of Naples had, as their owne; and judge them worthy, at whose hands they would vouchsafe to accept a present, much greater, and more pretious in regard of the minde and affection of the givers, than the substance and valeur of the thing. The Embassadors were highly thanked, as well for their liberalitie and munificence, as for the care they had of them: and that boll was onely received, which weighed least.
About the same time, a Carthaginian spye, who for two yeares space had walked unknowne and unsuspected, was detected now and apprehended at Rome: and after his hands were cut off, was suffred to depart. Five and twentie slaves were crucified for a conspiracie contrived in Campus Martius. The informer was made free, and had 60. pound 7. sh. 6. d (...).20000 pound of brasse bullion geven him  for a reward. There were also sent Embassadors to Philip King of the Macedonians, to demaund againe Demetrius Pharius, who having bene vanquished in plaine field, was fled unto him. Others likewise were dispatched to the Ligurians, as well to expostulate with them and complaine, that they had succoured Anniball with men, money, and other munition: as also to hearken and learne (seeing they were so neere) what the Boians and Insubrians did or went about. Besides, a third embassage was addressed as farre as to Selavonis.Illyricum, unto King Pineus, to require and call for the Tribute, whereof the terme was expired and past: and if he were minded to take a longer day, then to receive hostages and pledges of him for securitie. See how careful the Romanes were, and what a provident eye they had, notwithstanding the great warre which lay heavily upon their necks and shoulders, to their other affaires: in so much as no one thing in the world, how distant  and remote soever, was by them neglected. But as concerning religion, and church matters, they made some scruple of conscience, that the temple of Concord (which L. Manlius, L. Deputie in Gallia, had vowed two yeares before in time of a sedition and mutenie of souldiers) was not as yet set out to workemen for to be built or edified accordingly. And therefore two Duumvirs were for that purpose created, by Aemylius the Pretor or L. Governour of the citie, namely, Cn. Pupius, and Caso Quintius Flaminius: who gave order, that the Temple should be built upon the Capitoll hill. The same Pretor, by vertue of a decree of the Senate, sent his letters also unto the Consuls, importing thus much; That if they thought good, one of them should repaire to Rome for the creation of new Consuls; and that himselfe would summon the Parlement against that day which it should please them to appoint. The Consuls wrote  back againe according to the premisses; That they might not depart farre from the enemie without damage of the State: advising them to hold an assembly for the Election aforesayd, by authoritie of an interregent, rather than that one of the Consuls should be called away from the warres. But the LL. of the Senate thought it better, to have a Dictatour chosen by one of

 the Consuls for the holding of that high court of parlement. So L. Veturi^ Philo, was nominated Dictatour, and he chose for Generall of the horsemen M. Pomponius Matho. But these men being not duly and lawfully created, were commaunded at the fortnight end to give over their places, and then the matter grew to an Interreigne. The Consuls had their commission, for government and conduct of the armie, continued and confirmed for one yeare lo^^er. The Senatours named for Interregents, first, Cn. Claudius Cento, the sonne of Appius; and after him, P. Cornelius Asina. During whose interreigne, the Parlement was holden, with much contention and debate betweene the Nobles and the Commons. The vulgar people indeavoured to advance unto the Consulship C. Terentius Varro, a man of their owne coat and condition, one crept into good liking and favour with the common sort, by opposing himselfe and contesting against  great personages, and by other popular practices and courses that he used to win grace among the people; as namely, by abasing the greatnesse of Fabius, and the majestie of the Dictatorship: for nothing was there els in him, to commend him to the world, but a malicious minde to bring others into disgrace. The Nobles withstood the Commons all they could, to prevent this mischiefe; That men should not take a custome to be their equals, by meanes of inveighing and making head against them. The Oration of Bibius Herennius a Tribune.
Bibius Herennius a Tribune of the Comm. and kinsman to C: I erentins, blamed and accused much not only the Senat, but also the Augurs, in that they forbad the Dictator to finish and go through with the election and so by drawing them into hatred, fought to purchase favour and credit unto Terentius his Candidate, who stood to be Consull. First, quoth he, where as the Noblemen for many yeares together; sought occasions of warre; and trained Anniball  into Italie, the same persons craftily have made a long warre of it, when it might have ben brought to a finall end before now. Also, when it was well seene that they might have fought a battaile with the complet power of foure legions all together; seeing that M. Minutius in the absence of Fabius had a luckie day: two legions only and no more, were offred and exposed as it were to the enemie to be hewen in peeces: and then afterwards, they were rescued and saved from massacre, and the very edge of the sword: to the end that Fabius might be called Father and Patrone: even he, who to say a truth, first impeached the Romanes for vanquishing the enemies, before that he saved them from being vanquished. Moreover, the Consuls that succeeded, following the same course, and artificial fetches that Fabius practised before them, drew out the warre still on length, when they had good meanes of victorie, and might have fully finished it.  A complot (no doubt) contrived and concluded among all the Nobles. And never will they see to make an end of warre, before there be a Consull chosen, a meere commoner in deede, to wit, a man never seene asore, and of the first head. For those who of commoners are now noblified, are all alike and of the same profession; they draw all in one line, and have learned one lesson; and ever since that they have left to be contemned of the Nobilitie, are fallen to despise and disdeine the Comminaltie. For who seeth not? that in seeking to have an Interreigne, their onely purpose and reach was, that the Election might be full and wholie in the power and ordering of the Nobles. That was the thing which the Consuls aimed at, in staying behind in campe with the armie: and afterwards when there was a Dictatour created against their wils for to hold the great assemblie for the Election, their drift was, and they wrought so, and brought it about in the end,  that the Augurs should give it out and pronounce, that there was an error committed in creation of the Dictatour. And therefore, saith he, the commons cannot of all things away with these Interreignes: and verily, one of the Consulships (at least) apperteineth of right to the Commons of Rome: and no doubt, the people in their free election would more willingly make choyse of one to be Consull, and conferre the dignitie upon him, that loved rather to win the victorie at once, than to continue commaunder in the armie a long time. When the Commons were once inkindled and set on fire with these speeches and remonstrances, albeit three of the Patritij were competitours, namely, Pub. Cornelius Merenda, L. Manlius Volso, and M. Aemylius Lepidus, and two [Such as by descent and birth were pure Commoners, but by place, become of the Nobility.]new noblemen, who were alreadie familiar and acquainted with the Commons, to wit, C. Attilius Serranus, and Q. Aelius Paetus, of whome  the one had beene High Priest, and the other Augur: yet at length was C. Terentius onely created Consull, to the end that the election should be in his power, that hee might choose unto him a Colleague at his pleasure. Then the Patritians having a sufficient tryall, that their Candidates and competitours were of small force and not able to prevaile, urged and put forward L. Aemylius Paulus, who sometimes had beene Consull with M. Laelius,

in the condemnation as well of himselfe as of his companion, escaped the perill of being burnt, and was well senged and scorched as it were in the fire: a man of all others most mischievously bent against the commons: him they urged I say, to stand for a Consulship, notwithstanding he refused a long while, and alleadged many reasons against it. And so the next Comitiall or Parlement day, by occasion that all the concurrents and competitors aforesaid that stood with Varro, gave place and left off their suite, he was chosen to match with the Consull elect, for to thwart and crosse him, rather than to be assistant unto him in the government. This done, they proceeded to the election of Pretours, wherein M Pomponius Mathe, and P Furius Philus were created. Vnto Pomponius, fell by lot the iurisdiction within the citie of Rome: and unto P. Furius Philus, betweene the citizens of Rome and foreiners. Two other Pretors besides were chosen, M. Claudius Marcellus, to be sent L. Deputie into Sicilie, and L. Posthumius Albinus into Gallia. All were  created in their absence, and excepting Terentius the Consull onely, there was no Magistracie conferred upon any, who had not aforetime borne and exercised the same: for divers valorous and hardie men were passed over and left out, because in such a time of trouble, it was not thought good to preferre any man to a government, wherein he was raw and unexperienced. The armies also were augmented; but to what proportion they arose, either in Cavallerie, or Infanterie, I dare not set downe anything for certaintie: so greatly do authors varrie both in the number and qualitie of the forces. Some say, there was a new supplie of 10000 souldiers enrolled. Others affirme, that to the five legions, there were adjoyned foure new besides, to the end they might employ nine legions in the warres. Also, that the legions were increased in number both of foote and horse: to wit, with the addition of one thousand footemen, and three hundred  horsemen in every Legion: All within these marks [] ^eade (...) a marginall note. [For sometime before, a Legion conteined 4000 foote, and 200 horse, called quad^ at a legio: whereas at first, Romulus ordeined it to be 3000 of the one, and 300 of the other,] so as a legion consisted now of five thousand foote, and three hundred horse: and that the associates should double the number of horsemen, and find even proportion of footemen with the Romanes.
Some Historians have written, that at what time as the battell of Cannae was fought, the Romanes were in campe 87200 strong. But in this they all agree, that the Romanes warred with greater preparation, and more force and furie than in yeeres past, because the Dictatour had put them in good hope, that the enemie might be vanquished and subdued at once. But before that these new Legions advaunced under their ensigns and banners out of the cittie, the Decemvirs  were commaunded to goe and peruse the bookes of Sibylla; by reason that men were commonly put in feare, and terrified with newes of strange sights and prodigious tokens. For the rumour went, that both at Rome in the Aventine, and also at Aricia, it rained stones, much about one time; and that in the Sabines countrie (which no doubt portended a great massacre and slaughter) there issued out of a certaine fountaine, waters hote, with much bloud: and men were more terrified therewith, because it did so many times together. Besides, in the street called Fornicata, toward Campus Martius, divers persons were blasted and smitten to death with lightening from heaven. These prodigious signes were expiate and purged with due remedies out of the aforesaid bookes. Embassadours also from the cittie of Pestum, brought unto Rome a present of massie bols of beaten gold. Thanked they were, like as the Neapolitanes before them, but the  gold was not received.
The Embassadors of K. Hiero, in the Senate of Rome. At the same time, there arived at Ostiafrom K. Hiero a fleet of ships, redy rigged, and furnished with store of victuals; The Syracusian Embassadors were brought into the Senate house, where they declared, That K. Hiero, so soone as he heard of the death of C. Flaminius the Consul, and the defeiture of the armie, tooke it so heavily, that no proper calamitie of his owne, or losse incident unto his kingdome, could have troubled him more and touched him neerer: and therefore albeit he knew ful well, that the grandeur and courage of the people of Rome, was ordinarily more admirable in their adversitie, than in prosperitie and welfare, yet he had sent all those things, wherewith good friends and faithfull Allies are wont to furnish the associates in time of war: praying the LL. of the Senate, in any case not to refuse the same, but to take all in good worth. And first  and formost, for good luck sake and fortunate presage, they have brought with them the image of Victorie in gold, weighing 320 11520 pound sterling.pound: requesting, that it wold please them to accept the same, to have and to hold it, as their owne for ever.
Moreover they had transported with them 9375 quarters, reckoning sixe modij to Medimnus, which is supposed to be much about a bushell and a halfe of London measure.300000 Modios of wheate, and 200000 of barley, to the end they should be at no fault for victuals,

 and were redy moreover to bring in more, according as they should need, and to what place they would appoint. As for footmen heavily armed, and horsemen, he knew well the people of Rome would use none but naturall Romanes, or at least wise Latines. But forasmuch as he had seen and observed in the Roman camp, forrain aids consisting of light armed soldiers, therfore he had sent 1000 Archers and Slingers, a meet and competent power to match with the Baleares and Mores, and other nations that use shot, and to reach their enemie a far off. Over and besides these gifts and reall presents, they counselled and advised them, that the Lord Deputie of Sicilie, should passe with his fleet into Affricke, both to find the enemie worke, and give him his hands full of warre at home: and also to affourd him lesse respite and worse opportunitie, to send aid and succour to Anniball. The Senate returned this answere againe unto the King. That King Hiero  had done the part of a right good man, and a singuler friend and allie: who ever since that he was entred into amitie with the people of Rome, hath held on the same course still, in keeping his faithfull alleageance, and never failed, but at all times, and in all places succoured and advanced the state and empire of Rome, with all bountie and princely munificence: which the people of Rome tooke most thankfully, as in right they ought. As for gold, some other cities likewise had brought and offred unto them, but accepting onely in good worth their kindnes, received it not. But the image of Victorie, and the happie presage and foretoken therof they gladly accepted: and for that blessed Saint, they appointed and dedicated even the Capitoll, and temple of ^up. Opt. Max. to be the seat and shrine therof: that being consecrated in that castle and highest fortresse of the citie of Rome, it might be propice and gracious, and remain firme and fast to the people of Rome. As  for the slingers and archers, together with the corn, they were delivered to the Coss. Five and twentie gallies, with five ranks of ores to a side, were joined to the Navie which was under the conduct of T. Octacilius the Propretor in Sicilie: who had commission, if he thought it good and expedient for the commonweale, to passe over into Affricke. The Consuls having finished the musters and levied soldiers, staied a few daies, untill their allies were come with aide from the Latines. Then were the Soldiers particularly (a thing never done before) by their Colonels, put to their corporall oath, and sworne to make their repaire at the Consuls commandement, and without their leave not to depart: for untill that daie, there passed nothing but a sacrament parole and simple promise in generall. For whensoever the horsemen resorted to their Decuries, and footmen to their Centuries; both they of the Cavallerie in their Decuries, and also of the Infantery in their  Centuries, sware (after a sort) voluntarily among themselves, That they would not abandon their ensignes by way of flight, or upon any feare, nor go out of their ranks, unles it were to fetch either some offensive armour, or to smite an enemie, or to save the life of a citizen. Which having been aforetime a voluntarie covenant and accord between themselves, was now by the martial Tribunes or Colonels, reduced to a formall and solemne oth, and bound the soldiers to observe the same, of necessitie. Yet before the ensignes set forward and marched out of Rome, the Consull Varro dealt many hot words and brave orations in the assemblie of the people, intimating and purporting thus much in effect: That the Nobles had called for war in Italie, where it was like to remaine long enough, and to sticke close by the ribs of the common-weale, if she were served with many such Generals as Fabius was. As for my selfe (qd. he) I shal (I trow) vanquish the enimie, the  first day that I set eie upon him, yea and finish the war at once for ever. But his collegue Paulus made but on only speech, even the day before they were to take their leave of the citie: which was not so wel taken of the people for the present, as it proved true in the end.
Wherin he gave Varro no hard words, nor girded at him otherwise than thus; That hee mervailed much, how any captaine, before he had experience either of his owne armie or of his enemies, and knew the situation of the place and ground, and the nature of the countrey, sitting as yet within the cittie in his gowne, could perfitely tell what he was to do in the field, and in armes: and be able also to foretell and set downe the very day, wherein hee was to encounter and joine in raunged battaile with the enemie. For his owne part, he would not cast thus afore-hand, nor plot his designes and counsails before due time and season, which present occurrences are wont much more to minister  unto men, than men to fit them to the occurrents that shal happen. This wold he wish with al his hart, That the enterprises taken in hand warily and with discretion, might prove as luckie and fortunat. As for inconsiderat rashnesse, besids that it implieth folly, hath ever to that day sped but ill. Thus it was wel seen, that this man of himself enclined to prefer safe proceding and advised counsel, before doubtful waies and foole hasty courses: and to the end that he might persevere in that resolution

more constantly, Q Fabius Maximus at his departure (by report) bad him farewell, in this  or such like manner.
The Oration of Q. Fabius Max. to L. Aemylius the Consull. If either you, o L. Aemylius, had a Colleague like unto your selfe, (which I could rather wish) or that your selfe were sutable to your Colleague, these my words to you were altogether needlesse and superfluous.
For you twaine, being two good Consuls, would even without my speech do all things faithfully to the good of the Commonweale and contrariwise, if both of you were bad, yee neither would vouchsafe to give care to my sayings, nor ponder in mind my counsels. But now, when I consider your companion what he is, and your selfe, to be a man of that qualitie and worth, you are hee to whome alone I am addressed to direct my whole speech; to you, I say, whom me thinkes I foresee alreadie, like to be in vaine and without effect, an honest man and a good cittizen. For if the Commonweale be halt and lame but of one side, as great sway and authoritie  will bad projects and lewd courses carrie, as the good, sage, and holesome counsels. For you are far out of the way and much deceived, o L. Aemylius, if you thinke to bee lesse troubled with Anniball than with C. Terentius. And I wote not well, but I greatly feare, that you shall have a more comberous adversarie of the one, than a daungerous enemie of the other. For, with Anniball you are to fight in the field, and in time of battell onely: but with Terentius you shal have to doe in every place, and at all houres. Against Annibal and his Legions you shall make head, and have the help of your own Cavallerie and Infanterie: but Generall Varro will assaile you even with your owne souldiours. Farre be from you in any ill sense the late remembrance of C. Flaminius, for I love no such unluckie boding. Howbeit, he began his mad fits when hee was once Consull, and never before: when hee was in his province with commaund, and in the campe with his armie, and never els. But his Varro, even before he stood for the Consulship, and all the whiles he was a suiter therefore, and now likewise, that he is Consull, before that he seeth campe or enemie in field, is hornemad, and talketh like a man besides himselfe. What foule worke then (think you) will he make, when hee shall see himselfe with armed youths about him in the campe, who now amongst peaceable cittizens in their gownes and long robes within the cittie, stirreth so great stormes and tempests, cracking and vaunting at every second word, of nothing but fight, skirmish, and battaile? What a coyle I say, will he keepe there, where no sooner a word spoken, but a blowe given; and when upon direction, presently ensueth execution? But in case this man (as hee saith flatly he will) fall immediatly to strike a battaile, either I know not what belongeth to Art militarie, and have neither skill how to conduct this kind of warfare, nor any experience of the qualitie  and nature of this enemie, or els there will be another place more noble and memorable by our defeature and overthrow, than was the Lake Thrasymenus. But it is no time now to stand upon these tearmes, and to glorifie my selfe in comparison of this one person: who have loved (as it is wel known) to exceed and go beyond all measure in despising glorie and honor, rather than in desiring and coveting the same. But the truth is this, and so it will be found in the end, that the only way to war against Anniball, is that, which I tooke and alwaies used. Neither is it the issue and event alone (for that is maister and teacher of fooles) which sheweth and proveth this unto us, but even reason it selfe which hath, and will be still the same and immutable, as long as things in the world hold on as they doe. We warre (you see) in Italie, at home, in our owne ground and place of residence: all quarters round about us, full of our owne citizens or friendly Allies: who daily  helpe us, and will bee readie still to furnish us with armour, men, horse, and victuals. Sufficient proofe and testimonie of their faithfulnesse have they given us alreadie in our hard distresse and adversitie. Space and processe of time maketh us better, stronger, wiser every day than other, and more constant and resolute. Contrariwise, Anniball is in a strange and forraine land, in his enemies countrie, in the mids of all things that are crosse and adverse unto him, farre from his house and home, farre from his native soile, having peace no where, neither by land nor sea. No citties receive him and give him entertainment, no wals he hath, within which he can retire himselfe in safetie. Nothing seeth he, wheresoever he goeth, that he can say is his owne. From day to day, from hand to mouth, he liveth of rapine and spoile. Scarce a third part hath he of those forces, which hee transported over the river Iberus. Hunger and famine hath wasted more of them, than the edge of the sword: and for this small remainder that is left, hee is hard and scant provided of food and sustenance. Make you any doubt then, but we shall vanquish him, whiles wee (...) still and take our ease, who day by day decaieth sensiblie, and (...) old and feeble, who neither hath store of victuals to maintaine an armie, nor supplie of men to make up his broken bands,

 nor masse of monie to entertaine them. How long was he saine to fight for Gerion, a poore little castle in Apulia, as if it had been for the wals of Carthage it selfe? Neither will I boast and magnifie my selfe at all, before you, o Aemylius. Doe you but onely consider, how Cn. Servilius and Aemylius, the last Consuls, plaied mock holyday with him, and deluded him. This is the onely way of safetie, o L. Paulus, which I feare me, our own cittizens will make difficult and daungerous unto themselves, more than the enemies can. For you shall have your own soldiors and your enemies both, of one and the same mind. Varro the Romane Consull, and Anniball the Carthaginian Generall, will aime and reach at one and the selfesame thing. And you, being but one man, must make account to resist two captains: and resist them you shall well ynough, if you will stand firm and hold your owne against all bruits and speeches of the people, if neither the vaine-glorie of  your fellow that shall be blased, nor the infamous rumors that shall bee falsely blowne abroad to your disgrace, shall once stirre you from your constant resolution and maintainance of the truth. Old said sawes these be, and common proverbes, That right and true-dealing may well be sicke, but it shall not die: it may lie a bleeding, but shall not miscarie. And he that will despise vainglorie, shall attaine in the end to true glorie. Let them call you and spare not, fearefull for carefull, cold and slow for wise and considerate, an ill souldiour and ignorant for a skilfull warrior and experienced. But be not you dismaied: I had leifer heare a wise and sober enemie to fear you, than see foolish and brainesicke cittizens to praise you. Adventure all things boldly, Anniball will contemne you: enterprise nothing rashly, he shall dread you. And yet my purpose is not, neither speake I this, that you should enter into no action at all: but my meaning and advise is, that in  all your doings you be guided and directed by sage reason, not haled and carried away with blind fortune. Order the matter so, that all things lie within your compasse, and at your disposition. Stand ever armed, and upon your guard. Have your eie about you stil, and keepe good watch, that neither you lose any opportunitie that shall present it selfe unto you, nor yeeld unto the enemie any occasion for his advantage. Take time and leisure, you shall find all things cleere, plaine, easie, and certaine. Contrariwise, hast maketh wast: it is ever to seeke, is foreseeth nought, but is starke blind.
The Consull answered to these speeches, with no lightsome cheere and gladsome countenance, as confessing. The answere of Aemylius to Faebius. That all he spake was rather true in substance, than easie in execution.
For (faith he) if the Generall of horsemen were so violent, and not to be endured of you, who were  his Dictatour and soveraigne Commaunder; what course shall I take, what shift may I make, what power and authoritie sufficient, am I like to have, to sway against my seditious, quarrelsome, and headie Colleague? For mine owne part, in my former Consulship, I hardly escaped a scouring, and much adoe I had to passe through the light fire of the flaming peoples doome and heavie censure, wherein I was well scortched and halfe burnt. I wish all may be well in the end. Howbeit, if any thing shall fall out otherwise than well, I had rather hazard the pikes and darts of the enemies and leave my life behind me among them, than put my selfe to be tried againe by the voices and suffrages of angrie and testie citizens. Paulus had no sooner delivered this speech, but (as the report goeth) he went forth on his journie, and the cheese LL. of the Senat accompanied him. The other Commoner Consull was likewise attended of his favourites the Commons, more looked  on and gazed at for their multitude and number, than regarded for the worth and qualitie of their persons.
So soone as they were arrived at the campe, and that the new armie was intermingled with the old, they devided the whole into two camps, and ordred the matter so, that the new which was the lesser should be neerer to Anniball: and in the old, the greater number and the whole strength and floure of the maine forces should be quartered. Then they sent away to Rome M. Atilius the Consull of the former yeare, who excused himselfe by reason of his old age; and desired to be gone. But they gave unto Cn. Servilius the charge and conduct of one Romane Legion, and besides of two thousand horsemen and footemen of their allies in the lesser campe. Anniball, notwithstanding he well perceived that the power of his enemies was reenforced by  one halfe more than before: yet wonderous joyfull he was at the comming of these new Consuls. For not onely he had nothing left him of victuals, which from day to day he brevited for, to serve his present neede and no more; but also there was no more to be had, and nothing remained for to fill his hands with; by reason that after the territorie was not safe to travaile in the come from all parts was conveighed unto the strong walled townes and there laid up: so that

(as afterwards it was knowne for certaine) he had scarce corne ynough for to serve ten daies: and  the Spaniards, by occasion of the dearth and want, were at the point to revolt unto the Romans, if they might but espie a good and commodious time therefore. Over and besides, to the inbred rashnesse and overhastie nature of the Consull, fortune also ministred mater to confirme him therein. For in a certaine tumultuarie skirmish (to stop and impeach the forragers and boothalers of Anniball, and which began rather by chaunce, as the souldiors happened to encounter one another, than upon any considerate counsell aforehand, or by direction and commaundement from the Generals) the Carthaginians had the soile, and went by the worse; for of them there were 1700 slaine: but of Romanes and Confederates, not passing 100. And when in the traine of victorie they hotely followed the chase in disarray, the Consull Paulus, who that day had the absolute commaund (for they governed by turnes, each one his day) restrained and staied them. Varro thereat chaufed and frounsed, crying out alowd, That hee had let the enemie escape out of his hands: and if he had not thus given over the pursuit, the warre might have been ended at once. Anniball tooke this losse and dammage nothing neere the heart, but rather made full reckning, that he had caught (as it were) with a bait, and fleshed the audaciousnesse of the foolehastie Consull, and of the new souldiours especially. For he knew as well, all that was done amongst the enemies, as in his owne campe; namely, that the Generals were not sutable nor sorting one unto the other: and that of three parts of the armie, two in a manner were but rawe, fresh, and untrained souldiours. And therefore supposing he had now gotten place and time favourable unto him, to contrive and compasse some stratageme, the night following he led forth his souldiors, carying nothing about them but their armour; and abandoned the campefull of all things, as wel privat  goods and furniture, as publike provision: and beyond the next hils, he bestowed secretly in ambush his footmen well appointed and in ordinance of battell, on the left hand; and the horsemen on the right: and conveighed all his cariages into the mids between the two flanks: to the end that whiles the enemie was busied in rifling and ransaking the tents, forlorne (as it were) and forsaken by the flight of the owners and masters, he might surprise him laden and encombred with bag and baggage. He left behind him in the camp many fires burning, to the end that the enemies shold verily thinke and beleeve, that under a pretended shew of an armie in campe, his purpose was to hold and keepe the Consuls, amused still where they were, whiles himselfe in the meane time might gaine more ground and escape further away: like as he had plaied by Fabius the yere before. When day light was come, and the Coss. saw, first that the standing gards were gone, and  perceived (as they approched neerer) an unwonted silence, they marvailed much. But after they discovered certainely that the campe was abandoned, and no person remaining behind: there was running of all hands who could run fastest to the pavilions of the Coss. with newes that the enemies were fled, in such feare, as they left their tents standing entire, and had quit the campe wholly: and to the end their flight should be more secret and not descried, they had left light fires burning in everie place. Then began they all to crie and call upon the Coss. for to command the standerds and ensignes to be brought abroad, and to lead forth in pursuite of the enemies and without any stay to make spoile and havock of their campe. And in truth, one of the Coss. was no wiser than the common soldiors. But Paulus replied and told them ever and anon, that they were to be circumspect and warie, and to looke about them what they did, for feare of an ambush. Yet seeing  in the end no remedie, and that otherwise hee could neither staie the mutinie, nor rule the captaine thereof: he sent out M. Statilius (the Provost marshall) with a troupe of Lucane horsemen, in espiall, to discover the coasts and see all were cleare: who having ridden hard to the gates, and given order to all the rest for to stay without the fortifications, himselfe with two horsemen besides, entred within the rampire, and having looked and searched every corner advisedly, (...)tired and made relation, That past all peradventure there were knaves abroad, and a peece of (...)cherie was in hand: for why, there are fires made (qd. he) on that side only of the campe that ^^^ked toward the enemie: the pavilions stand open, and all things of price and value which they (...) most store by, are left at randon even to fit our hands: and we have seen besides in divers places, silver plate and coine scattered along the way here and there, as it were a bair laid to traine us to a  bootie. These circumstances reported, of purpose to withdraw their minds from covetous and greedie desire of pillage; set them on and kindled them the more. And the soldiors had no sooner cried aloud, that unlesse the signall were given, they would set forwards without Commanders^ but they had a captain straight at hand to lead them the way for immediatly Varro founded the

 march. Paulus who of himselfe made slow hast, and perceived besides that the birds in taking the Auspice, approved not this enterprise, nor gave good tokens of happy speed, gave order straightwaies that his Collegue should be advertised of the unluckie Auspice, who was readie now to set out of the gate with his standerd, and that in any wise he should stay. Wherwith albeit Varro was not wel content, yet the late misfortune of Flaminius, and the memorable overthrow at sea of Claudius [Read the Brevlarie of the nineteenth booke. Pulcher] Consull, in the Punick war, wrought some scruple of conscience and feare in his heart. But it was even the faire grace of the gods (if a man may so say) and nothing else, which put by and deferred, rather than impeached and inhibited the danger and destruction that hung over the Romanes heads. For, as good hap was, it chaunced at the very instant, when the Consull commanded the ensignes to be brought into the campe, and the soldiors would not obey him,  that two slaves (who served sometime two horsemen, the one a Formian, and the other a Sidicine, and who in the year when Servilius and Atilius were Consuls, among other foragers were taken prisoners by the Numidians) made an escape and fled that day to their old maisters again. Who being brought before the Coss. advertised them constantly, that the whole armie of Anniball, lay close in embuscado on the farther side of the mountaines. The comming of these bondslaves so right and jump as they did, caused the souldiors to obey their Coss. Whereas the one of them, by his ambitious courting and seeking unto them at the first for a Consulship; and afterwards, by his unseemely indulgence and pleasing of them, had lost all his majestie and reputation among them.
Anniball when hee saw that the Romanes rather began to stirre without advise, than still to  run rashly on head to the full, and that his craftie devise was disclosed and tooke no effect, returned againe into his campe. Where, hee could not for want of come make abode many daies: and besides, not onely souldiors (who were not all one mans children, but a mingle mangle and medley of all Nations) began daily to plot and enter into new dessignements, but also their captaine himselfe was of many minds. For whereas they began with muttering and grumbling, and afterwards with open mouth, to demaund and call for their due wages, complaining first of the death of victuals, and in the end, of meere hunger and famine: and withall a rumour ran, that the mercenarie souldiours; and the Spaniards especially, were minded and intended to give him the slip, and to turne to the enemie; Anniball likewise be thought himselfe otherwhiles as it was said, how he might flie into Gallia, but so, as he would leave his Infanterie behind him at sixe and  seven, and so bee gone with his Cavallerie alone. As men, I say, were thus plotting and devising in the campe, he resolved at length to dislodge from thence, and to remove into the hotter countries of Apulia, where the harvest was more timely: considering with all, that the farther hee went from the enemies, his souldiours who were by nature light-headed and unconstant, would not so easily revolt and flie from him. So he tooke his way by night, and made fires likewise, and left a fewe tents standing in sight, that the Romanes fearing the like traines and ambush as before, might keepe in, and not stirre abroad. But when as the same Statilius the Lucane, having scoured all the coasts, both beyond the campe, and the other side of the hils, and brought word, that he had discovered the enemies a farre off dismarching, then began they the morrow after to thinke and consult of making after him with hote pursute. But albeit both Consuls continued, as ever  before, the same men still, that is to say, diversly minded, and persisting in their severall resolutions: but so, as all in a manner accorded with Varro, and none agreed unto Paulus, but onely Servilius the Consull of the former yeere: yet according to the opinion and counsull of the Maior pars, they went both together (for what might bold that which fatall necessitie driveth) to make Cannae much renowned and famous for the notable overthrow and defeature of the Romanes. Neere this village Anniball had encamped under the wind Vul^arnus, and had it on his backe: which wind, when the fields are skorched and burnt with drought, is wont to bring with it clouds (as it were) of dust. Which as it was good and commodious for the very campe it selfe, so it was like to serve in speciall steed, when they should raunge their battaile in order, and fight, with the wind blowing on their backe, against the enemie, whose eies the dust was readie to put out, flying  with the wind full in their faces so abundantly.
The Consuls having diligently searched the waies, and tried the passages ever before them, followed Anniball hard, and so soone as they were come to Cannae, had him in sight: where they fortified two campes, of like distance almost asunder, as at Gerion; and devided their forces like as before. The river Aufidus ran close by both these campes, and yeelded wa^^ing places according

as either of them had occasion and neede, but not without some skuffling and skirmish. But from the lesser camp, which lay on the farther side of Aufidus the Romanes had more libertie to water, because upon the farther banke there was planted no skonce nor gard of the enimie. Anniball having possessed himselfe of a good plot of ground to his mind, commodious and meete for the service of horsemen (in which kind of forces he was invincible) ordred his battailons in array, and by putting out certaine Numidian light horse, made a bravado, and bad the Consuls battaile. And even then it fell out, that both the Romane camps were disquieted and troubled anew, what with the mutinie of the soldiours, and what with the disagreement and jarring of the Consuls; whiles Paulus laid hard unto Varro, and set before his eyes the rashnesse of Sempronius and Flaminius: and Varro againe hit him home, and twit him with the example of Fabius, which made so goodly a shew in the eyes of feareful, idle, and cowardly captaines: both of  them fell to protesting and calling God and man to witnesse, the one giving out, that the fault was not in him that Anniball was now Lord welneere of all Italy alreadie, and why? because himselfe was kept short and tyed fast enough by his colleague, and the soldiours whose hote bloud was up, and who were eager of fight, had their weapons even plucked out of their hands: Aemylius on the other side complaining, that if ought should happen amisse unto the Legions thus betrayed, and offred wilfully and unconsideratly to the daunger of doubtfull battaile, notwithstanding he were not blameworthy, but innocent altogether, yet should he be the first that smarted, and be partaker of the mischiefe and misfortune: and yet he would gladly see, whither they who were so readie and hastie of their tongue to speake, would be as nimble and active of their hands to fight, when the time came. Thus whiles they spend time in chopping logick, and quarelling  one with another, rather than in good and sober consultations, Anniball who had stood arranged a good part of the day readie to fight, minding to retire his other forces into his camp, sent forth certaine Numidians out of the battaile to charge upon the Romanes on the other side of the river, who from the lesser camp went for water. These being a disordred and confused multitude, were not fully landed on the banke, but with the shout only and tumult of the Numidians, they were discomfited and put to flight: whereupon the enemie rode further, even to the standing Corps de guard, quartered before the rampier, and hard at the very gares of the Romane campe. This was such an indignitie offred to the Romanes, to see themselves now thus braved and bearded even in the very camp by the auxiliarie souldiers, and the raskal sort of the enemies, that there was no other thing stayed the Romanes from passing the river presently, and embattailing  themselves, but only this, that it was Paulus his turne that day to have the soveraigne commaund of all. And therefore the morrow after, when it came to Varro his course for to rule, without any advise of his companion, he put forth the That is, a ^karlet (...) out of the Generall his pavilion. signall of battaile, and with all his forces put in order of battaile, went over the river. Paulus also followed after him, as one who might well enough mislike and disallow the purpose of his colleague, but otherwise could neither will not choose, but second him, and take part in the execution. Being once over the river, they joyne also the forces which they had in the smaller camp; The memorable battaile of Canne. unto the other: and in this maner they ordred the battaile. In the right point which was neerer to the river, was aranged the Roman Cavallerie, and after them the footmen. The left pointal without forth, was flanked with the horsmen of the associates: within forth stood their Infantery: but in the middle part were bestowed the archers  and loose shot, close to the maine battaile of the Romane Legions; and of all the rest of light armed auxiliarie souldiours, consisted the vantgard. The Consuls led both the points, Terentius the left, Aemylius the right, Cn. Servilius had the conduct of the maine battaile. Now Anniball by the breake of day, having sent before the Baleare slingers, and his other light armour, passed over the river, and marshalled them in battaile aray, ever as they came to land. The horse as well Gaules as Spanyards, he opposed in the left point, neere to the banke, even against the horsemen of the Romanes: the right consisted of the Numidian light horse: and the maine battaile was strengthned and fortified with his Infanterie but in such maner as the Africanes flanked both in maner of wings: and betweene them were bestowed the Gaules and the Spanyards in the midst. A man that had seene the Africanes, would have taken most of them for Romanes, so armed  were they with Romane armour, gotten much of it at (...), but most all at Thrasymenus. The Frenchmen and Spanyards, had targuets neere of one fashion, but their swords were unlike and farre differing. Those of the Gaules were very long and not pointed. But the Spanyard, whose manner is rather to fight with the thrust and to foyne, than to slash and strike edgelong,

 had handsome short curtilasses, and sharp at the point. And after this sort stood these two nations armed before the rest (terrible to behold, both for the bignesse of their persons, and also for their habite and attire.) The Gaules all from the navell upward naked: the Spanyards with linnen wastcotes or jackets, glittering wondrous bright, bordred and embrodred with purple and skarlet. The complet number of all, as well horse as footemen, that stood embattailed, amounted (as they report) unto fortie thousand foote, and ten thousand men of armes. These Captaines had the leading of the two points, to wit, Asdruball commanded the left, Maharball the right. Anniball himselfe in person with his brother Mago, conducted the middle battaile. The sunne shone sidewise upon the flanks both of the one and also of the other armie, very indifferent and commodious to both parts, were it that they were so placed and marshalled of set purpose, or  chanced at adventure so to stand: the Romanes with their faces full South, the Carthaginians into the North. But the wind which the inhabitants of that countrie call Vuliurnus, arose and blew full upon the faces of the Romanes, and raysed such store of dust, and drave it so upon their dyes, that it tooke away their sight and prospect. The cry and shout began on both sides, and the Auxiliarie souldiours put themselves forth first to skirmish, and charged one another with their light shot. Then the left point of the Gaules and Spanish men of armes, encountred and ran ful upon the right hand of the Romans Cavallerie, nothing at all after the order of horse-service, for they were of necessitie to affront one another streight forward, as having no roume left about them to fling out and ride at large, being flanked on the one hand with the river, and enclosed on the other with the battallon of footemen. Whereupon I say, they were forced to charge full  butt from both parts, directly before them, so long as their horses stood close and thrust togither: but at length when they began to stir and winse, the riders, man to man, fell to take hold and clasp one another, and every man to pluck his enemie besides his horse, so as now they were driven much what to fight on foot. This conflict was rather sharpe than long: and to be short, the Romane Cavallerie was discomfited and put to flight. And anon, as the horse made an end of their fight, began the medley of the foote also. At the first the Gaules and Spanyards equall to their enemies both in force and courage, mainteined the conflict right hardily, and kept their order and arraies. At length, the Romanes cast about and devised on what side, and with what forme of a close battailon, to force back that pointed squadron of the enemies, raunged very thin, and by so much the weaker, and bearing out withall, from the rest of the battaile. Now when they had  once driven them to recule, and to give ground, the Romanes preased on still at one instant, and with the same violence perced through them as they fled for feare headlong, untill they were entred as far as to the very midst of the vantgard and maine battaile: and finding none able to stand in their way and make resistance, they gained in the end the very rereward of the Affricanes: who having drawen in from both sides their skirts and wings, stood together strong, and firmely kept their ground. The Gaules and Spanyards continued still in the midst, somewhat advanced without the rest of the battaile. Now when this pointed squadron was driven in by the Romanes, and made even and equal first with the front of the battaile, and afterwards upon further enforcement, gave way for them to passe in a lane through the midst thereof; by that time the Affricanes charged upon their flanks: and whiles the Romanes unwarily were engaged overfarre within them,  they came about them on the skirts, and within a while hauing stretched out and spread their wings, inclosed the enemies round on their backs also. Hereupon the Romanes who had performed one battaile and conflict in vaine, were forced to give over the Gaules and Spanyards, whom they had disarayed and put to flight, and were to begin a fresh fight with the Africanes: and that to their owne great disadvantage; not only because they being enclosed and pent up in a streight roume, were to deale with them that had compassed them all about and were at libertie, but also because they being weried, were to maintaine a new skirmish with those that were fresh in hart, and lustie. And now by this time, in the left point of the Romanes battaile, where the horsemen of their associates were marshalled to affront the Numidians, they were falne to close fight: which at the first these Numidians began but coldly and faintly, after the deceitfull manner of Carthaginians,  unto whome they were sib and neere neighbours. For 500 of them or thereabout, having besides their usuall Iavelins and darts which they commonly cary, short daggers or skaines hidden under their cuirasse and harnesse, made semblance of riding away from their owne companies, and siding to the Romanes, with their bucklers at their backs, all of a sodain dismounted from their horses, and throwing their bucklers, targets, and speares at their enemies feet, were received

within the main battell, and from thence conducted to the hindmost in the rereward, were commaunded  there to abide behind at their backe. And untill such time as the medley joined on all sides, they continued quiet. But when they saw every mans eye and mind busied and occupied in the conflict, then they caught up those bucklers that lay strewed and scattered among the dead bodies all abroad, and plaied upon the battell of the Romans from behind: and what with wounding their backes, and cutting their hamstrings; they made foule worke and carnage among them, and more than that, raised a greater feare and tumult by farre. Now when the Romanes in one place were frighted and ran away, and in another fought for life, armed only with despaire of all meanes to escape; Asdruball who had the charge of that side, caused the Numidian horsemen; who fought but coldly with those that stood affront them, to be withdrawn from the mids of the battell, and sent them to pursue the enemies in the chase. And to the Affricanes overwearie now  with execution and killing, rather than with any other fight, hee joined the Gaules and Spanish footmen to assist them. On the other side of the battell, Paulus, albeit at the very first shocke and encounter, he was sore wounded with a bullet from out of a sling, yet often times hee made head against Anniball, and kept his battaillons close and thicke together, yea, and in diverse places renued the medley, and evermore the Romane horsemen guarded and protected him. But at the last they left their horses, because the Consull his strength failed him to rule his owne and to (...) him. Whereupon there was one brought word unto Anniball, that the Consull had commaunded his men of arms to light afoot. Then (qd. Anniball, as the report goeth) Yea marry: But how much gladder would I be, if hee delivered them into my hands bound hand and foot. And surely the horsemen fought so after they were alighted, as if there had been no doubt, but that the enemies  had the victorie. Howbeit, although they had the worse, yet they chose rather to die in the place, than to flie: and the Victours angred at the heart with them for thus staying the accomplishment of the victorie, went downe with them, and killed outright all those whome they could not make to give ground and yeeld. And yet a few, such as were wearied with much toile and overcharged with many wounds they enforced to recule. Anon they were all disbanded and scattered asunder: and as many as could, recovered their horses, and fled away.
Cn. Lentulus a Colonell seeing (as he rode by) the Consull sitting all agore bloud upon a stone. Ah L. Aemylius (quoth he) whom the gods ought of right to regard and save, as being the onely guiltlesse man, and innocent of this daies worke and unhappie overthrow, take here this horse of mine, while some vigour and strength remaineth in you. Able I am to mount you upon him, to accompanie and protect  you also. Come I say, and make not this battell more cursed and sorrowful by the death of a Consull. Without it ywis we have cause ynough alreadie, and too much, of dolorous teares and wofull lamentation. Whereunto the Consull made this answer: Icon thee thanke, o L. Cornelius Gra-mercie for thy kindnesse, and God blesse thee in this thy vertue and prowesse. But take thou heed to thy selfe, least by thy foolish pitie of mee, thou loose that little time which thou hast to escape out of the hands of the enemies. Save thy selfe, and go thy waies to the L L. of the Senat, and will them all from mee in generall, to fortifie the citie of Rome, and man it well with strong guards, before the enemie follow the traine of victorie, and come against it. But more particularly, let Q. Fabius understand, that L. Aemylius yet, was mindfull of his wholesome precepts, all the whiles he lived, and now also forgat them not at the houre of his death. And suffer thou me to  yeeld unto nature, and let goe my last breath, even here among the heapes of mine owne slaine souldiours, that I may end my daies and die neither an accused and guiltie person, nor in my Consulship stand up to accuse my Colleague, and to defend mine owne innocencie, and justifie my selfe, by the blaming of another. As the Consull uttered these words, first the multitude of his owne citizens in the rout, and then the enemies in pursute, ran over him, and not knowing who he was, overwhelmed him with javelins and darts good store. As for Lentulus, his horse caned him away to a little hill. Then they fled all amaine as fast as they could. 7000 recovered the lesser campe, and ten thousand the greater: and upon two thousand put themselves into the village it selfe of Cannae. But because it was an unwalled and fencelesse towne, they were immediately environned by Cartalo and the horsemen, and so perished every one. The other Consull made no semblance, that hee was offended or displeased with the companies (...) thus fled, were it of purpose, or as it chaunced; and accompanied with fiftie men of armes or thereabout escaped to Venusia. In this battell were slaine of Romanes (by report) 40000 footmen, and 2700 horsemen; and in a manner, as many besides of Allies, as of naturall cittizens. Amongst whome

 there was one Consull, two Treasurers, L. Attilius and Furius Ribaculus, one and twentie Colonels: some also who had ben Consuls, Pretors, and Aediles. Of which number was Cn. Servilius, and G. Minutius Numatius, who the yeere before had been Commaunder of the Cavallerie for some certaine daies. Besides eightie Senatours, or such as were Senatours fellowes, and had borne those dignities, in regard whereof, they were to be chosen Senatours. These served as voluntaries and were enrolled among the Legions. There were taken prisoners at this field, as the generall speech went, three thousand footmen, and three hundred men of Armes.
This is that noble battell, so famous for the overthrow at Cannae, and comparable to that defeiture at the river Allia. For like as this was of lesse importance than the other, in respect of that which ensued after the conflict, because the enemie staied his hand, and pursued not his victorie:  so if we consider the losse of men and defeiture of the armie, it was the greater, and for the shamefull flight more dishonourable. For the running away that was at Allia, as it betraied the citie, so it saved the armie: but at Cannae, when the one Consull fled, there were scarce fiftie of his armie that accompanied him; and as for the other Consull, whiles hee lay a bleeding and dying, all his forces, to speake of, tooke their heeles.
Now, there being a number in both campes, halfe disarmed, and wholly without their cheefe Commaunders the captains of the greater camp sent a messenger unto the other, willing them to come over thither, that they might march in one entire companie together, and depart to Cannusium in the night season, while their enemies were fast asleep; as partly wearied with long fight, and partly charged with wine and good cheare after their joifull victorie. This advise, some  there were that misliked altogether and rejected. For why (say they) might not they come hither themselves to us, as wel as send for us, since we may as soon so join together? Because ywis, all the waies betweene are full of enemies, and they chose rather to hazard the bodies of others, than adventure their owne persons in so great daunger. Others were not so much displeased for anie dislike of the motion, as their harts failed them to take in hand the enterprise therof. Then spake P. Sempronius Tuditanus a Colonell. The speech of P. Sempronius Tuditanus, to his fellow souldiors. And will ye rather chose (quoth he) to be taken captive by a most covetous and cruell enemie? And to have your heads valued at a price?
And that Chapmen comming to buy you in ouvert market, should aske every one of you this question, Whether art thou a Romane citizen, or a Latine Confederate? And so by thy disgrace, reproch, and miserie, another man shall get honour, and thy selfe none. Yee are not (I see well) like to Lucius  Aemylius, who made choise to die valiantly, than to live in shame and obloquie; nor to many other so brave and hardie men, who lie about him dead on the ground by heaps. But before day light surprise us, and greater troupes of enemies beset the passages, let us breake through these, that in disorder and out of array, make so soule noise at our gates. The point of sword and edge of courage, is able to passe through enemies, stand they never so thicke and close together. We will make a pointed battaillon in wedge-form, and pierce through their lose and thin squadrons, as easily as if nothing stood in our way. Goe with me therefore as many of you, as are willing to save yourselves and the Commonweale. The word was no sooner out of his mouth, but his sword was out of scabbard, and with a pointed battaillon tooke his way through the mids of the enemies: and when the Numidians flancked them, and shot hard at their right side that lay open to  them, they shifted their targuets to their right arme, and so escaped, to the number of 600 unto the bigger campe, and forthwith from thence, joining to the other greater companie, they retired themselves safe to Cannusium. These exploits were performed by men vanquished, more upon a present sit of courage, as each mans naturall instinct guided, or chaunce led him, than either any sage advise of their owne, or commaund of other.
Now when all the rest came about Anniball, immediatly upon this noble victorie, to congratulate and reioice with him, yea and to advise him, that after so great a battaile performed, he should the rest of that day and the whole night following, both refresh himselfe, and also give rest and repose to his weried souldiours: Maharball, Generall of the Cavallerie, was of minde that it was no giving over thus: Nay (quoth he) that you may know of what consequence this battaile  is, you shall breake your fast and eate your dinner five dayes hence in the Capitoll. Follow hardly with your horsemen, that they may see you are come, before they heare that you are comming.
No, saith Anniball again, let curriers on Gods name go afore, and spare not to cary newes thereof: Your words are good, and it is a gay matter and plausible you speake of: but the way thereto is longer, and more than I can presently conceive and comprehend: Icon you thanke

Maharball, and I commend your good mind and forwardnesse; but we had need to deliberat and  pause further upon this poynt. Ah (quoth Maharball) true it is, I see well, that God hath not endued one man with all gifts. Thou hast the way o Anniball, to win a victorie, but not the grace to use a victorie. And certes, in this one daies delay, as it was certeinly beleeued, stood the safetie and preservation of the cittie and Empire of Rome, The morrow after, so soone as ever the day beganne to appeare, they minded onely and intended the gathering ofspoiles, and to view that great butcherie and carnage: a pittifull and lamentable sight even to the very enemies to behold. So many thousand Romans lay there along in every place, horsemen and footmen pell mell, one with another, according as their hap was to meere together, and either to joyne in fight, or die in flight. Some were seen to arise up al bloudie from out of the mids of the slaughtred bodies, such, as the bitter morning cold had nipped their wounds, and made them to  start up by reason of their smart, and were by the enemie knocked downe againe and killed. Other some they found lying along still alive, cut shorter by the thighs and hammes, who offred their bare neckes and throates to be cut, and called vnto them to let forth the rest of their blood. Divers were founde with their heads covered within the earth, who as it appeared, had made themselves holes and gutters in the ground, for this purpose, to interre themselves, wherinto they thrust their mouthes and faces, and being buried with mould cast over them, were so stifled and choked. But above all the rest, there was one that drew every mans eye upon him, and made them all to wonder, a Numidian with his nose and eares pittiously mangled and eropt, but yet aliue, lying under a Roman dead. For when his hands so wounded as they were, would not serve him to handle a weapon, for very anger hee fell raging mad, and lay (so long as he had any breath  left within him) byting his enemie with his teeth.
After they had spent a good parte of the day in gathering spoiles, Anniball marched forward to assault the lesser campe: and first and formost hee turned aside the arme of the river that flanked them, and so excluded them from the water. But they all within being over wearied with toyle, with watching and bleeding of their woundes, yeelded sooner than he looked for: and covenanted, Imprimis, to deliver up their armour and horses: Item, to pay 300 quadrigate peeces of siluer, for every Romane: 200 for every one of the Allies and every bondman 100 a peece. Item, that after this ransome paid, they should depart in their single apparrell. Thus they received their enemies into the campe, and were themselves put all in ward: but, Allies and cittizens by themselves, apart one from the other. While they trifled time  there, there were about 4000 footemen, and two hundreth horsemen, even as many as either their strength or harts would serve, who out of the greater campe fled to Cannusium, some marching in order, others scattering abroad over the fields, which was not the woorse way of the twaine, and lesse safe. And then the campe was surrendred to the enemie, by those that were hurt and heartlesse, upon the same conditions that the other was. A rich bootie was there gotten: and setting aside horses, and men, and silver, which they used much in trappings and caparisons of their horses, (for souldiers, be ye sure, occupied very litle silver, either in their owne apparrell, or at their boord) all the pillage was given to be rifted and ransacked amongst them. Then he gaue commandement, that the dead bodies of his owne men should be gathered togither for to be buried. And as men say, they were to the number of eight thousand, all right va^ant  and hardie men. Some Authors report, that the Roman Consu also was sought up and interred. As for those, which escaped to Cannusium, were by the Cannusines entertained onely within the walles, and lodged in their houses: but a noble Lady and a wealthie, named Busa, relieved them with some victuall, apparrell, yea and mony also in their purses for their wayfare. In regard of which bountifull liberalitie of hers, after the warre was finished, she was highly honored by the Senate of Rome.
Now, there were amongst them foure Coronels, namely Fabius Max. of the first Legion, whose father had bene Dictator the yeare before: and L. Publicius Bibulus, of the second Legion, together with P. Cornel. Scipio, and Appius Claudius Pulcher of the third Legion, who had bene Aedile but lately afore: and by generall consent of them all, P. Scipio, a very yong man, and Ap. Claudius, were chosen to bear the soveraigne rule, and to haue the absolute command and conduct of the armie. But as they sat with some few others, in counsaile togither about the mannaging of their maine affaires, behold P. Furius Philus, whose father had bene a Consull, gaue them to understand, that all their consultations were in vaine, and that they did but softer and

 cherish a foolish hope of an overthrowne state: for the Common-weale was in a desperate case, past all cure, and remedilesse. Also that certaine noble young Gentlemen, of whom L. Cecilius Metellus was the principall, minded nothing else but to take sea, and were readie to imbarke, to abandon Italie, and to flie for succor to some king or other. This evill tydings as it was most grievous and heavie in it seifer so falling out as it did, presently upon other misfortunes so suddainly and unlooked for, put them into their dumpes, and wonderfully amazed and astonied them all. And when they that were present in place laid their heads togither, and thought good to call others to counsell upon this poynt, Scipio a young man, even then predestinied to be the fatall Captaine of this warre, answered: What do we here? (quoth he) it is no time now to sit consulting in so great extremitie, but leaving all discourses, presently to proceed to action, and to do some exployt.  As many therefore as are willing to save the Common-weale, take armes and goe with me forthwith: for no wher are our enemies (to say a truth) encamped against us more, than where such designements are plotting and contriving. Forth hee went with a few following after him, unto the lodging of Metellus: and finding there the young Gentlemen aforesaid, close togither in counsaile thereabout: he drew his sword, and brandisht it naked over their heads, as they sat in consultation.
I sweare before you all (quoth he) and I sweare from my very hart, and no man vrgeth me thereto, that I for my part, will neither forsake the Common-weale, nor suffer any Citizen else of Rome to abandon her. And if I faile witting and willing, then confound mee o lup. opt. Max. and bring a most shamefull end upon my house, my familie, and all that I haue. Sweare thou o L. Cecilius after me, as I haue done, I aduise thee: and yee all that are here present take the  same oath: for whosoever shall refuse, knowe hee assuredly, that upon him I haue drawne this sword. Here at they being no lesse terrified, than if they had seene the Conquerour himselfe Anniball in person, tooke the oath every one, and yeelded themselves vnto Scipio, for to be kept in ward to serve against Anniball.
At the same time, whiles these things were working at Cannusium, there arrived at Venusia, upon foure thousand foote and horsemen together, such as in their flight had bene disparkled asunder all over the fields, and repaired unto the Consull there. The Venusines tooke order for them all, that they should be gently enterteined, and carefully tended, and divided into severall houses: and they bestowed upon the horsemen, a side cassock, a coat, and 15 sb. 7 ob. ster. Aquadrigate, which it a peece of silver coyne among the Romanes, the same that Denavius: called so of Quadriga. i. a charios drawne with foure horses, represented on the one side of the peece. 25. Quadrigates a peece and gave ten Quadrigates to every footman: and armour besides, to as many as wanted. And  in all other courtesies of hospitallitie, both publike and private, they strove and endevored, that the people of Venusia should not in any kinde of friendly offices, come behinde one woman of Cannusium. Howbeit in regard of the great multitude, the burthen and charge lay more heavie upon Dame Busa: for now their number was risen to be ten thousand. Then Appius and Scipio having intelligence, that the other Consull was alive and well, dispatched a messenger presently, to advertise him how many footmen and horsemen there were in all with them: and to know his pleasure withall, whe then lie would commaund the armie to be brought unto Venusia, or abide still at Cannusium. But Varro (the Consul) of his owne accord brought his forces to Cannusium. So as by this time, they made a prettie good shew of a Consular army, and seemed sufficient to defend themselves, if not by force of armes in the field yet at least wise, with the strength of  walles within the towne. But the newes came to Rome, that there was not so much as this small remnant left of Cittizens and Confederates together: but that the two Consuls and both the armies were put all to the sword, and hewen in peeces to the last man. Never was there knowne so great terrour and turmoile within the wals of Rome (and the citie still remaining in safetie) I wil therfore even at first, sinke under my lode and say nothing at all: and never wil I go about to recount those things by discourse of words, which in reporting, I should make lesse than they were indeed: For there went not now, a flying rumour first of one soile, and then of another, to day of this losse, and to morrow of that; as the yeere before, when the Consull and his armie were defaited at Thrasymenus: but manifold overthrowes together were multiplied and all hudle at ones to wit, how both the Consuls were slaine, and two Consular armies lost, no campe not a pavilion  of the Romanes left standing: neither Leader nor Soldier remaining alive and how Anniball was now become Lord of Apulia, of Samnium, and well nere of all Italie full and whole. And verily; there is not (I suppose) a nation under the cope of heaven besides, but would haue bene overwhelmed and crushed utterly under the huge heape and heauie waight of so great a runne and overthrow. Should I compare therwith the desaiture and foile that the Carthaginians ^eceived

at the Ilands Aegates, in a conflict at sea? wherewith they were so quelled, and their backs so  broken, that at one clap they lost Sicilia and Sardinia both, and that which more is, yeelded themselves tributaries and subjects to the people of Rome. Or should I make comparison of their unfortunate and unhappie battaile in Affrike afterwards? wherein this very same Anniball gave over play, yeelded the bucklers, and confessed himselfe vanquished. Nay, they are not any way comparable with this, but only that they were borne and supported with lesse courage, and valour of mind.
Well, to proceede, P. Furius Philus, and M. Pomponius the Pretours, assembled the Senate in the Court Hostilia, for to consult about the defence and guard of the citie: for they made no doubt, but now that the armies were both defaited, the enemie would speedily come to assault Rome, the onely peece of worke, and warlike service that remained behind undone. But being  to seeke what counsell to take, and what remedie to devise for redresse of these calamities, so exceeding great and grievous, and yet not knowne to the full, and interrupted and shrewdly troubled besides with the clamorous noyses and plaints of women: whiles that in every house almost, they ceased not to mourne, weepe, and waile confusedly, as well for the quick as the dead (because as yet it was not openly and for certain knowen who were alive, and who were slaine.)
Then Fabius Max. gave his opinion, that certaine light horsemen should be made out and sent forth by the highwaies Appia and Latina, and to ride along, and enquire of them whom they hapned to meete with, (such I meane as fled, and were skattred here and there asunder) if happily some of them could report upon his knowledge, what was become of the Consuls, and the Armies: and in case the immortall gods had of their mercie and compassion spared some poore remnant still  of this miserable and wofull empire, for the Romane name; where that residue of small forces was; what way Anniball tooke; and whither he was gone after the battaile was fought; what preparation he maketh, what presently he is doing, or intendeth for to do. His advise was, I say, that to espie, herken and learne certainely, these premisses, certaine lustie young men, active and industrious, should be imployed. But for the LL. of the Senate thus much, that considering there were few Magistrates at home, and those notable to rid the citie of this tumultuous and fearefull hurliburly, therefore they should take upon themselves, to debarre the dames and women for comming abroad, and force them every one to keepe home, and tarrie within dores; to restraine the plaints and outcryes of housholds and families; to cause silence throughout the citie; to take order that all Posts, and messengers of newes, should be brought  before the Pretors; and that every man should attend at home the tidings, good or bad, that concerned himselfe, or his owne state. Over and besides, that they should set warders at the gates, to see that no person went out of the citie: and compell every man to hope for no other earthly safetie for themselves, but in the preservation of the citie, and walls thereof. And when the tumult and hurry is once husht, then (quoth he) may the Senatours well be called againe into the Counsell house, and consult for the defence and savegard of the citie. When all the assembly liked well, and approved of this opinion, and went euery man on Fabius his side without contradiction, so as the market place, by authoritie of the Magistrates, was cleered and voided of the multitude, and the Senatours were divided and gone sundrie wayes to appease the uproness then at last, came letters from Terentius the Consull, importing that L. Aemylius the Consull was  slaine togither with the armie: that himselfe was at Cannusium, busy in rallying the reliques of so great an overthrow, as it were after a shipwrack upon the sea that there were ten thousand souldiours of them, or very neere, and those, much out of frame and good order. As for Anniball, he sate still now at Cannae, busily occupied about the raunsoming of prisoners; and intentive to the rest of the spoyle and pillage: not measuring the victorie with the mind and courage of a conquerour, nor yet after the guise and manner of a noble warriour and great commander. Then were the private and particular losses also divulged and spredabroad through every man his house and familie, and the whole citie was so filled with sorrow and lamentation, that the Anniversarie solemnitie of sacrifices to Ceres was (...) because it was not lawfull for those that mourned to celebrate the same: and there was (...) throughout the citie, but was in  heavinesse and sorrow for the time. Least therefore other sacrifices likewise, as well publick as private, upon the same occasion, should be neglected and discontinued, (...) passed (...) of the Senate, by vertue whereof a terme was prefixed, to make amend of mourning within (...) dayes. Now was the trouble of the citie no (...) allayed, and the Senatours called againe

 into the Counsell house: but to mend the matter, there were other letters brought out of Sicilie from T. Octacilius the Vicepretor, notifying thus much, That the realme of Hiero was much wasted by the Carthaginian navie: and when he would have succoured him at his earnest suite and petition, there was another Armado readie rigged, decked and furnished, riding by the Ilands Aegates, waiting the opportunitie of the time, that when the Carthaginians perceived once that he had turned and bent his forces to the defence of the coast and river of Saracose, they might immediatly set upon Lilybaeum, and the rest of the Romane province. And therefore, in case they were minded to aid and maintaine a confederate king, and defend the realme of Sicilie, they must of necessitie rig and man another fleete out of hand. When the letters both of the Consull and also of the Vice-Pretor were read, agreed it was, and thought meet, that M. Claudius, Admirall  of the fleet which rid in theharbour of Ostia, should bee sent unto the armie at Cannusium, and letters be dispatched withall unto the Consull, willing him upon the deliverie of the armie to the Pretour, to repaire unto Rome with all speed possible, and not faile, so farre forth as he might, without any detriment and hinderance of the Commonweale. Besides these so great losses and adversities, men were put in feare with sundrie prodigious tokens: and among others, in that one yeare, two Vestall virgins, Opimia, and Floronia, were detected and attainted of manifest whoredome: the one of them was buried quick, as the manner was, under the ground at the gate Collina, the other killed herself. L. Cantilius (a Secretary or Scribe unto the Bishops, whom now they call The Petie or Minour Prelates. Minores Pontisices) the partie who had committed fornication with Floronia, was by the chiefe or high Priest so beaten with rods in the Comitium, that he dyed under his hand.  This heinous fact, and enormious offence falling out among so many misfortunes and calamities, was reckened, I say (as usually it is) for a portentuous signe; and therefore the Decemvirs were commaunded to search and peruse the Bookes of Sibylla. And Q. Fabius Pictor was sent to Delphos, to consult with the Oracle there of Apollo, and to learne, by what prayers and supplications they might pacifie the gods, and what would be the end of so great and fearefull miseries.
In the meane while, out of the learning conteined in those bookes of destinies, there were performed certain extraordinary Sacrifices: among which, a Frenchman together with a French woman; likewise a Grecian man and woman, were let downe alive in the Beast market into a vault under the ground, stoned all about: a place aforetime embrued and polluted with the bloud of mankind sacrificed, but not according to the ceremonies and religion of the Romanes.  When they had sufficiently (as they thought) pacified the gods, M. Claudius Marcellus sent from the haven of Ostia for the defense and guard of the citie, 1500 souldiours; whom he had levied and enrolled for the service at sea. Himselfe having sent afore the legion belonging to the Armada (which was the third) with Theanus Sidicinus a Coronell, and delivered the fleete unto P. Furius companion with him in commission: within few dayes after made hast, and with great journeis arived at Cannusium. At Rome, by vertue of the authoritie of the Senatours, M. Iunius was created Dictatour, and T. Sempronius Generall of the horse, who proclaimed a muster, and enrolled all the younger sort above 17 yeares old, yea and some also under that age, that yet were in theirIt was the upper garment that the Romanes children used untill they were fully 16 yeares of age, embrodred with purple. Pretexia, and were not come toOtherwise called Pura, and (...), because it was all white, and without any purple, which they put on at 17. Toga virilis. Of these were made up foure legions full, and a thousand horsemen. Likewise they sent unto their Allies, and namely, to the Latine  nation, to receive souldiours from thence according to the forme of the league: geving commaundement, that harnesse, weapons, and all other habiliments of warre, should be in readinesse. Also to furnish out the armie, they plucked from the temples, and publike gallerie stand walking places, the auncient spoyles and armour of their enemies. And for very neede and want of free men, they were compelled to devise a new kind of mustering never used before for they bought up in market ouvert, with the citie money, 8000 lustie strong young men, meete bondslaves: but they demaunded first of every one by himselfe, whether they were willing to serve in the warres, and so they put them in armour. And they thought it better to take up and levie souldiours thus, than to redeeme and buy againe their own who were captives, albeit they might have been raunsomed for smaller summes of money. For Annibal; after this so fortunate field fought  at Cannae, setting his minde wholly upon the affaires belonging to an absolute conquest, rather than any more warres; caused his captives to be brought forth, and severed the Romane confederates apart from the rest; and unto them (as he had done aforetime at Trebia, and the Lake Thrasymenus) hee spake graciously, and sent them home unraunsomed. The Romanes also hee called unto him, and gave them kind and loving words, more than

ever hee had done before. What? wee and the Romanes (quoth hee) warre not mortally  and deadly one with the other to the utterance: nay, our quarrell is rather for honour and soveraintie. And as my father and progenitors afore me, were subdued of the Romans, and yeelded at length to their valour and prowesse: so the onely thing that I seeke for, and indevor unto is this, That they likewise in their alternative turne, may give place unto my felicitie and vertue together. And therefore I graunt the Romanes this favor and libertie, to redeeme their prisoners: and this shall be the raunsome, for every man of armes I demand 15 lib. 12 sh. 6 d.(...) 500 Quadrigates, 300 for a footman, and 100 for a bondman. And albeit the horsemens raunsome was somewhat enhaulsed, above that summe which they capitulated for, when they yeelded, yet glad they were to accept of any condition and covenant whatsoever. So it was agreed, that tenne out of them should bee chosen by voices, togoe to Rome unto the Senate: and he tooke no other pledge for assurance of them  but their oth, that they would returne again. With them was sent Carthalo, a Nobleman of Carthage, with commission (if he could perceive haply the Romanes encline to peace) to offer unto them conditions, and to capitulate with them. They were not so soone gone out of the camp, but one of them (a man of no Romane nature and disposition) made semblance, as if he had forgotten somewhat behind him, and so, to discharge himselfe (forsooth) of his oth, returned into the campe, and before night overtooke his companie againe. When word was brought, that they were comming to Rome, there was a Lictor sent out to meet Carthalo upon the way, and to warne him in the name of the Dictatour, before night to depart out of the confines of the territorie of Rome. But the Committees of the Captives had audience graunted them in the Senat house by the Dictatour. And the principall man among them, Marcus Iunius, spake in this  manner.
Right honourable, The Oration of M. Iunius to the Senat. and my very good LL. of the Senat, There is not one of you all ignorant; that never any citie whatsoever, hath beene at lesse charge for redeeming of prisoners taken in warres, and made so small regard of them, than ours.
But if wee be not blinded in our owne conceit, and think better of our cause, than there is reason; never were there any soldiours that fell into the hands of our enemies, more to be accounted of by you than we are. And why? We yeelded not our weapons in battell for cowardise and feare, but after that wee had stood welneere untill night, fighting over the dead bodies of our fellowes slaine, and so maintained the medley to the very last, then we retired ourselves into the campe. The rest of the day, and the night following notwithstanding we were wearie with travell, and faint of our hurts, yet wee manfully defended  our rampier. The morrow after, when we were beset and invested round about by the conquerors armie, yea, and excluded from water; and saw no other hope at all to breake through our enemies, raunged so strong and close together, and thinking it not a matter of reproofe, and against the law of armes, that when 50000 of our citizens were slaine in field, some Romane souldiours should remaine alive after the battell of Cannae; then and not afore, we agreed upon a summe of monie, that being raunsomed, we might bee set at large, and so we yeelded unto the enemies our weapons, wherein now we saw no helpe at all. We have heard likewise, that our auncestors redeemed themselves from the Gaules with a summe of gold: and our fathers also, notwithstanding they were most streight laced, and hardly brought to capitulat and compound for peace, yet sent Embassadours to Tarentum, for to redeeme their captives: and both those battailes, first in Italie  with the Gauls, and then before Heraclea with Pyrrhus, were not so ignominious and shamefull for the losse itselfe, as for the fright and beastly running away. But the plaines of Cannae are covered all over with heapes of Romane bodies; and we that bee here, had not remained alive after them, but that the enemies strength held out no longer, nor their sword would serve to kill any more. And yet there bee some of our men also, who fled not backe in battell: but being left behind to guard the campe, were taken prisoners by the enemies as well as we, at what time as it was surrendred into their hands. Certes, I envie not the fortune, nor repine at the welfare and good estate of any citizen or fellow souldiour, neither would I be thought the man, who by debasing another, would seeme to advance my selfe. But even they verily (unlesse peradventure good footmanship and swift running deserve reward) who for the most part fled out of the field unarmed  and never stinted before they gat Venusia or Cannusium over their heads, cannot justly preferrd themselves before us, nor boast and glorie, that they stand the Commonweale in better steed than we. Find them you shall (I doubt not) good men and valourous souldiours: so shall you us too, yea, and more readie to do true service to our countrie, in that by your bountie and good means

 we have been raunsomed and restored again into our countrie. Yee have levied souldiours of all ages and degrees, and I heare say, there be 8000 bondmen in armes. We are no fewer in number ourselves, and redeemed we may be with as small monies as they are bought. I say no more but so, for if I should make farther comparisons betweene us and them, I must doe wrong to the Romane name and nation. This is a speciall thing moreover (my LL) which in mine advise yee are duly to consider in this deliberation, in case yee be so hard-hearted, as to have no regard of us, or of our desert, namely, in what enemies hand ye leave us. It is with Pyrrbus per adventure, who used us being his prisoners, like friends and guests. Nay, is he not a Barbarian and Carthaginian? who whether he bee more covetous or cruell, can hardly bee imagined. O that yee saw the yrons and chains, the nastie filthinesse and foule usage of your cittizens. I am assured, you would be no lesse  moved and affected to compassion at the sight thereof, than if yee beheld on the other side your Legions lying slaine all over the plaines and fields of Cannae. Yee may observe and behold the sorrowfull cheare, and salt teares of our kinsfolke standing here in the porch and entrie of this Court, and waiting for your answer. And if they so fare, and are so pensive for us, and for them that are absent, what heavie hearts have they themselves (thinke ye) whose libertie and whose life lieth now a bleeding? And in good faith, if so be Anniball himselfe would, contrarie to his nature, be respective and mercifull to us, yet should we thinke our lives did us small good, so long as we are reputed of you unworthie to be raunsomed and redeemed. There returned in times past to Rome certaine captives, sent home by Pyrrhus without any raunsome paid, but they returned accompanied with Embassadours, right honourable personages of this cittie, who had beene sent for  their redemption. And shall I returne unto my countrie againe, not esteemed a citizen worth 300 Deniers. Every man hath a mind by himselfe, and a fansie of his owne my LL. And I wote well, that my bodie and life is in jeopardie. But I feare more the hazard of honor and good name, least we should be thought condemned and rejected by you. For the world wil never beleeve, that you did it to spare your purse, and to save monie.
When he had made an end of his speech, immediately the multitude who were gathered together in the common place, set up a lamentable and pitteous crie, and held out their hands unto the counsell house, beseeching the LL. of the Senate to let them have and enjoy their children, their brethren, and kinsfolke againe. The very women also, for feare and necessitie, thrust themselves among this prease of men in the market place. But when all others besides the Senatours  were voided, they began to debate and consult about the matter in hand. Great variance there was in opinion. Some thought it reason, that their raunsome were disbursed out of the common chest: others were of mind, that the cittie should bee at no charge at all for their redemption: marry they would not be against it, but that they might be enlarged and delivered at their owne cost and expenses. And in case there were any that had not readie coine ynough for present payment, the chamber of the cittie should lend them monie, so as the people might have good securitie, as well by sureties bound, as by their goods and lands, morgaged for the satisfaction of that debt. And when T. Manlius Torquatus, a man of the old world for precise severitie, and as most folke thought too too hard and austere in this point, was demaunded his opinion, hee spake, by report, to the cause in this wife.
 If the Committees (quoth he) had treated and made suit, The Oration of T. Manlius Torquatus, in the Senat. for the redemption of them onely that are captive in the hands of the enemies, and there staied; if they had not touched the person of any other besides, I would in few words have knit up my verdict and judgement of them.
For what need I to have done els, but put you in mind, and exhort you, to observe the custome delivered unto you from your auncestors, and to maintaine the example, so good and necessarie for the service of warre. But now, seeing they have not onely justified, but also (as it were) glorified themselves, in that they yeelded unto the enemies, and thought it good reason to bee preferred, not onely before them that were taken prisoners by the enemies in the field, but also those that saved themselves, and escaped to Venusia and Cannusium; yea, and before C. Terentius himselfe the Consull; I will not hide any thing from you my LL. but acquaint you with every thing that  was done there. And would to God, that the words which I will utter here in your presence, I might deliver at Cannusium, even before the bodie of the armie, the best witnesse of every mans cowardise or valour: or at leastwise, that P. Sempronius were present here alone, whome, if these fellowes would have followed as their leader, they had been souldiours at this day in the Romane campe, and not captives at the devotion of the enemies. For whiles the enemies were wearied

with fight, joyous and jocund of their fresh victorie, and most of them retired into their owne  camp; they might have had the whole night to save themselves at their pleasure; and if that were not, yet being seven thousand strong, they had bene able to have made a lane through them, were they never so thick, and to have broken away in despight of their harts. But neither attempted they so much of themselves, nor yet would follow the leading of another. P. Sempronius Tuditanus ceased not all night long almost, to exhort, to admonish, and encourage them, for to follow his conduct, to take the time when but a few of the enemies were about their campe, whiles they were at repose and rest, and whiles the night lasted favourable vnto them, for to hide and cover their enterprise: persuading with them, that before day light they mought easily reach unto places of securitie, and arrive safely at the cities of their Allies. Like as in the daies of our Grandfathers, P. Decius a Tribune Colonell in Samnium; like as of  late time when I was a young man my selfe, in the first punick warre, Calphurnius Flamma said unto three hundred his voluntarie souldiers, at what time as he minded to lead them to the gaining of a litle hill, standing in the mids of his enemies: Let us die hardly my souldiers, and by our death save and deliver our Legions, beset and besieged round about. If P. Sempronius had said so much to you, he would never haue esteemed you men of valour, nor yet Romanes, if no man among you would haue borne him company, or seconded him in that singular vertue. But he shewed you a plaine and easie way, leading as well to life and safetie, as to honour and glorie. He offred himselfe to be your guide, to bring you to your native countrie, to your parents, your wives and children: yet would not your hearts serve you to escape and save your selves. Where had your hearts bene then, if he would have had you to die for your countrie? 50000 of our  Citizens and confederates, lay that very day slaine at your feete. If so many examples of manhood and vertue could not move you, nothing in the world will ever move you: if so great a foile and overthrow was not able to make you despise and set litle by this life; none wil ever do it. Desire home a Gods name, and long after your native countrie, whiles yee are free and in safetie nay, desire to be in your countrie, whiles it is your countrie, and whiles yee are Cittizens therof. Now your desire and longing commeth too late, being disfranchised, having lost your former estate and right of Cittizens, and made your selves bondslaves to the Carthaginians. Thinke yee for a peece of money to recover your libertie againe, and to returne to your former degree, from which through faintheartednesse and cowardise yee are fallen? You would not hearken nor give eare to P. Sempronius your Cittizen, willing you take weapon in hand, and to follow after  him: but anon after, yee could listen after Anniball, commanding you to betray and render the campe, and deliver up your armour. But why blame I their lithernesse and dastardly feare* when I may reproue and accuse them for wilfull and lewd wickednesse? For they not onely refused to be ruled by his good counsaile and exhortations, but also attempted to hinder and stay him in his intended enterprise, had not right hardie and valiant men with their swords drawne, set these dastardly beastes farther off. P. Sempronius, I tell you, had somewhat a do* to passe the rankes and squadrons of his own countriemen, before he could breakthrough the battailon of his enemies. Longeth our countrie to have these for her cittizens? who if the rest had bene like them, should by this day, have had never a one of them that fought at Cannae, for her cittizens. Of seven thousand armed souldiours, there were found 600 that had the heart to breake away, malgre the enemies, to escape and returne with libertie, and with their armour, home into their countrie, notwithstanding there were fortie thousand enemies to resist them: how easily then and safely, deeme you, might a power almost of two Legions, have passed through them and gon their waies? Yee had had this day my Lords twentie thousand at Cannusium, of right brave, hardie, and loyall souldiours. But now, which way can these luskes possible be reputed true and faithfull cittizens, (for valiant souldiours, I am sure, they will not thinke themselves, nor take upon them to bee, unlesse a man could bee persuaded and beleeve they were such) who would have impeached and withstood the rest for getting away, even when they were at the poynt to open a passage? or that they rather do not envie now, both the safetie and also the honor of others which they have woon by prowesse; knowing in their owne conscience, that their timorousnes  and cowardlinesse was the cause of most ignominious and shamefull servitude. They loved better to close within their pavilions, and to looke for the day-light and the enemie together* when as in the still dead time of the night, they had the opportunitie to escape. But how then? Although their hearts failed them to breake away out of the campe, yet to defend the same manfully,

 they had courage and valour enough. Besieged they were, and streightly beleaguerd: invested they were day and night for a good time: and in their armour forced to stand upon their guard, and manfully they quit themselves within their rampiar: and at length (God wot) when they had assayed and endured all extremities, when all succours failed them for sustentation of this life so pinched with hunger and so enfeebled, that they were not able to beare their owne armour and lift up their weapons; overcome at the last, rather with the necessitie of mans fraile nature, than by the violence of the enemies, they* good men, gave over and yeelded themselves. Nay forsooth, it is neither so nor so. The mo^row morning when the (...), the enemies advanced and approched toward the rampi^^* and within two houres (...), without any triall and hazard of skirmish, they delivered up their weapons and themselves. (...) yee see what  their good service was* for two daies together. When they should have stood to it in the field* and fought, then they ^ed backe to their tents: when they were to guard and defend their tren^ and rampiar, they surrendred them to the enemie* good no where, neither in battaile nor in bastill. I agree to ransome you, you (I say) when you ought to have (...) forth of the camp, linger behind and stay still: and when need was, to abide by it and to defend it like valiant men, surrender campe^ give vp your weapons, and yeeld your owne bodies to the enemie? Nay, but to speake what I thinke, my sentence is (my LL.) that these followes deserve no more to be ransomed, than those to bee delivered unto Anniball, who issued out of the campe, pearced through the mids of the enemies, and most valiantly saved themselves, for to do service another day in their countrie. When Manlius had said, albeit the prisoners were allied neere in kindred to most of the Senatours*  yet over and besides the precedent of the cittie it selfe, which never from the first beginning favored the redemption of such souldiers, as suffred themselves to be taken prisoners: the ransome it selfe, which amounted to a good ^ound summe, made them to pause: because they were unwilling both to emptie the publike tresurie; (having alreadie disbursed great summes, in buying up bond-slaves and arming them for the warres) and also that Anniball (who as the voyce went; was at a very great under for money) should be inriched thereby. When this their answere was returned, to wit, No redemption of captives: there was a newe fit of weeping and wailing afresh* added to the former sorrow of the people, namely for the losse of so many Cittizens: and so with many a teare that they shed, with sundrie plaints and mones which they made, they accompanied the Committees above-said, as far as the gate. One of the ten went home to  his house the same time, who upon a fraudulent and cautelous returne made into the enemies campe, as is aforesaid, supposed he had acquit himselfe and disburdened his conscience of his oath. Which being knowne and recounted to the Senate, they were all of mind that he should be apprehended, and attended with a good and sufficient guard at the charge of the cittie, and so carried backe to Anniball. There goeth another report of these captives, that first there came ten of them as Committees: and when it was debated in the Senate, and doubt-made, whither they should be admitted into the cittie or no; they were at length received, but so, as that they had no audience in the Senate: and upon longer stay made than they looked for, three others followed after them, to wit, L. Scribonius, C. Calpurnius, and L. Manlius. Then by mediation of one Tribune of the Com. a kinsman of Scribonius, the matter was propounded in the Senate  concerning the ransome of the captives; but graunted it would not be: wherupon the three latter Committees returned to Anniball, and the other ten that first came, remained stil behind: who upon a colourable occasion, had made an errand backe to Anniball, when they were well onward on their way, to take a note forsooth of the names of the prisoners, and thereby seemed to have discharged their conscience of the oath. Also, that in the Senate there was hard hold, much question and variance, about the delivering of them againe into the hands of Anniball: and how at last, they who were of opinion to have them rendred and sent backe, failed of their purpose, by reason they came short by some voyces and opinions, and that the other side carried it cleane away. But by the next Censors that came in place, they were so marked and branded, with all notes of disgrace and shame, that some of them immediately made themselves away  with their owne hands: and the rest for bare, not onely the common place and market all their life time after, but also came not abroad, in manner, to b^seene in the very streete, and never looked out of their doores. Thus a man may rather mervaile, that authors should so differ among themselves, than from any of them picke out and discerne the trueth. But how much greater this overthrow and losse at Cannae was, than any other b^fore time, appeareth by this

evident argument, in that those Allies, which ever to that day stood fast and sure unto them, now fell to shrincke and faile: and surely for no earthly thing else, but because they began to despaire of the maine chaunce of the whole State and Empire. For hereupon there revolted unto the Carthaginians, the Attellanes, the Calatines, the Hirpines, a part of the Apulians, all the Samnites, except the Petellines, all the Brutij in generall, and the Lucanes. And more than these, the Surrentines, and the whole tract wellneere, of the Greekes along the sea coast. The Tarentines, Metapontines, the Crotonians, the Locrians; and all the Gaules within the Alpes. And yet for all these defeatures, and rebellions of their Allies and subjects, were not the Romanes one whit enclined to make anie mention of peace, neither before the comming of the Consull, nor yet after that hee was returned, and renued againe the dolourous remembrance of that wofull overthrow received. And even at that very instant*  so high-minded was the cittie, and so farre from drouping and being cast downe, that as the Consull returned homeward from so great a defeature, whereof himselfe onely was a principall cause, hee was not onely met upon the way by all the States and companies of the cittie in great numbers, but also highly thanked, in that hee despaired not of the State of the Commonweale: who, if hee had been the Generall and Leader of the Carthaginians, should have beene sure to have smoaked for it, and endured all extremitie of torment and punishment.


THE XXIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.


The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the three and twentith Booke.
THE Campanes revolted unto Anniball. Mago was sent to Carthage, with newes of the victorie at Cannae: and in the entrie of the Counsell house, he poured out (on the floore) the golden rings which had been plucked from the fingers of the Romanes there slaine, which by report exceeded the measure of a Modius. Vpon these tidings, Han^^, the noblest personage among all the Carthaginians, persuaded with the Senat of Carthage, to sue unto the people of Rome for peace, but he prevailed not, by reason of the Barchine side and faction, that gai^esaid  him. Cl. Marcellus the Praetour, fought fortunately before Nola, in a sallie which hee made out of the towne against Anniball. The Armie of Anniball fell to riot at Capua, and gave themselves to such sensualitie, while they wintered there, that both in bodily strength, and also in courage of ^^nd they became much enfeebled. Casilinum was besieged by the Carthaginians, and the inhabitants within were dri^^^ by extreame famine, to ^at thongs and leatberings, plucked from off their shields and targuets, yea, and to feede upon (...) and rats. They lived with nuts which the Romanes sent unto them downe the river Vulturnus. The bodie of the Senate was replenished by receiving unto them a new supplie from out of the order of knights or gentlemen, to the number of 197. L.Posthumius the Pretour, was together with his armie defeated by the Gaules, and put to the sword. Cneui and Publius Scipiones, vanquished Asdruball in Spaine, and had the conquest thereof. The remnant of the Armie defeated at Cannae was sent away and confined into Sicilie, and commaunded not to depart from thence, before the warre was fully finished. A league and societie was concluded betweene Philip the king of the Macedoniaus and Anniball* Sempronius  Gracchus the Consull, discomfited a^d slue the Campanes. Moreover, this booke containeth the fortunate exploits atchieved by T. Manlius the lord Deputie in Sardima, against the Carthaginians and the Sardi: who tooke the Generall himselfe Asdruball, together with Mago and Hanno, prisoners. Claudius Marcellus the Praetour, vanquished and defeated in a set battaile before Nola, the Armie of Anniball: and was the first that put the Romanes (...) some good hope of better successe, after they had beene toiled out with so many foiles and losses.

ANniball after the batt^ile fought at Cannae, and the winning and ransacking of both the Romane campes, dislodged anone, and was removed out of Apulia into Samnium, being sent unto, for to come unto the Hirpines countrey, by Statius, who promised to betray and deliver the cittie of Consa into his hands. Now there was a citizen of Consa, named Tribius, a noble personage, and of great name in his countrie. But the bend and faction of the Cossanes (a familie of great power, by favour of the Romanes) kept him downe and overweighed him: but after the same of the battaile of Cannae and the comming of Anniball, divulged and blowne abroad by the speeches  of Trebius, those Cossanes abandoned the cittie: and so was it without any conflict rendered unto the Carthaginians, and received a garrison. Anniball leaving behind him there, all the pillage and baggage that he had, devided his armie into two parts: giving Mago in charge, to possesse himselfe of the townes of that countrey, which would revolt of themselves from the Romanes: or else to force them thereunto, in case they denied and refused so to doe. Himselfe tooke his journey through the land of Campaine, toward the nether sea, intending to assault Naples, that he might bee lord of a port towne also, and have it at his devotion. When hee was entred the confines of the Neapolitanes, hee placed some of the Numidians in ambush, as cunningly as he could, (and there for the most part, the waies are hollow, and full of close and secret noukes and holes) others he commaunded to make a shew of driving a bootie out of the fields,  and to ride out braving before the gates of the cittie. Against whom (seeming to bee not many, and those disordered) a troupe of horsemen issued forth, but the enemies of purpose giving back and retiring from them, tilled and trained them on, to the place of ambush: and so they were environned on every side, and there had not one of them escaped alive, but that the sea was neere, where they espied many fisher boates along the shoare on the bancke side, and as many of them as were skilfull in swimming, gat unto them, and saved themselves: but in that skirmish neverthelesse certaine young gentlemen were slaine. Among whome, Hegeas also, the Captaine of that Cornet of horsemen died in the place, who followed too hotely upon them that reculed and seemed to flie. But Anniball after he had viewed the wals, and saw they were not easie to be woon, was discouraged and skared from giving assault to that cittie. From thence he turned his journey, and  took his way to Capua, a citie flowing in wealth and superfluitie of all pleasures, by reason of long felicitie, and the favourable aspect of gracious fortune. But among all corruptions that there raigned, it was infected most with the licentious loosenesse of the Commons, who exceeded beyond all measure, and abused their libertie. Pacuvius Calavius, a man of noble race there, and popular with all, but one that by lewd and indirect courses became rich and mightie, by meanes thereof, had both Senat and Com. under his girdle, and might do what he would. This man chaunced to be head Magistrat the same year that the Romans were defaited and overthrown at the Lake Thrasymenus: and supposing that the Communaltie (who had ben a long time maliciously affected to the Senate and Nobilitie) would by occasion of alteration in the State, enterprise some notable act, to wit (in case Anniball should come with his victorious armie into those parts) the murdering  of the Senate, and delivering of Capua into the Carthaginians hands. This man I say, lewd and bad enough otherwise, but yet not starke naught and wicked in the highest degree: and desirous to lord it, and dominiere with the safetie of the Commonwealth, rather than with the utter destruction of the same; as knowing full well, that no state could remaine safe, spoyled and berest once of a publick counsell* cast about and plotted, how he might both save the Senate, and also oblige the same to be at his and the Commons devotion.
He assembled therefore the Senate one day together, and after he had protested with a solemne preamble, That in no case he would like and allow of the designement and intent of revolting from the Romanes, unlesse it were upon necessitie and constraint: for as much as himselfe had maried the daughter of Appius Claudius, and had faire issue by her: and besides, affianced a daughter of his own in mariage unto  Livius in Rome: but yet (quoth he) there is a matter of greater consequence toward, and a daunger like to burst out more to be feared than that. For the Commons intend not by way of revolt and rebellion to rid the citie of the Senators authoritie, but are purposed to massacre all the Senatours, and so to deliver unto Anniball and the Carthaginians, the Commonwealth, clearely void of a Senate. Of which imminent perill (quoth he) I know how to free you, in case

you will wholy trust and rely upon me, and forget all former jarres, and old debates, which have  fallen out in governance and managing of the Stat^. Now when all of them in place, for feare were forced to put themselves into his hands: I will quoth he shut you up within this counsellchamber, and pretend unto them, as though I were one of their complices, both privie and partie to this intended practise of theirs: and so by soothing them up, under a colourable approbation and allowance of their designements, which I should in vaine crosse and gainesay, I shall find out a ready way to save all your lives. And for assurance hereof, aske and have of me what bond and securitie yee will your selves. Thus having made his faithfull promise to be fast and true unto them, he went forth, and commaunded the Counsell-house dores to be shut sure, and left warders to keepe the gate and entrie thereof, that no man without his licence and commandement, should either enter in, or come forth. Then after he had called all the people  together to an audience, The Oration of (...) Cala^n^s, to the (...) of Cap^a. in a solemne and frequent assembly, thus he spake unto them. That which ye have often wished for (o ye Campanes, my good neighbours and friends) namely, to have the power and meane to revenge yourselves throughly of this wicked and cursed Senate, now lieth in your hands to performe with safetie at your pleasure.
And ye neede not by way of an uprore to assault their houses one after another, to the great danger and hazard of your persons, considering how they are defended with strong gards of their vassals, favorites, and bondslaves: ye have them all fast and close mued up within the counsell chamber: themselves alone, without companie, without armour and weapon; there you may take them. But see that ye do nothing hastily upon head without pause, nor rashly without advisement. I will so compasse and bring about, that ye shall give your doome of life and death upon every one of them, to the end  that each one may have his desert, and suffer due punishment accordingly. But above all things ye must have an eye and looke to this, that ye proceede not too much in heate and choler: but that ye have more regard of your owne safetie and profite, than of yre and revenge. For (I take it) they be these Senatours onely whose persons ye hate and detest; and your meaning is not wholy to put downe and overthrow the Senat quite: for either ye must accept of a King, (oh government abhominable) or else admit a Senate, the onely counsell in deede of a free citie and State: and therefore with one bush (as they say) ye are to stop two gaps, and to do both at once, namely, to abolish and depose the old Senate, and to elect a new. I will commaund, that the Senatours shall be cited by name one after another: and concerning their life and death, I will demaund your opinion and resolute sentence: and looke what judgement ye give, shall surely stand and be  put in execution. But before the condemned guiltie person be done to death, ye shall substitute in his roume a new Senatour, some good man of valour and courage, and worthy to succeede him in his place. With that, he fate him downe. And after all their names were throwne into a lotterie pitcher and shuffled together, he caused him to be cited and called alowd by name, and the man himselfe to be brought forth of the counsell house whose name chanced to be drawne out first. He was no sooner named, but every man cryed out, that he was a lewd and wicked person, and worthy to be hanged. Then Pacavius sayd, I see (quoth he) what destinie ye rede this man. Rejected he is, and cast out for naught and unjust: choose now a good Senatour, and a righteous in his roume. At the first, all was silent, and as still as midnight, for default of finding a better to place in his stead. Afterwards, when some odde groome past all shame and  reverence, seemed to nominate one: by and by they grew to much lowder words and greater clamours: while some sayd flatly they knew not the man, others laid to his charge sundrie lewd and naughtie vices, and objected against him either abject basenesse, povertie and beggeri^* or else some dishonest kinde of trade and occupation, whereby hee lived. Thus fared they, and much woorse a good deale, when a second or third Senatour was named: so as it was well seene, that the men bethought themselves and repented of that they had done alreadie, considering how they failed still and were to seeke, when they should substitute another in his place: for as much as it booted not, but was absurd to nominate the same againe, since that their nomination gained them nothing; but either to heare their vices deciphred, or to beare reproachfull tearmes: and as for all the rest, they were farre more vile and obscure persons, than those that came first into their rememberance, and were soonest thought upon. So the people fell at length, and gently came downe to this point, and confessed, that, Much better was bad they knew, than bad they knew not; and, Seldome came the better: willing the olde Senatours to be let out of ward and enlarged. By this pollicie Pa^uvius having bound the Senate

 to himselfe, more than to the Commons, and even as much as their life was worth; without force of armes ruled the rost, and all was at his devotion and commaund. Heereupon, the Senatours laid aside the remembrance of their owne dignitie, port, and libertie, became affable to the Commons, and would salute them kindly: inviting them courteously, and interteining them liberally at their bourds, with exquisit and delicate fare: undertaking and mainteining all their sutes and causes: readie at all times to assist them and stand by them: and in one word, empanalling Iuries (to go upon all causes and matters in law) of those whom they knew to be gracious and popular, and fitter to winne and procure the favour and affection of the common sort. Thus at the Counsel-table all matters were decided, as if the Commons had there sat, and not otherwise.
 This Capua was a citie ever given to dissolute life and excesse in pleasure, as wel by reason of the naturall corruption and inset disposition of the Inhabitants, as also for the plenteous and flowing aboundance of all delights, and the alluring intisements of all dainties, that either sea or lande might affoord. But at that time (such was the obsequious fawning, and flatterie of the Nobles, such was the licentious living of the Commons) they were so lavish, that they exceeded in lust and superfluitie beyond measure, and laid it on in expense without stay. Besides their contempt of Lawes, Magistrates, and Senate, they grew to this passe after the overthrow at Cannae, that whereas before, they had some awfull and reverent regard of the Romanes, now they despised and set naught by the government and Empire of Rome. And nothing else stood in the way, but that presently they would have rejected their rule, and shaken off the yoake of obedience  and alleageance, saving onely this, That by reason of ancient entercourse of crosse and mutuall marriages, many noble houses and mightie families were linked and allied to the Romanes: and againe, which was the greatest bond of all, whereas there had served in the Romane warres, certaine of them: there were threee hundreth men of armes, and those of noblest birth of all the Campanes, chosen out of them and sent by the Romanes to bee resiant in sundrie garrisons of the citties of Sicilie: whose fathers and kinsfolke (with much a do) obtained, that Embassadours should be sent unto the Consull of Rome. They found the Consull at Venusia with a few souldiours, and those armed by the halfes (for as yet hee was not gone to Cannusium) being in that poore taking and hard plight, as he could not be in worse; either to move pittie in the hearts of true and well affected allies, or to breed contempt in proud and hollow-hearted friends, such  as these Campanes were. Contemptible was their case, but the Cos. made himselfe and his condition more despised, by bewraying too much his present distresses, and laying open to the world the nakednesse of his calamitie. For when the Embassadours delivered unto him, That the Senat and people of Capua tooke it to the heart, and greatlie grieved at the adverse overthrow of the Romanes; The Oration of Varro, to the Embassadors of Capua. and promised therewith, to furnish him with all things fit and meet for war: Ye have (quoth he) o Campanes, observed an order and custome, and for form and fashion visited us your confederates, in willing us to require at your hands all supplements of warre; rather than said any thing directly besitting the present estate of our fortune.
For what have wee left us at all, after this discomfiture of Cannae, that wee should bee willing to have that supplied by our allies, which is wanting? as who would say, wee had somewhat alreadie. Should we demaund of  you footemen, as though wee were furnished with horse? Should wee say that we lacked mony, as if mony only were wanting, and nothing else? No, no, Fortune hath dealt so hardly with us, that shee hath left us just nothing, nor so much as that, which might bee made up and supplied by others. Our Legions of footmen, our Cornets of horse, our armour and munition, our Standards and Ensignes, horse and man, monie and victuals: all is gone; lost and perished; either in the battaile, or the morrow after in the ruine of our campe, when we were turned out of our tents and pavilions. And therefore yee are not, o Campanes, to aid and helpe us in this warre; but in our behalfe, and for us, yee ought to take the whole charge of the warre upon your owne selves, against the Carthaginians Call to rememberance how^n in times past, when your auncesters and forefathers were fearefully driven to keepe within your walles, standing in  dread and bodily feare, not of the Samnites onely your enemies, but also of the Sidicines: wee took them into our protection, and defended them before Satricula: and how for your sakes we began warre with the Samnites, and mainteined the same for the space almost of an hundred year, and in great varietie of fortune, giving and taking sundrie foiles all the while. Over and besides, call to minde, how wee concluded an indifferent and equall league with you, to the disadvantage

of neither parts: how wee graunted unto you the libertie of living under our owne  lawes: and how at the last (a matter ywis of right great importance and consequence, before this our late overthrowe at Cannae) wee graunted unto a great part of you, the freedome and priviledge of Bourgeoisie, and parted with you the franchises of our owne cittie. And therefore yee ought of right (my masters of Capua) to repute this losse and misfortune now received, to bee as well yours as ours: and to make reckoning to defend the common state and countrie of both. It is neither Samnite nor Tuskane that wee have to deale with, to whom, if we lost and parted with our Empire, yet it remained still within the compasse of Italie: but the enemie that pursueth us, is a Carthaginian, drawing after him a traine of souldiers, who are not so much as borne in A^fricke, but comming from the farthest and most remote parts and bounds of the world, from as far as the Gebraltar. streights of the Ocean sea, even from Hercules his pillers: void of the knowledge of  all law, right, and difference of condition, without reason and discretion, and (in manner) without comerce of mans language. These souldiers so fierce and fell by nature, so cruell and mercilesse by use and custome, their captaine hath withall made more wilde and savage, by making bridges, causies, and high-waies, over heapes of dead mens bodies: and (which I abhorre to speake) by teaching them to eate mens flesh. To see and endure these men to be their LL. whom feeding as they do upon such execrable meates and viands, which even to touch and handle without great horrour wee may not: to resort for justice as farre as into Affricke and Carthage, and to suffer Italie to be reduced into a Province under the Numidians and Moores, what is hee that would not detest and abhorre, were he but borne onely within Italie? A woorthie honour and immortall glorie it will be for you, o ye Campanes, if the Romane Empire and dominion, thus growing to ruine and falling downe prostrate under the weight of this late overthrowe, might by your fidelitie and forcible power be staied and vpheld, and set upright againe. I suppose yee have levied and enrolled alreadie, thirtie thousand foote, and foure thousand horse, out of Campaine: for coine, for corne, ye have store and plentie: Now if your faith and truth be aunswerable to your wealth and fortune, neither shall Anniball find that hee hath woon the victorie, nor the Romanes feele that they have lost a journey. With this Oration thus ended, the Consull gave the Embassadours their discharge, and dismissed them.
As they returned homeward, one of them, Sabius Virius by name, said thus unto his fellowes. Now is the day come (qd. he) wherin the Campanes may be able; not onely to recover againe the lands which in times past the Romanes have wrongfully taken from them, but also obtaine and enjoy the soveraigne  rule and Empire of all Italie. As for Annib. we may conclude, covenant, and capitulat with him what articles and conditions we list our selves, to our best behoofe and benefit: And it is all to nothing, that Annib. having now dispatched and finished the war, will of his own accord depart like a Conqueror into Affricke, and withdraw his forces out of these parts: so as the dominion of Italie shall bee left wholly to the people of Capua. Virius had no sooner delivered these speeches, but they all applauded him and accorded thereto. And in such tearmes they related their Embassage, as all men thought no lesse but the Romane Empire and name was utterly perished and extinct for ever. Incontinently the Commons and the greatest part of the Nobilitie of Capua enclined to revolt and rebell: Yet by the countenance and authoritie of the Auncients and Elders, the matter was staied and deferred for some few daies. At length, the greater part prevailed, whose opinion was, That the same Embassadors which were sent to the Roman Consull, should be addressed in embassie unto Anniball. But I find in some Annall records, that before they went, and before their resolute determination to revolt, there was an Embassage sent from the Capuans to the citie of Rome, demanding thus much, That if they meant to have any helpe and aid from them, one of their Consuls might be a Capuan. Wherat the Senat of Rome tooke such snuffe and indignation, that the said Embassadors were commanded to void the Counselhouse, and a Sergeant sent after them at their heeles, to set them out of the citie: charging them at their peril, to take up their lodging that night without the territories of Rome. But because this demaund jumpeth too neere to the like that the Latines made long before: and both Caelius and other Historians have (not without good reason) passed it over, and said nothing therof, I dare not  avow it for a truth. Wel, Embassadors there came unto Anniball, and concluded peace with him under these conditions, and covenants: Imprimis, That no generall, captaine, or magistrate of the Carthaginians, should have any jurisdiction or power over a citizen of Capua: Item, That no citizen of Capua should be compelled against his will to serve in any warres, or execute

 the charge and office of a souldiour. Item, That the Campanes still enjoy their old lawes and magistrates of their owne: Item, That Anniball deliver unto the Campanes three hundred Romane captives, such as they themselves shall choose; whome they might course and exchange for those three hundred horsemen of the Campanes that were in garrison, and served for pay in Sicilie. These were the articles of the accord. But the Campanes stucke not to doe more than so, and to go farther than their capitulations: committing divers and sundry outrages. For the commons suddainely at once, apprehended all the Romane captaines over the confederat souldiers, yea and attached other cittizens of Rome, that were either employed in any militarie charge, or otherwise occupied in their privat affaires: and caused them to bee clap^^p within the stouves and hote houses, as in ward and safe custodie, where their breath being stuffed  and stopped up with exceeding heat, and steeming vapours, they were stifled, and dyed miserably. But there was one Decius Magius, a man who wanted no meanes of soveraigne authoritie, but onely the sobtietie, discretion, and wisedome of the citizens with whom he lived; who withstood all that ever he could, such enormious and audacious courses, and endevoured to hinder the embassage sent to Anniball. And so soone as he heard that Anniball was sending a garison, he recounted unto his fellow citizens, the proud and lordly rule of Pyrrbus, the miserable and wretched thraldome of the Tarentines, as precedents, sufficient to give them warning. He ceased not to crie aloud in open place and audience, first, that they should not receive the garison into the citie: then, that being admitted, they should either be thrust out againe; or rather, if they would expiate and make amends by some valiant and memorable act, for that shamefull lewd part of  theirs, in revolting so from their most auncient Allies, yea and kinsmen by bloud, they should fall upon the Carthaginian garison, and kill them every one, and so reconcile themselves againe to the Romanes. Anniball having intelligence of these plots (for they were not a forging and contriving in a corner) first sent certaine messengers to summon Magius to repaire unto his presence within his campe. After that, seeing he stoutly denied to go (for he pleaded that Anniball had no authoritie nor right to commaund a citizen of Capua) he waxed wroth, and commanded the man to be apprehended, and to be haled perforce bound, unto him. But fearing, upon better advise, least by offering such violence some tumult might arise, and in the heat of bloud, breake foorth into an inconsiderat fray, he dispatched beforehand a messenger of purpose unto Marius Blosius, the Pretour or L. Governour of Capua: signifying, that the morrow next  following, he would be personally in Capua: and so with a small gard about him, he set forth of his camp, and put himselfe on his journey. Marius assembled the people together, making proclamation, and warning them to be readie in all frequent solemnitie, with their wives and children, to meet Anniball upon the way. They of the adverse side unto Magius and the Romans, performed this not only obediently, but also most effectually and with great diligence and endevor. Yea, the common sort likewise were very forward in this action, as desirous especially to see this great Generall and brave warriour, so noble and renowmed for his many victories. Decius Mag^us neither went forth to meet him, nor yet kept his house, because hee would not seeme to feare and cary a guiltie conscience: but walked up and downe idely for his pleasure in the Market place with one of his sonnes, and a few of his vassals and followers, whiles the whole  citie besides was busily occupied, and much troubled in the enterteining and beholding of this great Captaine and commander of the Carthaginians. Anniball being entred the citie, incontinently required to have audience in their Counsell house. Whereupon, the Nobles and principall citizens of Capua requested him that he would not that day intend any weightie matters of importance, but himselfe in person solemnize it, with joy and mirth, as an high and festivall holiday for his welcome thither. And albeit he was by nature hastie, and readie to fall into fits of anger, yet because he would not seeme at his first comming to denie them any thing, he employed a good part of that day in seeing and vewing the citie. Interteined and lodged he was and his whole traine, with the Manij, Celeres, Stenius, and Pacuvius, the most noble and honorable personages, and the welthiest of all others. Thither unto him, Pacuvius Calavius (concerning  whome I spake before, the principall man of that bend and faction, which reduced the citie to the obedience and devotion of Anniball) brought his owne sonne a yong Gentleman, and said withall, that the youth kept continually with Decius, and that he was faine to pluck him away from his companie and traine, whose part he tooke, and stuck most stiffly to him, in mainteining the old societie and amitie of the Romanes, against the new league with the Carthaginians;

and neither the bending and inclination of the whole citie to the contrarie side, nor yet  the reverent majestie of a father, had yet driven him from his obstinate resolution. And for that time, the father laboured with Anniball rather by way of prayer and intreatie, than by excusing and cleering his sonne, that he would not be discontented nor displeased with the yong man. So he was overcome with the importunate request and plentifull teares of the father, and gave commandement, that he together with his father should be bidden to supper, at which ^east, he purposed to have the companie of no other guests of all Capua, but only of his hostes that gave him enterteinement, and one Iubellius Taurea, a famous and brave warriour. To supper they went long before day light went downe, and fared at the table, not after the guise of Carthaginians, nor according to the discipline of souldiours, but after the order of a citie and house, which had bene used a long time to have the bourd furnished with sundrie sorts of deintie  dishes, and with all delicate junckets to please the palate and tast. Perolla onely the sonne of Calavius, could not be brought to change his mind, and shew himselfe cheerefull and merrie at meate, notwithstanding the masters of the feast, and Anniball himselfe otherwhiles, invited him to beare them companie, and sit with them; but he ever made his excuse to his father, that he was ill at ease and sickly whensoever he seemed to examine him, and to know the cause of such wonderfull trouble of mind, and vexation of spirit.
So, a little afore sunne setting, when his father arose, and was gone out from supper, he followed hard after him: and when they were come into a secret place apart, (a garden it was on the back side of the house) I will tell you a thing father, I have in my head a pollicie, and a readie meane, how we shall not only obteine pardon at the Romanes hands, for our trespasse committed, in falling away from them, and turning unto Anniball: but also how we Campanes may be in farre greater estimation and favour among them than ever we were. The father marveiling hereat, was desirous to know what devise that might be: and with that, the youth cast his gowne from off his shoulder, and shewed him a good blade girded to his side. I will quoth he out of hand, establish and seale sure, the Romane league with the bloud of Anniball. I was desirous (father) to let you know of it aforehand, if peradventure you would be willing to be out of the way when the deede is a doing. The old man seeing and hearing this, in a great fearefull agonie, as if he had bene present to see the execution of that which he heard him to speake of, Now I beseech thee, my sonne (quoth he) and pray thee of all loves and bonds that bind children and parents together, that thou wilt not before thy fathers face either commit or suffer this so horrible a part, full of all abhominable wickednes whatsoever, and not to be named. There are not many houres since, that we sware by all the gods and holy hallowes in heaven, and by joyning hand in hand, made faithfull promise, and obliged ourselves, to communicate together with him, and to eat at the holy table of sacred viands. And are we no sooner departed asunder from our familiar conference and parlee, but we arme ourselves against him? Arisest thou in deede from thy friends guest-bourd, to which thou wert thy selfe the third man bidden of all the Campanes, and even by Anniball, and wilt thou staine and pollute that bourd
with the bloud of the principall guest* I, thy father, erewhile was able to reconcile A^niball to my sonne; and can I not pacifie my sonne likewise, and appease his fearce stomack against Anniball? But if there be nothing sacred and inviolable, nothing to be trusted in the world, neither faithfull promise, nor religious oth, nor any pietie at all and good nature, things  so honest and just: then adventure hardly, and spare not to put in execution all actions detestable and not to be spoken, so that besides the note and infamous marke of wickednesse, they bring not upon our owne heads present mischiefe, and utter confusion. Darest thou alone assaile the person of Annibal? What will that multitude about him do the while, so many freemen and bondmen both? All their gard and regard, all their eyes upon him alone, what serve they for? What will become of so many hands of theirs? Thinkest thou that they will be benummed and dead, at the time of that frantick enterprise of thine? The grim visage of Anniball himselfe, whome whole armyes of souldiours tremble to behold: whome the people of Rome dread, and for feare of whome they quake againe, wilt thou alone abide to see? And if all other meanes of help should faile him, wilt thou endure to strike and wound me thy father, putting my bodie betweene, for the savegard and defence of Anniball? And stabb me thou must through the very hart, before thou canst hurt him or run him through. Suffer therefore thy selfe here to be frighted from this thy intended mischiefe, before thou have the foyle there, and misse of thy purpose. Let my prayers take place with thee, as once this day they prevailed for thee. With that, he

 marked his sonne to weepe and shed teares, and embracing him about the middle, and kissing him ever and anon, he left him not, nor gave over to pray and intreate him instantly, untill he got at his hands to lay off his sword, and promise him faithfully, that he would not attempt any such enterprise.
Then the youth, seeing how the case stood, I wil (quoth he) pay unto my naturall father that kindnesse and love, in which I am bound as a debtour to my native countrie. But alas for you, good father, I am right sory for your hard hap; who are to answere before God and the world, for the betraying of your countrie, no fewer times than thrice alreadie. Once, when you gave counsell and persuaded to forsake the Romanes, and to revolt from them: againe, when you were the principall agent, and advised to make peace with Anniball: and now this day the third time, when you are the only obstacle and hinderance, that Capua is not restored againe  into the hands of the Romanes. O sweet countrie and native soyle of mine, take here at my hand this sword, wherewith erewhile I was girt and armed for deere love of thee, and was fully minded to defend this thy chiefe castle and fortresse, and not to spare, but embrue it in the bloud of thy mortall enemie: take it I say, since mine owne father is readie to wrest it from me. This sayd, he flung his sword over the garden wall into the high way and open street: and therewith, because he would not grow into any suspition, he shewed himselfe againe to the guests within the house, and tooke part of the banquet. The morrow after, the Senate in favour of Anniball, solemnely met together in great number: in which frequent assembly, the beginning of his speech was very pleasant and gracious: wherein he gave the Capuans thanks, for preferring his amitie before the alliance of the people of Rome: and among other faire and magnificall behests to  them made, he promised that within a while, Capua should be the head citie and chiefe State of all Italie, whereunto the people of Rome, together with other nations, should resort for law and justice.
Mary quoth he, there is one that hath no part or fellowship in the societie and league made betweene the Carthaginians and you, namely, Magius Decius, who neither was a Campane, nor ought of right so to be called and reputed: him I demaund to be delivered into my hands, and that in my presence, the Senate should be asked their opinion concerning his trespasse, and an Act presently entred thereof. All of them there assembled allowed of the motion, and gave their assent in the end: albeit a great sort of them thought both the man unworthie of that hard fortune and calamitie, and that this was but an ill beginning and a very ouverture to the infringing of the right of their freedome. The chiefe Magistrate then, went forth of the  Counsel chamber, and sate in the Iudiciall hall or temple, and commanded Decius to be attached, and to stand before him at his feete, and there to answere for himselfe and make his defence. Who persisted still in the same stournesse and boldnesse of spirit, alleadging that by vertue of the covenants in the league comprised, he might not lawfully be pressed and forced thus farre. Wherupon he had yrons clapt upon him, and commaundement was given, that he should have a Lictor attend upon him, and so be conveighed into the campe of Anniball. All the way as hee was led, so long as he was bareheaded and open faced, hee went preaching to the multitude that flocked about him, and with a lowd voice spake and said.
Now Capuans, yee have the libertie that ye sought and longed for. In the open market place, at noone day, and in your sight, lo how I, a man inferiour to none in all Capua, am led away bound in chaines to die. What greater violence  could be offered, if Capua were woon by assault of the enemie? Go forth, go and meet Anniball, adorne and hang the citie with rich cloth of tapistrie. Register in your Kalender, among other holydaies, this day of his Entrie, that in the end ye may behold this goodly triumph over one of your owne cittizens. Vpon the utterance of these words, the multitude seemed discontented at the indignitie of this sight. Whereupon hee was hood-winked, and his head covered, and the Sergeant was charged to have him away quickely, and make hast out of the gates. So hee was brought into the campe, and immediately shipped and sent to Carthage, for feare least some commotion might arise in Capua, upon so unworthie and shamefull a deed* and least the Senate also should repent themselves, that they had delivered and yeelded out of their hands a principall personage among them: also to prevent, that no Embassage might be sent unto him  for his redelivery, wherby he should either offend his new allies, in case he denied them their first request, or suffer Capua to have alwaies a busie and seditious citizen, readie ever to stirre up new troubles, if he graunted their suite. The ship wherein he was embarked, was by tempest cast upon Cyrenae, a port towne in the dominion at that time of the KK. There, Magius fled for refuge as to a Sanctuarie, unto the Image of king Ptolomaus, and was brought by his guard and keepers

unto Alexandria to the kings presence, and enformed the king, how contrarie to the tenor and  priviledge of the covenant, he was in bonds by Anniball. Whereupon hee was loosed from his chaines, and put to the choise, whether to Capua, or goe to Rome. Magius answered, that he could not in Capua remaine in safetie, and if he went to Rome at that time especially, when there was warre betweene the Romanes and Capuans, he should bee sooner lodged there in prison like a fugitive runagate, than intertained in house for a friend and loving guest: and concluded in the end, that he would make abode and live the rest of his daies more willingly in no place of the world, than in his highnesse realme, whom he found alreadie to be the saviour of his life, and the redeemer of his libertie and enlargement.
Whiles these occurrents fell out abroad, Q. Fabius Pictor, sent (as is abovesaid) Embassador to Delphos, returned to Rome, and out of a writing he red openly, the answer of the Oracle in these  words (now yee must understand, that in this Script were certaine gods and saints named, unto whom they should make solemne supplication, and the manner also with all ceremonies and complements thereto belonging:)The answere of the Oracle. Then (o Romanes) if yee shall so doe, your state shall prosper and be more happie: your Commonweale shall goe forward better to your mind, yea, and victorie in the wars shall happen unto the people of Rome. But remember, that when all things shall goe well on your side, and your State shall be saved and preserved, yee send unto Pythius Apollo a present, according to the merite of a due recompence; and of the sylver raised of the pillage, prises, and spoiles taken from the enemies, doe him honour accordingly.
After he had rehearsed these words truly, translated out of the Greeke Originall, then he said moreover, That so soone as he was departed from the Oracle, he presently sacrificed unto all those gods with franke-incense  and wine. Also, that he was commaunded by the Priest of Apollo, that like as he both came to the Oracle, and also celebrated sacrifices, crowned with a garland and chappelet of Lawrell, so hee should in the same manner adorned, take ship and be imbarked, and not lay off the said garland before hee was arrived to Rome. Finally, that after all ceremonies performed most precisely and diligently, which hee was commaunded to observe, hee had laid and bestowed the said chappelet upon the altar, before the Shrine of Apollo at Rome. Then the Senate made a decree, That those sacrifices and supplications should with all speed and carefull regard bee celebrated.
Whiles these things passed at Rome and in Italie, Mago the sonne of Amilcar, arrived at Carthage, and brought the first tidings of the victorie at Cannae. This Mago was not immediately  and directly sent from his brother, out of the field where the battaile was fought, but staied certaine daies about receiving the homage and subjection of certaine cities of the Brutij, which revolted from the Romanes. Who having audience given him in the Senate of Carthage, related what acts and exploits his brother Annibal had atchieved in Italie: namely; That he had given battaile to sixe Generals, whereof foure were Consuls, and two were the Dictator and Commander of horsemen: That he had fought against sixe entire Consular armies, in which battailes he had slaine above 200000 enemies, taken prisoners more than 50000. That of those 4 Coss. he had killed twaine outright: as for the other two, one of them was deadly hurt, the other having lost his whole armie, was fled, accompanied scarcely with 50 men: That the Generall of the Cavallerie created with ful Consular authoritie, was discomfited and put to flight: and the Dictator (for  sooth) because he never would hazard the fortune of a field, was counted the onely warriour and worthie Captaine: That the Brutij and Apulians, part of the Samnits, and Lucanes, were revolted to the Carthaginians: That Capua, the head cittie not of Campane onely, but (after the Romanes defeiture and overthrow in the battell at Cannae) of all Italie also, was surrendred to Anniball. For these so many and so worthie victories, he required (meet and requisit as it was) that there should be a solemne feastivall day holden, and sacrifices solemnised to the honor of the immortall gods. And for better assurance of these luckie and fortunate atchievances, and to verifie his words, he caused the gold rings of the Romans, slaine at Cannae, to be poured forth in the porch and entrie of the councell house. The heape of them was so great, that as some authors affirme, when they measured the same, they filled three Mody and an halfe. But the constant report went, and sounding neerer to a truth, that they were not above one Modius. Hee added moreover and said (and all to prove their overthrow the greater) that none but knights and men of arms, and those of the better sort, who served on horses found at the citties charges, used to weare that omament.
The drift and conclusion of his speech was this, that the sooner that Anniball hoped to

 make an end of the warres, the more he ought to be aided and helped with all provision and furniture accordingly. And why? The service was farre from home, in the mids of the enemies land, a huge deale of corne was consumed, a great masse of monie was spent: and as so many battailes had utterly swoopt up the enemies armies, so reckning was to be made, that they had in some measure lessened and empaired the forces of the conquerour. Therefore, a new supplie of men was to be sent over, and monie for souldiers pay, yea and come also was to be transported to so brave souldiers, that had done so singular good service, and deserved so well of the Carthaginian nation. Vpon these reports of Mago, when all men els were wonderous glad, and tooke great contentment, Himilco, a man of the Barchine bend, supposing he had now good occasion and opportunitie offred to carpe and check Hanno. How now Hanno quoth he, what say you to this  geare? repent you still
and mislike the warre undertaken against the Romanes? Let us see now, give your voyce and opinion that Anniball be yeelded: forbid now thanksgeving to be performed to the immortall gods, for this prosperous speed and fortunate successe. Let us heare a Romane Senator now to speake in the counsell house of the Carthaginians. Then Hanno; I would have held my peace this day, my LL. quoth he, for feare to speake ought that in this common and generall joy might not be altogether pleasant unto you. But now, seeing a Senatour bluntly spurreth me the question, whether I mislike still of the enterprise of war against the Romanes? if I should keepe silence and say nothing, I might seeme either prowd and insolent, or else faultie and culpable. Whereof the one is the part of a man that hath forgotten the libertie of other men; the other a propertie of him, that thinketh not of his owne. Well may I therefore answer  to Himilco, that I cease not yet to mislike this warre, nor never
will give over to blame and challenge this invincible Captaine and warrior of ours, before I see the war ended and determined, upon some indifferent hand, and tollerable condition: and nothing els shall stint the misse I have, and quench the longing desire of the old peace, but the making of a new. And therefore these particulars, which Mago erewhile so magnified and vaunted of, are for the present, joyful newes to Himilco and other of that crue, and the supposts of Anniball; and to mee likewise in some measure, they may be acceptable tidings, in this regard, that good successe and luckie speed in warre, if we will make the right use and benefite of our fortune, will be a mean to procure us a more easie and honourable peace. For if we let slip this advantage and opportunitie of the time, when as we may seeme, rather to give than take conditions of peace, I feare mee, that even this present  so goodly a shew of ranckenesse as it maketh now, will run up all to straw,
and beare no head to yeeld corne in the end. And yet, let us consider now, what a speciall matter this is. Slaine I have whole armies of enemies; Therefore send me fresh and new souldiours. What could you (Sir) demaund more, if you had been overthrowne? Woon I have by force two strong holds where the enemies were encamped, full and fraight (we must needs think) of prizes and victuals; Allow me more corne and monie. What would you have required and craved more, I say, in case you had been rifled, and turned perforce out of your owne campe and pavilions? But that I may not marvel alone at these strange Enthymemes and conclusions (for it is as free and lawfull for me to ask some questions, seeing I have alreadie answered to Himilco) I would faine have Himilco or Mago, I care not whether, to make answere likewise to mee. Say, that in the battaile before Cannae, the  Romane Empire was wholly defeited and foiled. Say also, that certaine it is, how all Italie is at point
readie to revolt, tell me first and formost, whether any one Nation of the Latine people is fallen from them to us? Secondly, whether any one person of the five and thirtie wards in Rome, is run away, and fled to Anniball? When Mago said nay, and denied both. Why then (quoth hee) there be great numbers of our enemie still behind. But I would gladly know what courage, what heart, what hopes, that multitude hath. When Mago answered, he could not tell. And nothing (quoth Hanno) is more eife and easie to bee knowne. Say man, sent the Romanes any Embassadours to Anniball to treat for peace? Nay, had yee any intelligence brought unto you, that there was so much as one word lisped, or mention made at Rome of peace? When Mago said flatly, nay, to that too. Why then (quoth Hanno) by this account, this warre will find us  worke, and keepe us occupied as much as it did, the very first day that Anniball set foot in Italie. Howe variable
for tune was in the former Punicke warre, how victorie went and came reciprocally, wee are most of us yet alive that well remember. Wee never sped better, nor had a luckier hand, both by land and sea, than before Caius Luctatius, and Aulus Posthumius were Consuls. And whiles Luctatius and Posthumius were Consuls, were wee vanquished

and utterly overthrowne before the Ilands AEgates. And in case now (which God forfend) fortune should chance to change and turne her wheele, hope yee to have peace then, being overcome, which now when we are conquerours, no man offereth nor seeketh after. For mine owne part, if any man should aske mine opinion of peace, either to present and tender it to the enemies, or to accept it at their handes, I wote well what to say: but if yee would knowe what I thinke concerning those demaunds of Mago, my advise is, that there is no sence nor reason to send aide and supplies to conquerours: now if they beare us in hand, delude, and abuse us with a vaine and false persuasion of conquest and victorie, much lesse a great deale. These remonstrances of Hanno tooke small effect with many of them: for, both the secret grudge and rancor which he bare to the Batchin house, much impeached his credit and authoritie, and also by reason that their mindes were so fully possessed of the present joy, they could admit and abide to  heare of nothing, that might sound otherwise to daunt their glad harts; thinking verily that the warre would soone be at an end, if they now would straine a little and helpe it forward. And therfore with great consent, there passed an Act of the Senate, That there should be a supplie sent unto Anniball of fortie thousand Numidians, fortie Elephants, and many talents of silver. Also the Dictatour was sent before with Mago into Spaine, to levie and hire twentie thousand footmen, and foure thousand horsemen, for to make up those broken armies which were in Italie and in Spaine. But these matters (as usually it hapneth in time of prosperitie) were performed but slackly and at leisure. The Romanes contrariwise, made more speed; as being by nature more industrious: and besides, such was their adverse fortune and extremitie, that they might not sleepe their affaires and go slowly about their businesse. For neither the Consull was wanting in  any affaires that were by him to be managed: and the Dictatour M. Iun. Brutus, so soone as hee had performed all the complements concerning sacrifices and religious ceremonies, proposed unto the people, That (as the usuall manner was) he might mount on horsebacke. Which done, over and besides the two legions of cittizens, which in the beginning of the yeare had bene levied and enrolled by the Consuls, and the bondslaves that were before mustred, and certein squadrons gathered togither out of the Picene and Gaules countrie; he proceeded to the last remedie and succour of a distressed and well neere desperate state, when as honest and direct courses must give place unto commodious and profitable pollicies, and alight from his horse, and made proclamation, That whosoever were guiltie and condemned of any capitall crime, or whosoever were imprisoned for debt, and wold willingly serve under him, he would take order that  they should be exempt from all punishment, and discharged from their creditours. And of such he armed sixe thousand, with the spoyles of the Gaules, which in the triumph of Flaminius were carried in shew. Thus he departed from Rome five and twentie thousand strong.
Anniball having possessed himselfe of Capua, and solicited the Neapolitanes once againe, and sounded their minds, proposing before their eies feare and hope, and all in vaine, led his forces into the countrie of Nola: with this minde, not at first to go roughly with them to worke, and by way of open hostilitie, because he was not out of all hope, that they would willingly come off and yeeld themselves: but in case they hasted, and answered not his hope and expectation in some good time, hee would surely proceed against them in all extremitie, and put them to whatsoever they could endure or feare. The Senate, and especially the principall of them, continued  fast and sure in their alliance with the people of Rome. But the commons (as their maner is, desirous of alteration, and to see a new world) enclined wholly to the side of Anniball, casting many doubts, and feares, that their lands and possessions should be wasted and spoiled, with sundrie calamities and indignities that follow upon siege: neither wanted there heads and ringleaders of a rebellion. Whereupon the Senat (for feare least if they should seeme to thwart and crosse them, they had not bene able to withstand the violence of the multitude once up and drawne to an head) closely dissimuled their intent and purpose, and so by temporizing, prevented a present mischiefe. For they made semblance that they liked well, and were resolved of revolting unto Anniball: but upon what conditions and capitulations, they should enter into new league and amitie, they knew not certeinly. So having taken a farther time, they dispatched in  hast certeine Embassadours unto the Rom. Praetor Marcellus Claudius, who remained with the army at Cannusium, advertising him in how great jeopardie the state of Nola stood, to wit, That Anniball was alreadie lord of their lands, and the Carthaginians would soone be maisters of the citie, unlesse they were succored and relieved: that their Senat were
driven to this shift, for to

 yeeld unto the commons, and graunt to revolt whensoever they would have them; and by that meanes staied them that they rebelled not over hastily. Marcellus after hee had commended the Nolanes, willed them with the same dissimulation to protract time and hold off untill his comming: and in the mean while, to conceale and keepe secret to themselves, the dealings and treaties with him, and in no case to be knowne of any hope they had of aid from the Romans. Himselfe went from Cannusium to Calatia, and from thence passed over the river Vulturnus, and by the way of Satricula and Trebia, journied over Suessula through the mountaines, and arrived at Nola. A litle before the comming of the Romane Pretour, Anniball was departed and gone out of the territorie of Nola, and drew downewards to the sea side neere unto Neapolis: his teeth watered at the port-towne, and that out of Affricke his ships might arrive thither, as to a safe  and sure harbour. But after that hee heard that Napleswas held by a Romane provost, M. Iunius Syllanus (sent for thither by the Neapolitanes themselves) and had received a garrison: seeing hee could not be admitted into Neapolis, no more than into Nola, he went to Nuceria. Having beleaguerd it round a long time, and often assaulted it forcibly, and assaied to sollicite as well the Commons as the Nobilie, but without effect; at the length by famine he forced them to yeeld, and so became master of the towne, upon composition, That they should depart every man disarmed, in their single garments. Then, as one that would seeme ever from the beginning, to use clemencie to all Italians, but onely the Romanes; he made faire promises of great rewards and advancement to honor, unto all those that would tarrie behind and serve under him. But no man upon those hopes wold remaine with him. For they all gave him the slip, and went  sundrie waies, some to their friends and acquaintance, others at a venture as their minde stood, to divers citties of Campane, but most to Nola and Naples. Amongst the rest, there were almost thirtie Senatours, and those (as it fell out) of the best sort, that came to Capua: but being kept out there, because they had shut their gates against Anniball, they went to Cumes. The pillage of Nuceria was bestowed upon the souldiours, the cittie sacked and burnt. Now kept Marcellus Nola, not presuming more upon the strength of his owne garison, than upon the confidence he had in the great men and chiefe of the cittie. But he had the commons in jealoasie, and aboue all, one L. Bantius, who for that he had complotted to rebell, and therefore stood i^ feare of the Romane deputie; one while was pricked and incited to attempt treason, and to betray his countrie; another while, in case he should faile of that opportunitie, and misse his purpose,  to make an escape and run away to the enemie. A courageous and lustie yong man he was, and the bravest Cavalier in those daies of all the Roman confederates. His hap was to be found lying halfe dead among the heapes of slain bodies before Cannae: Annib. tooke order for the cuting of his hurts, and when he was throughly healed, right courtessy sent him home well and bountifully rewarded. In rememberance of which favour and good turne; and in token of thankfulnes, he was willing to deliver and yeeld Nola into the hands of Anniball, to be at his devotion. But the Pretour had an eye unto him, and observed how his head wrought, and was busily occupied to bring an alteration. And seeing there were but two waies to deale with him, either by punishment to keepe him short, and cut him off; or by some benefit to winne his heart: he thinking it a better course; to gaine unto himselfe so hardie and valiant a friend, than onely to bereave his  enemie of him; he sent for him, and in this manner spake friendly unto him.
You have (quoth hee) amongst your countriemen and fellow cittizens, I see well, many that envie you, as it appeares well by this, that there is never a neighbour you have at Nola, that hath told me of you, and how many noble exploits and good services in warre you have performed. But yet your valour cannot be unknowne and hidden, ever since you served in the Romane armie. For many there be that were souldiours then with you, which have made report unto me of your prowesse, and what perils you have entred into, and how often you have put your life in hazard, for the safetie and honour of the people of Rome and namely; how in the battaile before Cannae, you gave not over fight, untill at length having bled well neere to death, you were borne to the ground and lay under foote, overwhelmed with men, horse and armour, falling upon you, and so kept down  that you could not rise up againe. But be of good cheere man, and go on still in this thy ver^ue and well doing: you shall have at my hands all honour and reward that may be possible: and the oftener you come to me and keepe me companie, you shall find it will be more for your reputation and commoditie both. The young man was glad at heart for these gracious words and large promises: and so Marcellus gave unto him freely, a goodly brave courser, and commaunded the

(...) Treasurer to tell him out in monie Bigates of silver, charging his officers and Lictors to let  him have accesse unto him at his pleasure, whensoever he came. By this courteous usage and humanitie of Marcellus, the young mans stout heart was so doulced, mollified, and easie to bee wrought, that of all Confederates and Allies there was not one, who bare himselfe more valiantly, nor maintained more faithfully the State of Rome. When Anniball was approched to the gates of Nola (for he was returned from Nuceria, and come thither againe) and the Commons within the towne practised afresh to rebell, Marcellus had a little before the comming of the enemies retired and put himselfe within the wals: not for fear that he should not be able to keep the field and his hold; but least he should give advantage and opportunitie to betray the cittie, seeing too many of them within, disposed and forward thereunto. After this, they began on both sides to arraunge their battailes in array, the Romanes under the wals of Nola, the Carthaginians  before their owne fort. Small skirmishes there were, between the cittie and the campe of Anniball (with variable event of fortune) because the Generals were not willing, either to denie and debarre some few that were so eager and forward to call for fight, or yet to give forth the signall of a generall battaile ^ Whiles these two armies temporised thus, and held their corps de guard, continually, and in manner of a solemne set Assemblie, the cheefe Nobles of the Nolanes advertised Marcellus, that there used to be night-meetings and conferences betweene their owne Commons and the Carthaginians: and that it was plotted and set downe, That when the Roman host was issued in battaile ray out of their gates, the Commons in the mean while should fall to rifling of their carriages, packs, and trusses within, and then shut the gates upon them, and keepe the walls: and so having the cittie, an
d all their goods and baggage under their hands  should from thence forth receive Anniball into the cittie in steed of Marcellus. Vpon these advertisements, Marcellus after he had thanked and commended the Senatours of Nola, determined before any commotion and mutinie arose within the wals, to trie the fortune of a battell. A^ those three gates that stood toward the enemie, he raunged his forces, devided into three battaillons, and gave order, that all the cariages should follow after: and that the lackies, launders, and other camp-followers, together with the feeble and sickly persons, should carie stakes and pales for the rampier. At the middle gate he placed the flour and strength of the legions, together with the Romane Cavallerie: at the two gates of either hand, he bestowed the new souldiours, the light armour, and the auxiliarie horsemen of allies. The Nolanes were by streight commaundement forbidden to approch the gates or the wals. As for the baggage and carriages, the ordinarie guard  was appointed to attend thereupon, for feare, least while the Legions were busie in fight there should bee some assault made upon them. In this order and array marshalled they were, within the gates. Anniball, who likewise readie arraunged, stood with banner displaied (as hee had done for certaine daies together) untill it was well toward noone, first wondered at it, that neither the Romane armie issued out of the gates, nor any souldiours appeared upon the wals: and supposing afterwards, that their usuall complors and conventicles were discovered and revealed, and that for very feare they kept within and sat still, sent backe part of his souldiours into the campe, with commaundement, in all speed to bring abroad into the open field before the vaunt guard, all the ordinance and artillerie for to batter the cittie walls, with assured confidence, that if hee came hotely upon them, and gave an assault, whiles they thus lingered and issued not forth  the Commons would make some tumult and stirre within the cittie. But anon, as every man was busily occupied, running to and fro in hast about his owne charge, before the vaunt guard and forefront of his battaile, even at the point when hee advaunced forward to the walls; all upon suddaine a gate was set open, and Marcellus caused the trumpets to sound the al'arme, and the souldiours to set up a shout, commaunding the footmen first, and then the horse to sallie out and with all the might and force they could, to charge upon the enemie. Soone had they terrified their main battell sufficiently, and made disorder there, when at the two gates of each side, P. Valerius Flaccus, and Caius Aurelius, two Lieutenants generall, issued forth upon their flanckes and wings. The horse-boies, skullions, and the other multitude abovesaid, which was set to guard the carriages, arose up and made a new outcrie and shouted, so as to the Carthaginians (who contemned  them before for their small number especially) they represented all at once a shew of a mightie armie. I dare not avouch that which some Authours sticke not to write, that of enemies were slaine in this medley 2300: and that the Romanes lost but one onely man. But what victory soever it was, either so great, or smaller, surely a doubtie peece of service was that day atcheeved

 and I wot not whether I may truly say, of the greatest consequence that any ever was, during the time of that warre. For as the time was then, it was a greater matter for the Romanes (albeit they were the conquerors) not to be vanquished of Anniball, than it was afterwards to vanquish him. Anniball disappointed of his hope to win Nola, retired to Acerre. And Marcellus immediately having shut the gates, and placed the guards and warders to keepe the same, that no man might goe forth, sat judicially in the market place to examine those that had used secret conference and parling with the enemies: and finding above seventie, guiltie of this action, pronounced sentence of death upon them, as in case of treason. Those he cut shorter by the head, and commaunded their goods to be confiscate. And thus leaving the governement of the cittie to the Senat thereof, he departed with all his forces, and above Suessula encamped himselfe, and there abode.
Anniball being come before Acerre, first summoned the cittie, to surrender voluntarily and without constraint: but seeing them obstinate, and not willing to relent, he made preparation to lay siege unto the towne, and to assault it. But the Acerranes had better heart and courage, than might and strength to resist him. Therefore, when they saw themselves like to bee entrenched all about, and were past hope to defend and keepe the towne: before the enemies had brought all ends of their trenches and sconces together, they got between the trenches and rampiers (where they were not finished, and stood not close together) in the dead time of the night, and escaped through the sentinels and watches that were slenderly looked unto, and as well as they could, making shift through by waies and blind lanes, over hedge and ditch (as either their wits guided them, or their feare carried them) recovered those citties of Campania, which they knew for certaine  were not revolted, but persisted true and fast unto the Romanes. Anniball after he had put Acerra to the sacke, and set it on fire, having intelligence, that the Romane Dictatour and the Legions were received at Casilinum: and fearing, least while the enemie lay so neere encamped, some should have recourse also into Capua, led his armie to Casilinum.
At the same time Preneste was held by 500 Prenestines, with a few Romans and Latines, who upon the newes of the overthrow at Cannae, were retired thither. These Prenestines, by occasion that they were not levied and mustered at Preneste, by the day appointed, set out from thence somewhat too late; and were come as farre as Casilinum, before the rumour was bruited of the defeature before Cannae: where they joined themselves with other Romanes and Confederates, set forward from Casilinum, and marched together with a good great companie: but meeting  by the way with the tidings of that unfortunat field, turned back again to Casilinum. And after they had spent certain daies there, as well fearing the Campanes, as suspected of them againe, (for they devised on both sides how to entrap one another, and how to avoid each others trains), and having received also certain intelligence, That in Capua there was treating about a revolt, and that Anniball was there received; they in one night set upon the townesmen of Casilinum, and killed them, and got that part of the cittie which is on this side Vulturnus, (a river that runneth through it, and devideth it into two parts) and kept it still. Their number was well encreased by the comming of a cohort of foure hundred and sixtie Perusines, who likewise were driven to Casilinum, by the same report and news, which a few daies before had turned the Prenestines thither. And surely there was sufficient almost of armed souldiers, to man and defend the wals of that  part, being of so small a circuit as they were, considering the towne was flanked on the one side with the river. And againe, for the proportion of corne (whereof they had small store) they were men but too many. Anniball being now not farre from thence, sent before him the Getulians, under the conduct of a captaine named Isalca; with direction, that first, if he could come to a parlie, he should persuade with the inhabitants within, and by faire words induce them to open their gates, and receive a garison: but in case they continued still in their obstinacie, then to assayle them by force, and give the attempt to enter into the citie one way or other. When they were come under the wals, the barbarous captain Isalca, supposing (because he heard no noyse, and saw no sturring) that they had quit and abandoned the towne and were fled, began to assaile the gates, breake open the locks, and burst the barrs. But all at once on a sodaine, the gates were set  open, and two cohorts well appointed and provided for that purpose within, sallied forth, with an exceeding noyse and tumult, overthrew a number of the enemies, and beat them downe. Thus when the first had the repulse and were set back, Maharball was sent with a greater power to second them, but was not able to make his partie good with these squadrons that sallied forth and charged upon him. At the last Anniball himselfe encamped even before the wall, andwith all

his powre and forces put together,(...) made preparation to give assault to this little towne, and  small garison. And whiles he preassed hard upon them with fresh and hote assaults, investing it round about, the enemies from off their walls, curteines and turrets, let flye their shot so lustily upon the assailants, that he lost some of his best and most forward men there. Once they issued forth of themselves upon a braverie, and minded to bid them battaile, but by a course of Elephants set betweene them and home, they had like to have bene shut forth and kept out, and so they made hast in great feare to recover the gates and put themselves within the towneagaine; having lost, considering so small a number, a great sort: and more had dyed for it, but that the night parted the fray, and made an end of the skirmish. The morrow after, the assailants were all of them sharp set to give a fresh and hot charge, but not before there was a murall coronet of gold shewed, and promised unto him that first could skale the walls. And the Generall himselfe  cast in their teeth and reproved them for being so long about the assaulting of a small and weake skonse, to speake of, seated also upon a plaine: wheras before they had woon the strong towne of Saguntum. He put them in mind both all and some, of Cannae, Thrasymenus, and Trebia. Then began they to set mantilets and pavoises to, and to undermine. Many and sundry enterprises were attempted, and nothing left undone, that either by fine force could be performed, or by art and cunning devised. The Romane associates against these their engins and fabricks, raysed mounts, and platformes: yea and with countermines and crosse trenches, met with the mines of the enemies; so as both above ground, and underneath, they impeached all their attempts; so long, untill Annibal for very shame was faine to give over his imprease for the present. And when he had fortified his standing camp, and placed there a meane gard for the defence of it, because  he would not seeme to have relinquished altogether the enterprise, he withdrew himselfe into Capua, there to winter. There he lodged his souldiers within house for the better part of winter: those souldiours I say, who many a time and often had endured long, and held out against all travailes and hardnesse that can possibly happen to the body of man; and never had bene used to any good keeping, nor acquainted with delights and pleasures of the world. But even these men, whom no calamitie, no miserie could tame and overcome, were spoyled and undone with too much wealth and excessive deinties: and so much the rather, as they more greedily fell thereto; and having not tasted thereof before, gave themselves wholly that way, and were deepely plunged and drowned therein. For sleeping on soft beds, wine and delicate fare, wenching and bathing, stewes and hotehouses, idlenesse and taking ease, which by use and custome grew pleasant  and delightsome unto them every day more than other; had in such sort weakened their bodies, and made their harts so effeminate, that from that time forward, the reputation and name only of their victories past, defended them more, than any present strength and vigour they had: in so much, as expert and skilful warriours judged their Captaine Anniball in more fault, and farther overseene in this action, than in not leading his armie streight forward to Rome, after the battaile before Cannae. For, that stay might have bene thought to have differed onely the entire and finall victorie for a time, but this error and oversight, seemed to dishable him for atchieving the victorie for ever. So little retained he of his former old discipline, that I assure you, he went out of Capua againe, as if he had led some other armie, and none of his owne. For, not only they returned from thence most of them intangled and snared in the love of harlots, but also so soone  as they came againe to lye abroad on the bare earth under tents and pavilions covered with beasts hides, to march long journeys, and to tast of other militarie toyle and labour; their bodies so tyred, their harts so fainted, as if they had bene raw souldiers, new come into the field: in such wise, as all the time of their sommer abode in campe, many of them without licence and pasport, would slip out of the way, and depart from their colours: and these start-backs had no other place of haunt to lurke in, but Capua. Now when the winter season began to be more mild, and draw toward the Spring, Anniball brought forth his souldiers out of his wintering harbours, and returned to Casilinum: where, albeit the assault ceassed, yet the siege had continued so streight, that the townesmen and the garison within the fort, were driven to extreame necessitie and want of victuals. Now the Captaine over the Romane camp was T. Sempronius [Gracchus] by reason that the Dictatour was gone to Rome to take new Auspices. And as for Marcellus, who was desirous for his part to relieve and succour the besieged, was impeached for comming to them, partly by the rising and swelling of the river Vulturnus, and partly by the intreatie of the citizens of Nola and Acerrae, who greatly feared the Campanes, in case the garison were

 once departed from them. And Gracchus, lying and keeping neere unto Casilinum, stirred not one foote, by reason of the expresse commandement of the Dictatour, That he should attempt nothing in his absence: albeit there came dayly from Casilinum into the campe such newes, as would have moved and provoked the most patient man that was. For it was constantly reported, and for certaine knowne, that some of them within the towne, no longer able to endure the famine, threw themselves downe headlong, and brake their necks: others stood unarmed upon the walls, offring their bare and naked bodies as a butt and marke to the shot of arrowes, and other darts. Gracchus greeved much to heare these piteous tidings, yet durst he not for his life, skirmish and fight without the warrant of the Dictatour: and he saw full well, that if he would convey come and victuals unto them openly, fight he must, there was no remedie. Having therefore  no hope at all to send any, but it should be spied, he devised to fill many tunnes and pipes with come, that he had gotten together out of the countrie all about: and withall, to dispatch a messenger to the chiefe magistrate of Casilinum, advising him, that he should in the night season take up all those vessels which came downe the river. The night next following, every man watched at the river side, according to the hope they conceived by the foresaid Romane messenger, and so received those tunnes, hulling downe the midst of the streame: and the corne was equally devided among them all. Thus did they the morrow after, and the third day also. For, ever by night these vessels were let downe into the water, and the same night they might easily come unto them: by reason whereof, the sentinels and guards of the enemies, were nothing ware of that which was done. But afterwards, the current growing more swift and rough, by occasion of  continuall raynes that fell, the sayd tunnes were some of them driven crosse the channell to the banke side, even where the enemies warded: and were espied waving and sticking among the willowes and oisiers that grew along, close unto the banks: whereof Anniball was advertised. And so from thence forward, they tended the watch more streightly, that nothing sent downe the river Vulturnus, could escape them, and passe to the cittie. Afterwards, there was powred into the water great store of nuts, from the campe of the Romanes; which floated downe the channell unto Casilinum, and with grated skimmers of wicker were taken up. But at the last, they within the towne were driven to this poore shift and extremitie, for to take their thongs and bridle raines, to plucke off the lether from their shields and bucklers, and make them sort in skalding water, and prove how they could eat them. Nay, they spared not so much as  mice, and rats, nor any other like vermin. Nor there was not a weed nor a root that they could come by, upon the banks and terrasses under the walles, but they gathered and diged up. And when the enemies had turned up with a plough all the green sord of the counter-skarpe without the wals, they within, cast turnep seed upon the mould. Whereupon Anniball made a hout at it, and cried alowd: What? shall wee sit heere about Casilinum so long, untill these rapes be come up and grown. And whereas before that time, he would never vouchsafe to heare of any composition and agreement, now at last, he was contented to take reason, and be conferred withall, about the raunsome of as many, as were freemen within the towne. And it was covenanted betweene him and them, that they should pay for their redemption 21. lib. ster.seven ownces of gold a peece. So upon faithfull promise made, and securitie given, they yeelded themselves: andwere kept  bound in prison untill they had made full payment of the gold aforesaid. After which, they were sent backe under safe conduct to Cumes. For this is more like to be true, than the report which goeth,
 That there were sent out after them certeine horsemen, who fell upon them and slew them in the way. Most of them were Prenestines. And whereas, there were of them in all, five hundred and seventie in garrison, the one halfe well neere, were either by sword or hunger consumed: All the rest, togither which their Praetour Manitius (one who a foretime had bene a Scribe or Notarie) returned safe unto Preneste. In memoriall and testimonie of this, his Statue was erected in the market place of Preneste, armed in his cuirasse, clad in a long robe, with his head covered: and three other images, with a title or inscription engraven in a place of Brasse, with this tenor: That Manitius had made a vow for the soldiers who lay in garison with him at Casilinum. And  the same title also was graven under three other images, set up in the temple of Fortuna. The towne of Casilinum was restored againe to the Campanes, with a strong garison of 700 souldiours, deducted out of the armie
 of Anniball: for feare least when hee was departed once from thence, the Romanes should assaile them.
The Senate of Rome by vertue of a decree, granted unto those souldiours of Preneste double

wages, with five yeeres vacation and rest from warfare. And when, to gratifie them farther for  their valiant service, they made offer unto them of the Burgeosie and freedome of Rome, they chose rather to remaine still at home, and would not change their owne countrie. But what befell unto the Perusines, is not recorded so plainely: for neither appeareth evidence by any publike monument and memoriall of their owne, nor yet decree extant of the Romans. At the same time the Petellines (who alone of all the Brutij remained in friendship and amitie with the Romanes) were assaulted not onely by the Carthaginians, (that were possessed of a great part of the countrie about them) but also by the other Brutij, with whom they would not joine in the complot of their rebellion. The Petellines not able of themselves to hold out and endure these daungers, sent their Embassadours to Rome, for to crave their aide and assistance: whose humble praiers and pitteous teares (for after an answere received, That they
 should provide and  shift for themselves; they fell into lamentable mones and complaints, and lay prostrate upon the earth, before the porch of the Counsell-house) wrought exceeding compassion and pitie in the hearts both of the Senatours, and also of the people: whereupon the LL. were moved again the second time, by M. Acmylius the Pretour, to deliver their opinion. And when they had cast all about, and well waied and considered their present state, and what they were able to do: being forced to confesse, that it lay not in their power to help their Allies, so far distant and remote from them: they willed them to repaire home againe; and since they had performed their fidelitie to the full, according to covenant, they gave them leave in this calamitie of theirs, to take that course, that they thought best for themselves. When they were returned with this answere unto the Petellines, their Senate all on a suddaine was strucken into such sorrowes, dumpes, and fearfull 
maze; that some of them were of mind, and gave advise, to abandone the cittie, and flie everie man wheresoever he could: others were of opinion and persuaded, that seeing they were forsaken of their old friends, they should joyne with the other Brutij, and by their meanes, turne to Anniball, and come under his protection. Howbeit, a third side prevailed, who would in no wise that any thing should be done over hastily and rashly: but that they might meet againe, and sit in counsaile about the matter. And so it was put off, and respite given untill the next day. Then, after more mature deliberation, and their former feare somewhat assuaged, the principall personages there assembled, grew to this resolution, namely, To convey all things out of the territorie about them into the cittie, and to fortifie both it and the walles.
Neere about one and the same time, there came Postes with packets of letters to Rome, from  out of Sicilie and Sardinia. Those out of Sicilie from Octacilius the vize. Pretor, were read first in the Senate-house, importing these newes: That L. Furius the Pretour, was come out of Affricke, and with his fleet arrived at Lilybaeum: himself sore hurt, and lying at point of death: that neither souldiours, nor sailors, and marriners, had their monie or come, duly paid at the day; neither indeed was there any to bee had, for to keepe touch and make paiment: moving and advising them earnestly, to send supplie thereof, with all convenient speed: and if they thought so good, one also of the new chosen Pretours to succeed after him. To the same effect in manner, wrote Cornel. Mammula the Propretor, out of Sardinia, as touching that point of money and corn. Answere was returned to the one and the other, That they had it not, and therefore they were to looke themselves both to their Armadoes and armies, and to provide for them. Octacilius, who addressed  Embassadours unto K.Hiero (the only refuge and stay of succor, that the people of Rome had) received for souldiers pay, as much silver as was needfull, and come to serve sixe moneths. The confederat cities likewise in Sardinia, contributed liberally unto Cornelius, and served his turne. At Rome also for want of silver, there were (by a law published by Minutius, Tribune of the Commons) created three Bankers, called Triumviri Mensarij, to wit, L. Acmylius, who had ben Consull and Censor: M. Attilius Regulus, twise Consull asore time: and L.Scribonius Libo, a Tribune of the Commons for the time being. Two Duumvirs also were chosen, M. and C. Attilij, who dedicated the temple of Concord, which L. Manlius Pretour, had vowed before. Three high Priests also were consecrated, Q. Cecilius Metellus, Q. Fabius Max. and Q. Fulvius Flaccus, all to supplie the roomes of
P. Scantinius late deceased: of L. Acmylius Paulus the Consull, and Q. Aclius Paulus, slaine both in the journey of Cannae.
Now when as the LL. of the Senate had fulfilled other wants, and made up all decaies and breaches, which fortune by continuall calamities and losses had wrought and brought upon them, so farre foorth, as by any wisedome and pollicie of man, they could provide for at

 length they had respect and regard unto themselves also, even to the desolat estate of the Counsel-house, and the unfrequent number of Senatours, assembling to the publike Counsell of the cittie. For since that L. Acmilius and C. Flaminius were Censors, there had bene chosen no new Senatours, notwithstanding that in five yeares space, what with unfortunate battailes, and what with other particular chaunces, so many of them had miscaried.
And when M. Acmylius the Pretour, in the absence of the Dictatour (who after the losse of Casilinum was now gone againe to the host) had at the request of them all, propounded this matter: then Sp. Carvilius, after he had in a long oration complained, not only of the penurie, but also of the small choyse of those citizens, who were capable of Senatours dignitie, spake unto the point, and said, That he held it a matter of good importance both for the full repairing and restoring of the decayed bodie of  the Senate, as also for to bind the Latine nation in a more fast bond of amitie, that two Senators out of every State of the Latines (if the LL. of the Senat of Rome would agree unto it) should be enfranchised citizens of Rome, and taken into the Senate in place of those that were deceased. This opinion of his, the LL. of the Senate could abide to heare, with no better eare, than in times past they accepted the motion and demaund of the Latines themselves inthat behalfe.
And there being throughout the whole house a great muttering, for very indignation and disdein of those his words, Manlius above the rest brake out into this speech and said, That they were not all dead, but one man yet was left alive of that house and line, out of which a Consul (when time was) threatned in the Capitoll, that he would kill with his owne hand, that Latine whomesoever he saw sitting in the counsell house of Rome. With that Q. Fabius: Never was there a thing, quoth he propounded  and mentioned in the Senate house, in a worse and more unseasonable time, than at this present, when ^s the hearts and affections of our Allies being so wavering, their faith and alleageance so doubtfull, the very breaking and broching of such a matter as this, were enough to set them farther out. And therefore this inconsiderate speech of one foolish vaine person, is to be suppressed and buried presently with the silence of all men, and never once to be spoken of againe. And if ever there were uttered at a counsell table, any secret and mysterie, which were to be concealed, this of all other ought most to be kept close, hidden and smothered in oblivion, and reputed as never spoken at all. So this matter was dasht, and dyed there in the very birth. Then they proceeded and agreed, to create Dictator for the choosing of Senators, one that had bene Censor aforetime, and of all those who had bene Censors, and were then living, the most  auncient: and thereto they gave order, that C. Terentius Varno the Consull should be sent for, to the nomination of that Dictatour. Who being returned out of Apulia, leaving the camp there with a good guard, and taking long journeys, untill he was come to Rome: the night next following (as the maner was) created by authoritie of an act of Se^at, M. Fabius Bu^co, Dict. for 6 moneths, without a Generall of horse.
When he was mounted up with his Serjeants to the Rostra, [which is the place of publike audience] for to make a speech unto the people, he sayd, That he neither allowed of two Dictatours at one time, (a precedent never seene and knowne afore) not yet could take himselfe for a Dictatour, so long as hee was without his Generall of Cavallerie. I mislike also (quoth he) that the entier authoritie and power of Censors, should bee put into the hands of one and the selfsame man, twice: and that a Dictator should have the rule and government  for sixe moneths, unlesse he were created for the managing of warres. And therefore (said hee) I will my selfe limit and gage those things, which fortune, occasion of the times, and necessitie have made excessive and beyond all measure powerfull. Neither am I minded to depose or displace any of those from his Senatours dignitie whom C. Fl^minius, and ^ Acmylius late Censors, have admitted into the Senate: but only, that a transcript and rehearsall bee made of their names, for that I would not have it lie in the power of one man alone, to censure and give judgement of the same and behavior of a Senatour: but this course will I take in substituting newe Senatours in the roume of the dead, that it may appeare, and be said, That this Order and degree is preferred before that, and not one person before another. So after that the names of the olde Senatours were copied out and read, then he chose first into the place of them that were deceased  those who after the time of L. Acmylius and C. Flaminius Censors, had borne any Magistracie of State, and of the chaire, and yet were not elected Senatours. And according as they had exercised their office one before another in order of time, so were they chosen first Senatours in their course. This done, he made a second election, of those who had bene AEdiles, Tribunes, Pretors, or Questors: and last of all, such as could shew the spoyles taken from the enemies of

Rome hanging in their houses: or had bene honoured and rewarded with a Civick garland. Thus after he had with right great approbation and contentment of all men, taken into the Senate 177, forthwith he resigned up his office, descended from the pulpit a private man againe, discharged and put from him the Serjeants, and came and stood beneath among the other multitude that attended their owne private businesse: trisling out the time for the no^^^ and of purpose, because he would not have the people to leave the common place for to wait upon him. Howbeit, for all that lingering and stay which he made, the peoples affection cooled never the more, and so with a goodly traine of men he was accompanied, and conducted home to his house.
The next night following, the Consull returned toward the armie, without making the Senate privie and acquainted with his departure, for feare he should have bene deteined still in the citie  for the solemne election of new Magistrates. The morrow after the Senate decreed; upon a motion propounded by M. Pomponius the Pretor, to write unto the Dictatour, that if he thought it were for the good of the common weale, he would together with his Generall of the Cavallerie, and M. Marcellius the Pretour, repaire to Rome to subrogate and choose new Consuls, to the end that when they were all together in place, the LL. of the Senate might by them take knowledge in what state the Common wealth stood, and consult how to provide for everything. They all came that were sent for accordingly, leaving behind them their Lieutenants for the goverment and conduct of the Legions. The Dictator spake of himselfe but little, and with much modestie, ascribing the greatest part of the honor unto T. Sempronius Grac^hus, and then summoned the generall assembly for the Election: in which were chosen Coss. D. Posth^mius the third time (who  then was absent, and as L. Deputie ruled the province of Gallia) and T. Sempronius Gracchus, who at that time commaunded the Cavallery, and repaired to Rome with speede. Then were elected Pretors M. Valerius Levinus, Ap. Claudius Pulcher, Q. Falvius Flacc^s, and Q. Mulins S^aevol^. The Dictatour after the choosing of these Magistrates^ returned to Theanum, where the armie wintred: leaving the Generall of the horse behind at Rome, to the end that he being to enter into his government, within few dayes after, might consult with the LL. of the Senate as touching the levie and enrolling new armies against the yeare ensuing.
Whiles they wer^ in their busiest and deepest conferences about these matters, newes came of a fresh overthrow: such was the fortune of that yeare to heape one calamitie in the neck of another: to wit, that L. Posthumius the Consull elect, was himselfe slaine, and the armie togither  with him in Gallia^ utterly defeited and destroyed. The manner of which misfortune was this. There was in those parts a wide and huge forrest (which the Gaules call Litana) through which Postliumius was to leade his army. The defeiture of L. Post^^^ius and (...) armie. The trees there growing on either hand of the pase, the Gaules had so cut, that they might stand upright of themselves so long as they were not stirred, so, being forced never so little, they must needes fall downe. Now had Posthumius the conduct of two Romane legions; and of associates besides, from the high costs of the upper sea, he had enrolled so many soldiours, as that he came into the enemies countrey 25000 strong. The Gaules who had bestowed themselves in ambush round about the skirts of the wood, so soone as the armie was all engaged within the streights of the pase, shoved from them the trees (so gue^ded) which stood next unto them, and they fell one upon another (standing as they did^ so ticklish of  themselves, and readie to totter and come downe on both sides of the way) and in the fall ove^threw withall and covered over and over both horse and man, with their armour and (...), so as skarse ten of them escaped alive. For as most of them were felled and strucken starke (...)^ either with the bodies of the trees, or the broken armes and boughes; so the rest of the multitude, affrighted with this unexpected and unhappie accident^ were killed by the Gaules that beset all the streights and passages of the wood: and of that great number, they tooke few prisoners, who making towards a bridge standing over the river, were intercepted by the way, and stopped by the enemies that kept the advenue of the bridge in which place (...) was slaine, for he strived all that ever he could, not to be taken alive. The spoyles of this Generall captaine, together with the head cut off from the rest of his bodie, the Bo^a^s with great joy and  solemnitie brought into the temple that amongst them was reputed most holy and sacred. And after they had clensed the head, as their manner is, they encha^^ed and garnis^ed the (...) with gold, and that served as well for an holy vessell to sacrifice and give say withall, upon high and festivall dayes, as also for an ordinary drinking mazar for the high Priest^, and other (...) of that

 temple. The bootie also which the Gaules gained of their enemies, was of no lesse importance than the victorie: for although a great part of the beasts and living creatures was crushed and squeased to death with the fall of the wood, yet all other things, by reason that nothing was scattered and lost by flight, were found wholly on the ground, as the souldiers lay along in that order as they marched.
These wofull tidings being reported, the cittie was for many daies in such feare and perplexitie, that all shop windowes were shut up, and no stirring at all in the streetes throughout, from one end to the other, as if it had beene night continually. Then the Senate gave the Aediles in charge to walke all about, and commaund the shops to be set open, and to make no more shew in the cittie of publicke sorrow and heavinesse.
Then T. Sempronius assembled a Senate, spake  comfortably to the LL. of the Counsell, and exhorted them, that as they were not dismaied with the overthrow and discomfiture at Cannae, so they would not be cast down and daunted with lighter and smaller losses and calamities. For if it might please the gods to blesse them; and give them good speed (as they hoped no lesse) against the Carthaginian enemies and Anniball, the war with the Gaules might without daunger and inconvenience either be laid aside clean, or put off and deferred. As for the revenge of this deceitfull practise, it should rest still in the power either of the immortall gods, or of the people of Rome, to bee performed one time or other. But for the present, they were to consult and resolve concerning Annibal their grand enemie, and to grow to some point and conclusion of such forces as were meet for that warre. And first himselfe discoursed and laid downe what companies of foot and horse, what number of citizens, and how many  confederats were in the armie of the Dictator. After him, Marcellus shewed and recounted the proportion of his own power and their strength. Also, what forces, and of what qualitie, were with C. Terentius the Consull in Apulia, they were required to declare, who might speake upon their knowledge. Then they proceeded to cast and examine, whether two Consular armies well appointed and furnished, were sufficient to go through so great a war. Thus for that year they let France alone, albeit they had good cause to bee angrie, and were provoked that way to follow revenge. The Dictatour his armie, was appointed unto the Consull. As for the forces under the leading of Marcellus, consisting of them that fled out of the field at Cannae, those they ordained to bee sent over into Sicilie, there to remaine in service so long as the warre continued in Italie: and that thither also should be posted over out of the Dictatour his Legions, all those souldiors who were  able to doe least service, there to abide in souldierie, without any other limitation of time than that, which the i. The (...) of ten yeares. laws in that case provide for. For the other Consull, who should be substituted in steed of L. Posthumius, there were assigned two Legions of Romane cittizens: and order was given, so soone as the Auspices would permit, hee should bee elected with speed. Likewise it was agreed upon and ordained, to send for two legions besides out of Sicilie: out of which, the Cos. unto whom those Legions aforesaid of the cittie were allotted^ should take what souldiours hee thought needfull. Finally, C. Terentius the Consull, had his commission of commaund continued for another yeare, without empairing one jot of the armie, which hee had in his conduct for the guard and defence of Apulia.
Amids these affaires and preparations in Italie, the war went forward nevert^elesse in Spaine,  and ever to that day prospered on the Romanes side. P. and Cn. Scipions devided their forces so, as Cn. should serve by land, and Publius at sea with the navie. Asdruball the cheefe Colonell and commaunder there of the Carthaginians, distrusting his owne strength both by sea and land, kept himselfe aloofe, and farre from the enemie, in sure places of safetie. Vnto whome, after long suite and instant praiers, were sent 4000 foot, and 500 horse out of Affricke for supplie. Having thus at length, with new helpes gathered fresh hope, he encamped neerer to his enemie, and gave order and direction withall, that the Armada should bee rigged and decked for the defence of the Islands, and the sea coasts. And whiles hee was thus beginning hotely to make warre againe, hee was suddainely distempered and disquieted with the revolt of the Admirals and great captaines of the navie: who for their fearefull abandoning of the fleet upon Iberus, having been sharpely  checked and rebuked, were never after trustie and sure, either to the Colonell himselfe, or to the State of Carthage. These fugitive renegates had first practised to raise troubles and insurrections in the land of the Carpesij, and by their solliciting and instigation, certaine citties were procured to rebell, and one of them they had forced by assault. Whereupon, Asdrubal turned his forces from the Romanes, and bent them wholly against that Nation: and with a cruell armie entring the

frontiers of the enemies, determined to give the charge upon Galbus, a Nobleman, and renowmed  cheefetaine of the Carpesians, even before the cittie, that some few daies before was lost, where the said Galbus with a puissant power kept himselfe strongly encamped. Having therefore sent out before, certaine vaunt-courriers lightly armed, to traine forth and draw the enemies to skirmish, he made out withall certaine companies of his Infanterie sundrie waies to overrun and spoile the countrie, and likewise to catch up and meet with all straglers, dispersed in the fields. Whereupon, at one time there was a skirmish before the campe: and likewise in the fields, they were either slaine, or put to flight. But afterwards, having by divers waies from al parts recovered againe the campe, suddainely they shaked off all feare, plucked up their harts, and thought themselves good ynough, not onely to defend their fort and hold, but also to bid the enemie battaile. They sallied out thereforeof thecampe in good array, shouting, dauncing, and hopping after  their manner, so as this unexpected boldnesse and courage of theirs, terrified the enemies, who a little before had challenged them to fight. Whereupon Asdruball himselfe withdrew and retired his power for more securitie to an hill of good height, and situate for his advantage, with a river likewise betweene him and his enemies. The light armed vaunt-courriors also, and the forlorne hope, together with the horsemen that rode scattering abroad, he caused thither to repaire for their better safetie. And because he trusted neither hill nor river, hee fortified himselfe with a trench and rampier besides. In this alternate and interchangeable feare on both sides, there passed some bickerments; and blows were dealt between. In which, neither the Numidian horsemen were able to match the Spaniards in that kind, nor the Moores archers could make their part good with the light Carpesians targatiers, who innimblenesse and swiftnes were as good as they;  and for courage and bodily strength, farre better. These Carpesians seeing they neither could provoke Asdruball to a battaile, with all their braving hard under his campe, nor yet easily by assault win it, they tooke by force the citie Asena, into which Asdruball when he first invaded the frontiers of his enemies, had conveighed store of corn and other victuals: yea, and became LL. of all the countrie thereabout. And they grew so lustie and audacious, that neither in their march and array, nor within their campe they would bee ruled and ordered by any mans commaund. This secure and carelesse negligence of theirs, when Asdruball perceived to arise (as usually it doth) upon good successe and prosperitie; after an exhortation made to his souldiors, to charge upon the enemies, roving abroad without their coulors, he descended from the hil, and marched in battaile array against their campe. So soone as the Spaniards were advertised by those who  came in great hast, and fled from the Sentinels and corps de guard, that he was comming, and neere at hand, with a great outcrie they gave the al'arme. And as every man could get weapon in hand they ran upon the head to battaile, without direction and commaundement of captain, without signall, ensigne, and order, confusedly. When the formost in the vaward were joined in conflict and come to hand fight, some of their fellowes were seene running on heapes and by troupes, and others were not well come forth of the campe. At the first the enemie was terrified with their bold adventure. Afterwards, as they encountred, thin and losely raied, with the enemies thicke and closely raunged together, seeing themselves too weake, and not sufficient, so few in number to defend th^mselves, they looked backe one upon another for succour: and being on everie side put backe, and forced to recule and lose ground, they cast themselves into a ring, and thus  thrust (as they were) close together, bodie to bodie, and armour to armour, they were so pent and pestered in so narrow a ground, that they had scarse roume ynough to weld their weapons: so they were compassed and environned round with the enemie, and for a good part of the day hewen, in peeces, and massacred. Some few of them that brake through by dint of sword, escaped to the woods and mountaines. With like feare the campe was abandoned: and the day following, the whole nation yeelded, and came under the subjection of the Carthaginians.
Long they continued not quiet. For within a while newes came from Carthage, that Asar^ball should make what speed he could with his armie into Italie. Which rumour being blowne abroad through Spaine, turned in manner all their hearts away unto the Romanes. Whereupon Asdruball addressed his letters immediately to Carthage, shewing what hurt the fame of his departure  had done alreadie: and in case hee should set forward on his journey, and go out of those parts, all Spaine would turne to the Romanes, before hee were passed the river Iberus. For over and besides, that he had not strength ynough to leave behind for a garrison, nor a sufficient commaunder in steed of himselfe, the Generals of the Romane armies, who had set foot in Spaine,

 were such, as he might hardly make head against them with equall puissance. And therefore, if they had any regard of Spaine, he advised them to send one to succeed him with a strong power: For he should have his hands full, and ynough to doe in the province, fall out things as fortunately as they could. These letters, albeit at the first fight they greatly troubled the Senate, yet because the Italian affaires seemed of more moment and greater importance, they wrought no alteration in their intended course, either for Asdruball himselfe, or his forces. Howbeit Himilco was sent with a complete and competent armie, and a greater Armada, both for the holding of Spaine in their alleageance, and also for their defence by sea and land. Who having passed over with all his power, as well for land-service as the sea, fortified his campe, drawne his ships ashore, laid them up in drie land, and empaled them strongly all about; himselfe in person with his elect  and most choise menof armes, made what hast possiblie hee could, through nations partly enemies, partly doubtfull and untrustie, and staied not either in one place or other (but evermore standing upon his guard) untill he was come to Asdrubal. After he had declared unto him the order decreed by the Senate, and what he had in commission, and taken himselfe direction likewise from him, in what manner the warre in Spaine was to be managed, he returned backe againe to his owne campe. In which voiage to and fro, hee travailed safely by no one thing more, than by speedie expedition. For hee was ever gone from a place, before the people could agree together, and make head against him. Now Asdruball, before that hee dislodged and set his armie on foot out of those parts, levied summes of money of all the citties and stares under his jurisdiction: for well he knew, that Anniball had paid sweetly before him, for his passage through certaine countries:  and as well he wist besides, that the Gaules he was faine to wage: for amongst them no money; no men. And if he undertooke and entred upon that great expedition, poore and bare of silver, hee had never reached so farre as the Alpes. Thus having in great hast raised and collected his monies, he came downe to the river Iberus.
When the Romanes heard of the proceedings and designements of the Carthaginians, and likewise of the journey of Asdruball: both the Generals (laying all other matters apart) prepared, to joine their whole forces togither, to oppose themselves, and to withstand such intended attempts: supposing and considering, that if Anniball (who by himselfe alone was an enemie to Italie hardly supportable) were once seconded by Colonell Asdruball and the Spanish armie, the Empire of Rome would soone be at an end. Vpon these carefull cogitations being grieved  and perplexed, they assembled all their power neere to Iberus: and after they had passed over the river, and long counsailed whither they should encampe themselves and abide the comming of the enemies to bid them battaile; or by invading and assailing the associates and subjects of the Carthaginians, to stay the enimie and hinder his intended journie: they resolved at length and made preparation to assault Ibera, (so named of the river neereby) the richest and most wealthie cittie at that time, of all other in those parts. Wherof when Asdruball was advertised, he for to helpe his friends, advanced himselfe likewise to set upon another citie lately yeelded to the Romans, and reduced under their subjection. And so the Romanes after they had begun to lay siege to Ibera, gave over that enterprise, and made head against Asdruball himselfe. And for some few daies, they lay incamped five miles asunder one from the other, not without some light skirmishes:  but never came to pitch a faire field. At length upon one and the same day (as if they had bene so agreed afore) they hapned on both sides to set out the signall of battaile, and to come forth with all their power into the plaine ground. The Romanes stood arranged in three battailons: one part of the Infanterie was placed before the standards in the vaward, another regiment bestowed behind in the reregard: the men of armes flanked the (...) like wings. On the other part, Asdrubal strengthned his main battel with Spaniards in the right point he marshalled the Carthaginians, in the left, the Affricanes. As for the auxiliar and mercenarie horsemen, whom he waged and hired; such as were Numidians, he ordained afront the Carthaginians footmen, to guard them: the rest that were Affricanes, hee distributed and disposed about the (...) and edges of the battailons. Neither were all the Numidians placed in the right flanke, but such as  after the guise and manner of Vaulters, led two horses apeece: and used often times in the mids of the hottest conflict, to leape armed as they were from their wearied horse, to another fresh one. So nimble are they themselves, and so t^actable and well taught to their hands are their horses. Thus stood they arranged on both sides in order of battaile. The Captains of either part for hopes in manner nothing unequall: for neither in number or qualitie of souldiours, was

there any great oddes betweene them: Marie, for courage and heart, there was great difference  and inequallitie in the souldiours themselves. For the Romanes (notwithstanding they fought farre from home) were so persuaded by their leaders, that they fought for Italie and the cittie of Rome: and therefore, as if the whole hope of their safe returne into their countrie, were to be tried and decided in this one battaile, they resolved either to winne the day or do die for it. On the other side, the soldiours were not so resolute, for most of them being Spaniards, would have chosen rather to bee conquered and overcome in Spaine, than with conquest and victorie to be drawne into Italie. And therefore at the first shocke, when scarcely the darts and javelins were lanced and let flie, their maine battaile reculed: and so soone as the Romanes with great violence redoubled the charge, they turned their backes and fled. Howbeit in both flankes the fight was hote enough. The Carthaginians of the one side, the Affricans on the other, charged the Romans  very hard, and fought sore against them, as if they had them invironed round about within their battailons. But when as the whole power of the Romanes were once rallied and gathered togither in the mids, they were strong enough to remove and set backe the wings of the enemies. So they maintained fight in two divers places at once. But both in the one and the other, the Romames (after they had discomfited the maine battaile in the mids) were no doubt, much better, as well in number, and also in strength and vigour of men. Many a tall fellowe was there slaine. And had not the Spaniards at the first when the battaile was scarce begun, fled amaine by heapes, very few of the whole battaile had escaped and remained alive. The horsemen fought little or not at all. For the Moores and Numidians, so soone as they espied the battaile to shrink and loose ground, presently all on a suddaine fled as fast as they could, and left the sides and flankes  of the said battaile naked, driving afore them the Elephants withall. And even Asdruball himself, who mainteined the medley to the very last, escaped with some few out of the thickest massacre and execution. The Romanes tooke their campe and rifled it. This battaile was of such import and consequence, that it caused all the Spaniards, who were before but wavering, to turne wholly to the Romanes: and left Asdruball no hope at all, to passe with his forces into Italie, not so much as to make abode with safetie in Spaine. The newes hereof being bruited abroad and sent to Rome, by the letters of the two Scipions, great joy there was, not so much for the victorie, as because Asdruball was tied by the foot, and staied for comming into Italie.
Amids these exploites in Spaine,Be^ieasir^. Petelia (a citie of the Brutij, having endured the siege and many assaults for certaine moneths) was finally won by Himilco, one of Anniball his captaines. But that victorie cost the Carthaginans much bloud, and manya sore wound. No force nor violence overcame the besieged Petelians more, than very famine. For having consumed and eaten up all food of corne, all flesh of foure footed beasts whatsoever: they were driven at length to feede and live upon shoomakers lether, weeds, and roots, tender barkes of trees, and the crops of briers and brambles: and they gave not over so long as they were able to stand on their legs upon the walles, and beare their armour.
Anniball after the winning of Petelia, conducted his armie against Cos^nza. Consentia, which being not so valiantly defended, was within few daies surrendred up into his hands. Neere about the same time, a power of the Brutians also, laid siege unto Croton, a cittie built and inhabited by the Greekes, and in times past, mightie in men and munition: but now at this time so distressed  with manifold and grievous calamities, that of all ages one with another, they were not able to make twentie thousand men. And therefore no mervaile, if the enemies were soone maisters of the cittie, being so destitute as it was of cittizens to defend it. Onely the castle they kept still, into which there were some that escaped in that tumult when the cittie was taken, out of the mids of the massacre. The Locrians likewise revolted unto the Brutij and the Carthaginians, by reason that the common multitude were fraudulently betraied by the chiefe and principall cittizens. The Rhegines onely of all that countrie, continued both true unto the Romanes, and also at their owne libertie to the very last. The same disposition to revolt, was to bee seene even in Sicilie, in so much as the very house of Hiero was not cleere and free in all parts from rebellion. For Gelo his eldest sonne, having in contempt both the olde age of his father, and also (after the  overthrow at Cannae) the societie and friendship of the Romanes, turned unto the Carthaginians. And he had, no doubt, made a general alteration in Sicilie, but that his death came between and cut him off; which hapned so jumpe^ even when he was arming the multitude, and soliciting his friends to rebellion, that his v^^y father himselfe was drawne into deepe suspition that hee

 tooke his life away. These were the occurrents that fell out that yeare with variable event, in Ita^ilic, Affricke, Sicilie, and Spaine.
In the end of the same yeere, Q. Fab. Maximus moved the Senate, and made request, that the temple of Venus E^ycina, which he had vowed being Dictatour, might now be dedicated. And the Senate made a decree, That Titus S^mpro^lus, Consull elect; should so soone as he was entred into his office, propose unto the people, that they would creat two D^^mvirs for the dedication of temples. And in honour of (...) Lepidus, who had bene Consull twise^ and Augur, his three sonnes, Lucius, Marcus, and Quintus, exhibited certeine funerall games for three daies space; and a shew in the Common place likewise for three daies togither, of two and twentie paire of sword-fensers, to fight at sharpe to the utterance. The ^uru^e Aediles, ^. Lectorius,  and ^. Sempronius Graccus, now Consull elect, who in his Aedileship had bene Generall of the horsemen, set out the Romane games, which were renewed and continued still for three daies. Likewise, the Plaies of the Commons, were thrise exhibited by M. Aurelius Cott^, and M. Cl^^diu^ Marcellus. Now after three yeeres expired of the Punick warre, T. Sempranias (...) Consull, began his government upon the 15 of March. Ides of March. As for the Praetors, Q. Fulvius Flaccus, who had afore time bene Consull and Censor, obteined by lot the jurisdiction of the citti^ens: and M. Valerius Co^vinas, of the strangers and alliens. To Appius Claudius Pulcher was alotted the government of Sicilie: and to Q. Mutius Sc^^vola of Sardinia. M. Marcellus was by the people allowed to have the authoritie of a Viz Consull, in regard that the above all the Romane captaines, after the defeature of Cannae, mannaged his affaires and warred prosperously in Italie.
 Now the very first day that the Senate was assembled in the Capitoll, they decreed upon the first motion, that within the compasse of that yeare, there should be levied a double taxe or tribute: and that one single tribute should be forthwith gathered, for present pay to all the souldiours, saving those that served at Cannae. Then concerning the armies this order was set downe: Imprimis, that T. Sempronius the Consull, should appoint the two legions of citizens a certaine day to meete at Cales. Item, that sixe legions should be conducted to the campe of Claudius above Sucssula. Item, that the legions which there were (and those consisted for the most part of the residue of the Cannian (...)) Ap. Claudius Pulcher the Pretour, should put over sea into Sicilie: and as for those that were in Sicilie, they should be transported to Rome. Item, unto that armie which was appointed to meet by a day, at Cales, M. Claudius Marcellus was sent: and he was  commaunded to conduct the legions of the citizens to the camp of Claudius. Last of all, to receive the charge of the old armie, and to leade it into Sicilie; T. Metilius ^roto Lieutenant, was sent by Ap. Claudius. Men looked at first, and yet they sayd nothing, that the Consull should call an assembly for the creating of a Colleague unto him. But after that they saw that M. Marcellus was sent out of the way (as it were of purpose) whome above all others they were desirous to be the Consull for that yeare, in regard of his notable good service whiles he was Pretour, there arose much muttering in the Senate house.
Which the Consull perceiving: my LL. quoth he, it was for the good of the Common wealth, that both M. Claudius should go into Campaine to exchange the armies: and also that the Election of Consuls, should not be proclaimed, untill that he were returned againe from thence, with dispatch of that businesse which he had in  charge: that ye might have a Consull, such a one as the present condition of the State required, and your selves most desired. So there was no more speech of the election, untill Marcellus was come backe againe. In this meane time were two Duumvirs created, Q. Fabius Maximus for the dedication of one chappell to Venus Erycina, and T. Octacilius Crassus, of another to the Goddesse Mens. Both stand upon the Capitoll hill, devided asunder no more than with one^ onely condu^ct of water passing betweene. And as concerning the three hundred Campaine horsemen, who had served out their full time of warfare faithfully, and were come to Rome, a motion was propounded to the people, that they should be enfranchised cittizens of Rome: and in like manner, that they should be reputed as free Denizens of Cumes, from the day afore that the Capuans revolted from the people of Rome and rebelled.  The chiefest cause of proposing this act, was this, because themselves denied flatly that they knew, to whome they did appertaine, seeing they had abandoned their old native countrey: and as yet were not enrolled and incorporate into that state, unto which they had retyred. After that Marcellus was come againe from the armie, the solemne day of election of a Consull in place of L. Posthumius, was published. And with exceeding great consent of all men,

Marcellus was chosen: and forth with he was to begin his Magistracie. At whose first entrance, it  hapned to thunder: and the Augurs being called to give their opinion of it, pronounced, that they thought hee was not rightfully created. And the Senatours gave it out commonly and bruited abroad, that the gods were not well pleased therwith, because (forsooth) two Coss. were elected of the communaltie (a thing never seene before.) Whereupon Marcellus resigned up his place, and in his roome was substituted Fabius Max the third time.
That yeere the sea burned. At Sinue^^a a cow brought forth a horse fole. And at Lanuvium in the temple of Iuno Hospita, certeine statues or images dropped with bloud: and about that temple it rained stones. For which showre, there was solemnised, according to the customable manner, a Novendiall sacrifice. The other prodigious signes likewise were expiate with great care and heedfull regard. The Consuls then, parted their armies betweene them. Fabius tooke charge  of those forces which had bene commaunded by M. Iunius the Dictatour. Sempr^nius had the conduct of all the voluntary souldiers; and besides of 25000 of Auxiliaries sent from the confederates. M. Valerius the Pretour had the legions appointed for him, that were returned out of Sicilie. M. Claudius the Vizconsull, was sent unto that armie, which lay in garison at Nola, above Suessula. And the Pretours tooke their journey into Sicilie and Sardinia. The Consuls, whensoever they would assemble the Senate, proclaimed that the Senatours, and all others that had lawfull authoritie to speake their mind and deliver their opinion in the Counsell house, should meet at the gate Capena. The Pretours, those that were Iudges in the court, and to whom the civile jurisdiction appertained, erected their Tribunall seats and places of Assises at the publicke Fishpoole, and thither they commaunded all writs to bee returned, and apparence there to bee  made. And for that yeare all pleas and iudgements of causes passed there.
In this meane time newes came to Carthage (from whence Mago the brother of Anniball was minded to transport and set over into Italie 12000 footmen, and 1500 horsemen, 20 Elephants, and 1000 talents of silver, together with a guard and supplie of 60 gallies) That in Spaine things went untowardly: and that all the cities of Spaine (in a manner) were revolted unto the Romanes. Some there were of opinion, to withdraw Mago with that fleet and power of his, from the enterprise of Italie into Spaine. Considering there was good hope shewed of a suddaine, to recover againe Sardinia, for that there was but a small power of Romanes there; and Cornelius the old Lord Deputie, well acquainted with the state of the province, was now upon his departure from thence, and a new expected in his turne. Over and besides, that the Sardinians were  wearie alreadie of the Romanes government, which they had so long endured, as who the yeare that past was, had tyrannised over them cruelly, and exercised their authoritie with oppression, covetously imposing upon them hard exactions and tributes, and levying of them a most unjust taxation and contribution of come: and finally they wanted nothing but an head, upon whome they might relie themselves. To this effect there was an Embassage sent secretly from the Lords and Princes of the Island. And the principall actour and procurer hereof, was Hersicora, a man in those daies of greatest authoritie and power among them. Vpon these tidings aforesaid, happening so just at one time, they were both disquieted and also refreshed. So they sent Mago with his fleet, and other forces into Spaine: and they chose for the expedition into Sardinia, Asdruball surnamed Calvus, for the L. Generall, furnished and appointed with as great a power almost, as  Mago had.
At Rome likewise, the Consuls having dispatched the affaires of the citie, addressed themselves to the war. T. Sempronius appointed Sinuessa to be the Rendez-vous, where the souldiours should meete at a certaine day. And Q. Fabius, by an order and direction from the Senate, made an Edict, That all men should before the first day of Iulie next ensuing, gather all their come out of the countries, and convey the same into the principall walled strong townes: proclaiming that whosoever did not accordingly, their fields he would lay wast; sell their servants in port sale at the speare, and set their farmes and villages a fire. Not so much as the Pretors themselves (created for civill jurisdiction and to decide law matters) were freed and exempted from the conduct of warre. As for Valerius the Pretor, he was appointed to goe into Apulia, for to receive  the armie of Terentius: and when the legions were returned out of Sicilie, to imploy them especially for the guard and defence of that countrie; and that the armie of Terentius should be sent with some one of the Lieutenants. And M. Valerius had 25 saile allowed him, to keep and defend all the sea coasts betweene Briudi^i. Brundusium and Tarant^. Tarentum. The like number of ships was assigned

 to Q. Fulvius the citie Pretor, for to guard the river side, neere adjoyning to the citie of Rome. C. Terentius the Proconsull had in charge to take up by commission souldiours in the Picene countrey, and to guard those quarters. And T. Octacilius Crassus, after that hee had dedicated the temple of Mens in the Capitoll, was sent into Sicilie, as Lord Admirall of the Armado there.
Vpon this warre betweene two of the mightiest citties, and most puissant states of the world, there was not a king and prince, no nor a Nation under heaven, but was amused. Among whom Philip king of the Macedonians, had an eie thereto, and was more intentive, in that he was neerer unto Italie, and onely devided from thence by the Ionian sea. Hee at the first, when the bruit came to his eares, That Anniball was passed beyond the Alpes: as hee joied much, that there was  warre kindled betweene the Romanes and the Carthaginians, so, as long as it was uncertaine, whether nation was the stronger, he wavered in mind and was in suspence, whether of the twaine he should wish to have the victorie. But after that he heard once, that in three severall battailes one after another, Anniball and the Carthaginians had gotten the better hand, hee enclined to the fortunate side, and sent Embassadours unto Anniball: who falling off, and desirous to avoid the havens of Brundusium and Tarentum, which were guarded and kept by the Romane fleet, arrived and landed at the temple of Iuno Lacinia: and so through Apulia, travailing toward Capua, chaunced to light upon the mids of the Romanes corps de guard, and were brought before M. Valerius Levinus the Lord Deputie, being then encamped before Nuceria. Where Xenophanes, the principall of the Embassadours, bashed not to say, That he was sent from king Philip,  to treat and conclude a league and amitie with the people of Rome, and had commission and direction to the Consuls, to the Senate likewise and people of Rome, to that effect. Valerius taking great contentment to heare of this new societie and friendship with so noble a king, especially upon the rebellion of so many old allies, courteously intreated and friendly entertained this false hearted enemie, in steed of a trustie friend: and appointed diverse to accompanie him forward, to guide him carefully in the waies, and to shew him what places, what passages and streights were held and kept, either by the Romanes, or the enemies. Xenophanes with these instructions passed through the middest of the Romane guards into Campania, and so the next way arrived at the campe of Anniball, and made a league and amitie with him, under these conditions and capitulations. Imprimis, That king Philip should with a right puissant Armada (for that he was supposed  able to set out 200 saile) passe over into Italie, wast and spoile all the sea coasts; and to his power maintaine war by sea and land. Item, That when the warre was finished, all Italie, together with the very cittie of Rome should be possessed by the Carthaginians and Anniball, and unto him all the pillage and bootie likewise should belong. Item, When Italie was thus subdued, that they should saile into Greece, and wage warre with what Princes there they pleased, and that all the citties of the maine, and the islands which lay to Macedonie, should fall unto Philip, and bee annexed to his kingdome. In these tearmes, and upon these articles, in manner, was the league concluded and confirmed betweene the Generall Anniball, and the Embassadours of the Macedonians: and with them were sent backe unto the king for the better ratifying of the said covenants, certaine Lega^es, to wit, Gisgo, Bostar, and Mago, who arrived together at the same temple  aforesaid, of Iuno Licinia, where there rid closely a ship at anker, expecting their returne. From whence being departed, they were not so soone launched out into the deepe, and had taken the open sea, but they were descried by the Roman fleet that guarded the coasts of Calabria. Q. Fulvius Flaccus made out certain Corcyreans, to pursue and fetch in that ship. Wherupon, the Macedonians began to flie, but seeing themselves overmatched in swiftnesse of saile, and not able to make way with them, they yeelded themselve sunto the Romans, and were presented unto the Admirall. Who demaunded what they were, from whence they came, and whither they were bound. Xenophanes who had already sped ^o well by making of a lye, began to cog againe, and say, That he was sent from Philip unto the Romanes: that he came unto M. Falerius; because to him onely he was able to passe in safetie, but could not possibly get beyond Campania, being so strongly  kept with garisons of the enemies. But afterwards, upon the sight of the Carthaginian habite and apparell, they began to suspect the embassadors of Anniball: and they being questioned withall, their speech and language bewraied them. Then was their retinue taken apart, and threatned to confesse. Letters also were found upon them, sent from Anniball unto Philip, concerning the peace betweene the king of the Macedonians and Anniball. Vpon these matters

thus detected and certainely knowne, it was thought good to convey the Embassadors and their  companie with all speede prisoners to Rome, unto the Senate there, or unto the Consuls wheresoever they were. To this purpose were chosen five pinnasses that were most swift, under the conduct of L. Valerius Antias, who had his direction and charge to part these embassadors in severall ships, and keepe them sure asunder: and to take good heede, that they neither talked nor conferred together.
About the same time it happened at Rome, that Au. Cornelius Mammula, upon his departure out of the province Sardinia, made report in what state the Iland stoode, namely, that they all enclined to rebellion and warre: that Mutius who succeeded after hym, presently upon his first comming, by reason of the ill aire and unholsome water, was fallen into a sicknesse, not so quick and dangerous, as chronick and tedious, and would not be able long to endure  the service of warre: that the armie there, as it was sufficient to guard and keepe in good order a quiet and peaceable province, so it could not hold out with the warre that was like to ensue. Whereupon the LL. of the Senate gave order, that Q. Fulvius Flaccus, should leuie and enroll 3000 foote, and 400 horse, and provide that this legion should passe over with all speede into Sardinia: and send therewith whom it pleased him to conduct and manage the warre untill Mutius were recovered of his disease. For this intent was T. Manlius Torquatus sent governour; one, who had bene twise Consull and Censor, and in his Consulship had subdued the Sardinians.
Neere about the same time, there was an Armado set out from Carthage unto Sardinia, under the leading of Asdruball surnamed Calvus, and being sore tossed and beaten with tempests, was cast upon the Baleare Ilands: where (so farre out of order was not only the ship tackling, but  also the very keeles and bodies of the ships so shaken) they drew up the ships to shore, and whiles they stayed there about calking and trimming them againe, they spent much time.
In Italie whiles the warres began to slake and waxe cold, by reason that after the battaile of Cannae, the strength of the one part was much abated, and their force decayed, and the courage of the other, well allaied and made effeminate: the Campaines upon their owne heads began to contrive, how to reduce the State of Cumes under their obedience, first soliciting them to revolt from the Romanes: and seeing that course would not speede and take effect, they devised by a fraudulent practise to compasse and entrap them. The Campanes use yerely to solemnise a set feast and sacrifice in a certaine place called Hamae^ and they gave notice unto the Cumaines, that the whole Senat of Capua would resort thither: requesting the Senat of Cumes likewise to  meete them there, for to conferre and consult together in common, how both cities, the one and the other, might have the same friends and the same enemies, and no other: geving them withall to understand, that they minded there to have a good guard aboutthem of armed men, for feare of some sodaine and dangerous attempt from the Romanes. The Cumanes, albeit they suspected some treacherie, denied nothing, supposing thereby to colour and cover their owne craftie intended designement. Now all this while, ^. Sempronius the Romane Consull, having surveied and purged his armie at Sinuessa, at which place he had made proclamation, that his forces should meete together: passed over the river Vulturnus, and encamped neere unto Liuternum: where because the souldiers in the standing campe had nothing els to do, he exercised them to run often the race and skirmish in aray, to the end that the raw souldiers (for such were  the voluntaries for the most part) might by use and practice learne how to follow their colour^ in good order, and in the time of battaile know their owne ranks and ensignes. In these kinds of training, the speciall care that the Generall had, and the onely thing that he aimed at, was their concord and good agreement. And for this purpose, he charged the Lieutenants, and the Colonels and Captaines, that they should not cast in any mans teeth one or other, their fortune and condition aforetime, thereby to breede any discord and hartburning among the companies: and that the olde experienced souldiours should suffer themselves to be but equall in estate to the new learners: and those that were borne free unto the voluntaries, who had bene slaves: reputing them all of birth good enough, and of gentle bloud descended, unto whom the people of Rome had vouchsafed to commit their armour and ensignes: saying, that the same fortune  which had driven them so to do, forced them likewise to mainteine the same, and make the best of it, now it was done. The captaines were not more carefull in giving these good lessons and instructions, but the souldiers were as diligent to observe the same: and within a while their hearts and affections grew to bee so linked and united togither, that they forgat generally, in what degree

 and of what condition each soldiour entred into service. Whiles Gracchus was busied hereabout, the Embassadours of Cumes certified him, what kinde of Embassage came unto them from the Campan^s, a few daies before, and what aunswere they had returned: advertising him that their festivall daie was to be holden three daies after: that not onely the whole Senat would be present, but also the campe and armie of the Campanes. Gracchus having commaunded the Cumanes to convey all that they had out of the fields and territories about, into their cittie, and themselves to keepe within their walles: himselfe the day before the solemnitie aforesaid of the Campanes, removed his power to Cumes, and there incamped. Now Hamae is three myles off from thence. The Campanes by this time were assembled there in great number, according to appointment: and not farre from the place, Marius Alfius the chiefe head magistrat of Capua,  was incamped closely with fourteene thousand souldiours. Hee, what with preparation of the sacrifice, and contriving withall, the deceitfull traine of treacherie, was more busie and carefull thereabout, than either in fortifying his campe, or in any other militarie action. Thus for three daies continued this festivall sacrifice at Hamae. And ever in the night season it was performed so, as before midnight all was done and finished. Gracchus supposing that a good time for his ambush to be emploied, having set certaine warders before the gates, that no man might go forth to give intelligence, caused the souldiours betwixt the sixt and tenth houre of the day, [from no one untill foure of the clocke] to refresh themselves and take their sleepe: that in the beginning of the darke night, they might assemble togither at the watch-word or signall given them. And about the first watch hee commaunded to display their Ensignes and advaunce forward:  and thus with a still march, hee arrived at Hamae by midnight; surprised the hold of the Campanes, and entred all the gates at once, being negligently guarded, by reason of their overwatching. Some he killed lying along fast asleepe: others, as they returned unarmed from the sacrifice. In this night-tumult there were slaine more than two thousand, with Marius Al^ius himselfe their leader: and 43 ensignes taken and carried away. Gracchus with the losse of fewer than one hundred of his souldiours, having woon the campe, retired speedily to Cumes, for feare of Anniball, who lay in fort encamped upon Tifata over Capua. And (as hee was a provident man and of great forecast) nothing was he deceived in his opinion. For so soone as this defeature was reported at Capua, Annib. supposing that he should at Hamae find the armie of the Romanes (consisting for the most part of raw souldiors, and those, bondslaves) jocund and lustie  above measure, and insolent upon their fresh victorie, busie in rifling their dead enemies thus conquered, driving away booties, and charged with pillage; removed his forces in hast, and marched a pace beneath Capua: and encountred with some of the Campanes that were fled, whom hee caused betweene two guards to be conducted safe to Capua, and such as were hurt and wounded, to be set in waggons and carried thither. Himselfe found at Hame the campe emptie and void of enemies, and nothing there but the tokens of a fresh massacre, and the dead bodies of his friends and allies lying here and there scattered. Some there were that advised him presently to advance forward to Cumes, and to assault the towne. And albeit Anniball was willing enough thereto, and passing desirous (seeing hee could not come by Naples) to have Cumes at least, a maritime port-towne, as well as the other; yet because his souldiours had brought nothing with  them but their weapons, as being led forth to march in such hast, he retired backe againe to his fort and campe upon Tifata. From whence, at the importunat praiers of the Campanes, the day following hee furnished himselfe with all the ordinance and engines meet for the assault of a cittie, and returned toward Cumes: and having wasted the territorie therof, he emcamped himselfe a myle from the towne. Then Gracchus, more for shame, that hee might not seeme to leave his associates in such necessitie, (who craved protection and recommended themselves to him, and to the people of Rome) than for any confidence and trust that hee reposed in the strength of his armie, staied in Cumes. Neither Fabius the other Consull, who was encamped at Cales, durst set his armie over the river Vultumus: as having be^ne busied first at Rome in renewing the Auspices and bird sights: and after that, troubled also about the  fearefull prodigious signes which were reported one after anothers. And when hee ^ough^ expiation thereof by sacrifices, the Soothsayers made answere and said, That they could not perceive that the gods were appeased and pacified for all that hee did. Thus whiles Fabi^s upon these occasions was kept backe, Sempronius was besieged, yea and by this time assaulted, with fabrickes and engines of batterie. One mightie great towre of wood there was erected

against the town. Against which, the Roman Consull raised another from the very wal somwhat  higher than it: for that he used the wall (which of it selfe was of good height) in stead of a groundworke, and planted thereon strong postes and piles of timber to beare up the foresaide frame. From thence, at first the souldiours within, defended the towne and walles with stones, with long poles and perches and other instruments to launce against the assailants. But at length seeing the other turret comming forward even close to the towne wall, they ^lung thereon at once much fireworke, and burning matter: at which fires the multitude of armed men for fear leapt headlong downe the turret: and withall, they of the towne issued out at two gates at once, discomfited the guards of the enemies, and drave them into their campe: so as that day Avniball was more like one besieged himselfe, than laying siege unto others. There were of Carthaginians slaine about fourteene hundred, fortie wanting one were taken prisoners alive, such as about  the wals and their Corps de gard stood rechlesse and negligent, fearing nothing lesse than a sallie out of the towne, and were suddainly at unwares taken and surprised. Gracchus sounded the retraict, and caused his men to retire within the walles, before the enemies after their suddaine fright could be rallied togither. The morrow after, Annibal (supposing that the Consull in his ruffe for this happie hand, would come into the field to fight a set battaile) arranged himselfe in array betweene his Campe and Cumes. But after that, he saw no stirring at all from the usuall guard and defence of the citie, and nothing put to the rash hazard of doubtfull hope, he retired to Tifata, without any good at all done.
At the very same time that the siege was raised before Cumes, Titus Sempronius surnamed Longus, fought fortunatly in Lucania before Grumentum, with Hanno the Carthaginian: slew  more than two thousand of his enemies, lost himselfe two hundred and eightie men, and went away with 41 ensignes. Hanno thus driven out of the confines of Lucania, retired himselfe backe into the countrie of the Brutij. And M. Valerius the Pretour, recovered by force from the Hirpines, three townes that had revolted from the Romanes. Vercellius and Sicilius the motifes and chieftains of that rebellion were cut shorter by the head. More than one thousand captives were sold at the speare in port sale; to who that would bid most. All the pillage besides was given to the souldiours, and the armie brought backe to Cumes.
Whiles these things hapned in the countries of the Lucanes and Hirpines, those 5 ships abovesaid (wherein were embarked the Embassadours of the Macedonians and Carthaginians as prisoners) having set a compasse from the upper Adriatick sea unto the nether sea of Tuscan, round  about (in a manner) all the sea coast of Italie, hapned to saile along neere the citie of Cumes and being not certeinly knowne whither they were friends or enemies, Gracchus put forth out of his fleet two pinaces to encounter them. When as by demaunding and questioning one with another, it was once certified unto them, that the Consull was within Cumes, and the ships there arrived in the haven, the prisoners were brought to the presence of the Consull, and all the letters delivered. The Consull after hee had read over the letters, both of Philip and Anniball, sealed them up againe sure, and sent them by land unto the Senate of Rome, but commaunded the Embassadours themselves to bee conducted thither by sea. When as both letters, and also the Embassadours were arrived at Rome, in a manner, all in one day, and that (after due examination) words and writings agreed togither in one: at the first the LL of the  Senate were pensive and plunged deeply into cares, considering in how great danger they stood of a new Macedonian warre, who were hardly able to endure the Carthaginian. But in conclusition, so farre were they off from being utterly dismaied hereat; and sinking under the water, that foorthwith they beganne to treate and debate, how they might begin themselves to warre with these enemies first, and so stop them from their entrance into Italie. The captive Embassadours they laid up fast in yrons: their train and retinue were sold in ouvertmarket: and besides the five and twentie ships, wherof Q. Fulvius Flacc^s was Admirall; they tooke order for twentie more to bee rigged and decked: which being provided, furnished and shot into the poole afloat, togither with chose five barkes wherein the prisoners were conducted: there were 50 saile in all, that loosed from Ostia and arrived at Tatentum. Quintus Fulvius had commission to embarke  the souldiours of Varr^, who had beene under the leading of L. Ap^sti^t the Lieutenaun^ at Tarentum, with this fleete of fiftie saile, not onely to defend the sea coast of Italie, but also to hearken and have an eye after the Macedonian warre: and in case he could learne, that the designement and intent of Philip was sutable to those letters and informations of the

 Embassadours, then he should by his letters certifie M. Valerius the Pretor so much; and that leaving with L. Apustius his Lieutenant the charge of the armie, he should go to the Armada at Tarentum, and with all speed possible set over into Macedonie, and there endevor to keepe Philip play at home within his owne realme. As for that money which was sent unto Appius Claudius into Sicilie for to be repaied unto king Hicro, it was appointed unto him, for the maintenance of his Armada, and managing of the Macedonian warre. This monie was by L. Apustius the Lieutenant brought to Tarentum, and with it, there were sent from Hicro Much about 5000 quarter of London measure. 200000 Modi^ of wheate, and 100000 of barley.
Whiles these preparations and doings passed at Rome, one ship of those prisoners which were sent to Rome, chanced to single it selfe from the other, and to escape away to Philip: whereby  he was advertised, that the embassadors or commissioners were taken, and the letters intercepted. But he not knowing what covenants had passed betweene Anniball and his legats, and what answere they should have brought unto him, sent forth another embassage with the same commission. The Embassadours sent unto Anniball, were Heraclitus surnamed Scotinus, Crito of Berrea, and Sositheus of Magnesia. These went too and fro betweene in safetie, these carled and recaried their errands fortunately. But the summer was come and gone, before the king could enter into action, or execute any enterprise. Of so great moment and importance was the boording of that one ship at the first with the embassadors, for the differring of that imminent warre intended against the Romanes.
When Fabius had passed over the river Vulturnus, after the expiation at length of the prodigious  tokens aforesaid, both Consuls together made warre about Capua. Fabius by assault woon these cities, Combulteria, Trebula, and Austicula, which had revolted unto the Carthaginians: and within them he surprised the garison souldiers of Anniball. Many of the Campanes likewise were taken prisoners. At Nola (like as in the yeare before) the Senate held with the Romanes, but the Communaltie tooke part with Anniball, and plotted secretly, how to murder the Nobilitie, and to betray the citie. But to stop the proceedings of these mischievous designements, Fabius led his armie betweene Capua, and the camp of Anniball upon the hill Monte di Capus. Tifata, and fortified himselfe upon the mountaine Monte di Somma. Vesuvius, in that fort where Cla^dius had encamped before. From thence he sent M. Marcellus the Viz-Consull with those forces which he had, into Nola, there to lye in garison.
 Likewise in Sardinia, T. Manlius the L. Deputy, began to administer those affaires, which had bene forelet, by occasion that Q. Mutius the Pretour was fallen sicke, and lay of a long and lingering disease. Manlius after he had drawne the gallies ashore at Caraleis, and put the mariners and rowers in armes for land service, and received of the Pretour his armie, was able to make 22000 foote, and 1200 horse. With this power of men of armes and footmen together, he entred into the enemies countrey, and not farre from the camp of Hersicora, pitched his tents. Hersicora himselfe was by chance gone then, into the countrie of the Pellidians (a people of Sardinia) to arme the youth there, for the mending of his strength; and left his sonne named Hioslus, ruler over the campe in the meane time. He a lustie hote youth, rashly joyned battaile, and quickly was discomfited and put to flight: thirtie thousand Sardinians in that field were slaine, and upon  1030 taken prisoners alive. The rest of the armie first fled stragling as under over the fields, and through the woods; but afterwards, hearing by the voice that went, how their captain was fled to Co^ne^^. Cornus the head citie of that region, they retired thither also. And surely they had in that one battaile, made an end of all warre in Sardinia, but that the Armada of Carthage, under the leading of As^r^ball (which by tempest had been cast upon the Baleare Islands) came in time to entertaine the Islanders, in hope to ^ebell. Manlius, after it was noised abroad, that the Carthaginian fleet was arived, retired himselfe to Caraleis: which gave Hersicora good opportunitie and ouverture to joine with Asdruball. Who having landed his souldiours, and sent the ships back again unto Carthage, went forward by the guidance of Hersicora, robbing and spoiling the lands of the Romane confederates: and had come as farre as Caraleis, but that Manlius with an armie encountered  him upon the way, and restrained him from so Iavish overrunning and robbing the countrey. At the first they encamped one against the other, not farre asunderi afterwards, they began to put out certaine bands and companies, and to maintaine light skirmishes with variable event, untill at last they pitched a set field, and in full battaile fought for the space of 4 hours. The Carthaginians held out conflict a good while, and the victorie still remained doubtfull

(for the Sardinians were ever used to have the foyle) but at last, seeing every quarter full of the  Sardinians either lying along dead, or running away, they also were discomfited: and as they turned their backs and were about to flye, the Romanes wheeled about with that wing, where with they had defeated the Sardinians, and enclosed them round, and so they fell rather to killing than fighting any longer 12000 enemies were there slaine of Sardinians and Carthaginians together, about 3700 were taken prisoners, and 27 militarie ensignes woon. This was a noble and famous battaile, memorable especially above all, for taking of these prisoners, namely, Asdruball the L. Generall, Hanno and Mago, two noble men of Carthage. Mago was of the Barchine house, neere oskin and in bloud to Anniball. Hanno was the sollicitor of the Sardinians to rebellion, and no doubt, the principall author of that warre. Neither was this field lesse famous for the overthrow of the chiefe commanders of the Sardinians: for both Hiostus the sonne of Harsicora was slaine in fight: and also H^rsicora himselfe, as he fled with a few horsemen, hearing besides other calamities and losses of the death of his sonne, in the night season, because he would have no man come betweene to stay his purposed intent, killed himselfe. All the rest escaped to the citie Corneto. Cornus as they had done afore, and there as in a place of refuge sought to save themselves. But Manlius following the traine of his victorie, came against it, and within few daies was maister of it. After this, other cities also which had revolted, and turned to Harsicora and the Carthaginians, gave hostages, and yeelded by composition. And when Manlius had levied of them certaine money for the souldiours pay and corne likewise, according to the havoir and abilitie or trespasse of each of them, he led his army back to Caraleis: and there having put the gallies on the water, and embarked the souldiers that he had brought with him, he sayled to  Rome, and recounted unto the LL. of the Senate the utter subduing of Sardinia. The money he delivered to the Treasurers, the corne to the Aediles, and the prisoners unto Fulvius the Pretour.
Much about that time, T. Octacilius the Pretour, having sayled from Lilybaeum into Affricke, and wasted the territorie of the Carthaginians, as he was bound from thence and set sayle for Sardinia, whether Asdruball as the newes went had lately crossed over from the Baleare Hands, he met with the Armada returning back into Affricke: and after a skirmish made upon the sea by his souldiers lightly armed, he tooke therewith seven gallies with their ores and mariners: the rest for feare were scattered, as it had bene with a tempest, all over the sea: And it hapned about the same time, that Bomilcar with certaine companies of souldiers sent from Carthage for a supply, and fortie Elephants, and good store of victuals, came to Locri. For the surprising and  setting upon him on a sodaine, Ap. Claudius leading his armie in hast, and marching to Messana, under a colour of visiting the Province, put over to Locres with the tide. Now was Bomilcar passed alreadie from thence into the Brutians countrie to Hanno, and the men of Locres shut the gates against the Romanes. So Appius, after much ado and preparation, having effected nothing, returned back to Messana. In the same summer, Marcallus made many rodes from Nola (which he held with a garison) into the Hirpines countrie, and the Samnites, about Caudium, and made such wast there, with fire and sword, that they in Samnium called into their fresh remembrance the old losses and overthrowes which they had received: whereupon there were sent immediatly from both nations embassadors together, unto Anniball, who in this wise delivered their speech unto him.The Oration of the Embassadors of the Hispines and Samnites, unto Anniball. We have bene enemies, o??? Anniball to the people of Rome, first of our  selves, and in our owne quarell, so long as our armour and forces were able to defend us: but after that our hope therein began to faile us, we drew to aside, and tooke part with king Pyrrhus.
And when he forsooke us once, we accepted of peace for very necessitie: wherein we continued for fiftie yeares almost, even untill the time that you entred into Italie. Neither was it your prowesse, vertue and fortune, rather than your singular courtesie and benignitie extended toward our countreymen and fellow citizens (whom being taken prisoners, you released and sent unto us back againe) which hath caused us to entertaine your amitie: in so much, that so long as you remaine our friend, alive and safe, we would not stand in dread of the people of Rome, no nor of the very gods themselves (if it be lawfull so to say) were they never so angrie against us. Howbeit assuredly, for this sommer season, we have bene divers and sundrie times so spoyled and wasted, not only whiles you are alive and safe, but also (which is more) present in place, where you might both heare, in manner, the wailing and weeping of our wives and children, and also see our houses on a light fire: So it seemeth it was Murcus Marcellus and not Anniball that had the victorie at Cannae. And the Romanes boast and say, That you are good at the first push only, and when

 you have once let flie and launced the Iavelin (as it were) out of your hands, you are cleane done, and can abide no longer. We warred almost an hundred yeares with the people of Rome, without help either of foreine captaine, or armie of strangers: save that for two yeares only, Pyrrhus with the aide of our souldiours, rather increased his owne strength, than by any power of his defended us. But we list not to make vaunt and boast of fortunate successe and brave victories, namely, how we subdued and put under the yoke two Consuls, and two consular armies: nor of other noble exploits which hapned to our joy and honor. And as for the crosses and adversities that befell us during that time, we may report them with lesse griefe and indignation, than those that this day light upon us. Then in those dayes, mightie great Dictators with their Generals of horsemen, two Consuls at once, with their two royall hoasts, entred our territories, having sent  out beforehand their espials andskouts, and led forth their souldiours to make spoyle; under their colours and ensignes, aranged in good order of battaile, and seconded strongly behinde. Now are we exposed as it were to be a prey of one onely garison, and that but a small one, left for the gard and defence of Nola. For, now they overrunne all our confines and borders, not by bands and companies in warlike wise, but like theeves and robbers, more carelesly and negligently, than if they raunged about for their pleasure in the Romane territorie. The only cause is this, because your selfe make no reckening to protect us: and all our owne youth (which if they were at home were able to defend us) serveth under your banner and standerd. But I know neither you, nor your armie at all: if I should not be persuaded and beleeve that he whom I wot well to have discomfited and put to flight so many Romane armies, were soone able to defeat and suppresse  these robbers that vague about our country, stragling without leaders, and without their colours disordredly whither they list, according to the vaine hope of pillage that haleth them here and there, and, as every one gapeth for prizes, which they shall never get. No doubt but if you put forth a few of your Numidians, they will soone fall into their hands: Send but unto us a garison to succour us, you shall quickly displace that other at Nola; in case you judge not us (whom you have thought worthy to be your confederates) now, unworthy to be defended, after you have received us into your protection.The answere of Anniball to the Embassadours. Hereto Anniball made this answere againe, and sayd, That the Hirpines and Samnites hudled up all at once together: they declared their calamities and losses, they craved ayd and succour, and they made complaint that they were neither garded by him, nor regarded of him. Whereas they should have first made declaration of their  harmes: after, sued for help: and last of all, if they might not obteine, then and not afore they should have complained, that they had besought his helping hand in vaine. Howbeit hee promised, that hee would not bring his armie into the territorie, either of the Hirpines or the Samnites, least himselfe also should be chargeable and troublesome unto them, but into the next quarters belonging to the allies of the Romanes: by spoiling and wasting whereof, both he would fill his souldiours hands, and also with the terrour thereof, set their enemies farre ynough off from them. And as for the managing of the Romane war, like as the battell of Thrasymenus, was more noble than that of Trebia; and the field of Cannae more memorable, than that of Thrasymenus: even so would he make the memoriall of Cannae dimme and obscure, in regard of one greater victorie yet, and more renowmed than the other. With this answere, and  with honourable rewards besides, he dismissed the Embassadours, and gave them their dispatch. And leaving a small guard to keepe the hill Tifata, hee marched in person with the rest of his armie against Nola. Thither also was Hanno come, out of the countrie of the Brutij, with the supplie that he brought from Carthage, and the Elephants. Where, after Anniball had pitched his tents not farre from the towne, and made diligent enquirie, he found, that the case was far otherwise, than it was reported by the Embassadours of his associates. For Marcellus bare not himselfe in any of his actions, so as it might be truly said, that he blindly committed ought to the hazard of fortune, or rashly adventured upon the enemie. For he never went a boothaling, without his skoutes and espials, without setting strong guards in due places, whereunto he might retire himselfe in safetie: but had a good eye aforehim, and a warie regard and heedful forecast, as if he  were to encounter with Anniball in person. And even then at that time, when hee perceived, that the enemie approched and was comming, he kept his forces within the citie: commanding the Senatours of Nola, to walke up and downe upon the wals, and to survey all over, and espie what the enemies did, or were about Amongst whom, it happened, that Hanna being come under the very wall, espied Herennius Bassus, and Herius Petrius, whom he called out to a parle. And when they

were gone forth unto him by the permission and leave of Marcellus, thus he spake unto them by  his interpreter.The (...) of Hanno to Herennius and Her^ts Nolanes. First he highly extolled the vertue and fortune of Anniball, debasing and treading under foot the dignitie and majestie of the people of Rome, growing now old in time, and decaying in force and strength.
Which if they were (quoth hee) on both sides equall, as sometimes they were, yet seeing they had good experience, how heavie and greevous the governement of the Romanes was to all their Allies, and again, how indulgent and gracious Anniball is, even to all the captives of the Italian nation and name, they should wish rather to be in league and amitie with the Carthaginians, than with the Romans. If both Coss. were with their armies at Nola, they were no more able to match with Anniball, than they were at Cannae: much lesse might one Pretour, with a few raw and new souldiours hold out and keepe Nola against him. And as for the Nolanes themselves, it concerned them much more than it did Anniball, to consider, whether hee should  win Nola by force, or enter upon it by surrender and composition. For to be Lord thereof he made no doubt, like as he was maister alreadie of Capua and Nuceria: but what ods and difference there is betweene the state of Capua andof Nuceria, the Nolanes know best themselves, who are seated (as it were) in the midway betweene both. Loth hee was to boden so much unto Nola, what calamities might befall the cittie, if it were conquered by assault: rather yet would hee give his word and promise, That if they would deliver Marcellus with his garrison, and yeeld up Nola into Anniball his hand, they should themselves, and none but they, set downe and capitulate under what conditions they would entertaine alliance and friendship with Anniball. To this motion Herennius Bassus framed his answere in this sort.The ans^ere of Herennius to Hanno.
For many yeeres alreadie there hath been continuall amitie betweene the people of Rome and Nola, and neither of both to this day, hath repented  thereof. As for the Nolanes themselves, if they had been disposed to turne with the wind, and to chaunge their faith and alleageance, together with their fortune, they would have done it long before this: for now it was too late to start and alter. If they had minded to yeeld themselves unto Anniball, they would never have sent for a garrison of Romanes: but since they were now come to protect and defend them, they had imparted and communicated all their state with them alreadie, and would take such part, as they, so long as they had an houre to live. This emparle put Anniball cleane besides all hope of gaining Nola by treason. Therfore he beleaguered the town on every side, and invested it round about like a garland, to the end, that in one instant he might give the assault on every part of the wals. When Marcellus saw him under the wals, he set his people first in battell aray within the gate, and then with a great noise and tumult he suddainly sallied  out. At their first shocke and onset, diverse of the enemies were beaten downe and slaine: but after that, they ran from all parts to battell, and were come together with equall forces, the fight began to be hote and sharpe, and a memorable conflict it had beene, and few like it, but that it rained and poured downe so fast, and with so many stormes and tempests, that it parted both the battels, and staied the fight. So for that day, having with that small skirmish kindled their courages, and set their bloud in heat, they retired backe, the Romanes within the cittie, and the Carthaginians to their campe. Howbeit, of the Carthaginians there were slaine, upon the first sallie and charge given, not above thirtie, and of the Romans not one man. This tempestuous shower of raine lasted all night long, and continued still, and never gave over untill nine of the clocke before noone the next day. And therefore, albeit they were sharpe set, and their fingers itched on  both sides to be a fighting, yet for that day they kept within their hold and strength. So the third day Anniball sent out certaine companies into the territorie about Nola, for to ^orray and fetch in booties: which, so soone as Marcellus understood, he presently set his men in array, and entred the field, neither was Anniball for his part behind. Now there was a mile distance, or very neere, betweene the cittie and the enemies campe. In this space betweene (for all about Nola is plaine and champion) they encountred and joined battell. The shout that they set up on both sides, reclaimed and caused to returne unto the fight alreadie begun, the neerest of those cohorts and bands, which were gone aforaging into the countrey. The men of Nola likewise came unto the Romanes, and mended their battell: whom Marcellus commendedfor their forwardnesse, and gave them in charge to abide in the rereward, to helpe as occasion served, and to carrie foorth of the  skirmish those that were hurt and wounded, and to forbeare fight in any case, unlesse they had a signall and token given them by him. The fight was doubtfull, for both the Generals gave encouragement effectually, and also the souldiours did their best and fought right manfully?
Marcellus was earnest with his men to presse hard and charge still upon their enemies, whome they

 had defeited not three daies agoe,The speech of Marcellus to his souldiers. who not many daies past were put to flight, and driven from Cumes, and who the yeare before were beaten from Nola, under his conduct, by other soldiors, saying, That they were not all there in the field, but many of them gone raunging abroad into the countrey, for to hale booties, and get prises. As for them that fought, they were such as were decaied with ^oioting and following their delights in Capua, such as with wine-bibbing in everie taverne, whoore hunting in everie Stewes and Brothel^house, all the whole winter, were become enfeebled in bodie, spent, and wasted utterly. As for that lively strength and vigour of theirs, it was cleane gone: those able and lustie bodies were decaied, those courageous hearts abated, wherwith they passed over the Pyrenean mountaines, and the high cliffes of the Alpes. There remained now nothing but the reliques and shaddow of those men to fight, who are  scarce able to beare their verie armour, to lift up their armes, and carrie their owne bodies. Adding withall, that Capua was another Cannae unto Anniball: there died his warlike prowes, there, lost he his militare discipline; there was the glorious fame of former daies buried; there the hope of future time for ever, suppressed and stifled. As Marcellus by reproviug these and such like things in his enemies,The words of Anniball to his souldiors. animated his owne soldiours: so Anniball rebuked his men with more sharpe words and bitter checkes. I know these to bee (quoth hee) the same armesand weapons, the very same ensignes and standerds, which I saw and had at Trebia, at Thrasymenus, and last of all at Cannae. But surely, me thinkes, when I went to Capua, there to winter, I carried with me thither, other manner of souldiours than I have brought againe from thence. Have yee in deed so much a do to maintaine fight, with a Roman Lieutenant, leader of one only legion and corner;  whom heretofore two full Consular armies were never able to abide in the field? Shall Marcellus with young and raw souldiours of his owne, seconded onely with the aide of the Nolanes, challenge and bid us battaile the second time? Where is that souldiour of mine, that unhorsed C. Flaminius the Consull, and stracke off his head? What is become of him that at Cannae slew L. Paulus? what? is the edge of your sword dull, and the point blunt? or are your right hands asleepe and benummed? or what strange and wonderfull accident is befallen you? Ye that were w^nt being few in number to vanquish many, are yee now being many in number, hardly able to withstand and abide the violence of a few? Ye spake big, and gave out great brags and proud words, that if any man would lead you, you would winne Rome, that you would. Behold now, a smaller peece of service. Here I would have you prove your strength, and make triall of your valour.  Let us see now, winne me Nola, a cittie situate in the champian, on a plain, defended neither with sea nor river. O, out of this so wealthie a cittie, will I be readie either to lead you, laden with rich pillage and spoile, whither soever yee will, or follow you, whersoever yee would have mee. But nothing availed either: his cheerefull words, or his checking rebukes, to encourage and confirme their hearts. For the Carthaginians being forced on every side to recule, (whiles the Romanes grew more and more animated, not onely through the comfortable speeches of their owne captaine^ but also by the Nolanes themselves, who with their lowd shouting in token of their love and affection, enkindled their courages to hote fight) turned their backes, and were driven into their hold. And when the Romans were desirous to assaile the same, Marcellus reconducted them to Nola, with great joy and congratulation even of the Commons there, who before;  were more inclined and affected to the Carthaginians. There were of the enemies slaine that day, above one thousand, sixteen hundred were taken prisoners, nineteen militarie ensigns woon, two elephants gotten alive, and foure slaine in the conflict. Of Romanes there were not killed all out one thousand. The morrow after, they spent (upon a truce concluded) in burying the dead that were slaine on both sides. Of the spoyles of the enemies, Marcellus made a great fire, upon a vow pronounced unto Vulcane. On the third day, 1272 horsemen of Numidians and Spaniards, one with another (upon some spleene and anger I beleeve, or else for hope of more liberall enterteinment and commodious gaine) sled from Anniball and turned to Marcellus: whose valiant and faithfull service, stood the Romanes in very good stead, often times during that war. And after the warre was ended, the Spaniards in Spaine, and the Numidians in Affricke, in reward of  their vertue and prowesse, were endued with faire lands and large possessions. Anniball sene Hanno backe from Nola to the Brutij, togither with the forces that he came with himselfe went to the wintering harbours of Apulia, and lodged about Arpi.
Quintus Fabius so soone as he heard that Anniball had taken his way into Apulia, conveyed all the corne from Nola and Naples into his campe, which he had pitched above Sueffula: and having

well fortified the hold, and left there a sufficient garrison to guard the place for that winter  time, removed himselfe neerer to Capua, and there encamped: and so wasted: the Campane territorie with fire and sword, that the Campanes little trusting in their owne forces, were constrained to issue forth of their gates, and fortifie themselves in campe before the cittie, in the open plaine. Six thousand they were in all. Their footemen were weake and not for service: their horsemen were farre better and more able: so that oftentimes they charged their enemies with their horse, and provoked them to fight. Among many brave men of armes that the Campanes had, one Iubellus surnamed Taurea, a cittizen of Capua, was the worthiest and best horseman of them all, by many degrees: insomuch, as when hee served under the Romanes, Claudius Asellus onely, a citizen of Rome, was able to match him in glorie of good horsmanship, and horse-service. This Taurea when he had ridden all about the troups of his enemies, casting his eye every way, to see  if hee could espie Claudius Asellus, enquired at length closely, after silence made, where about hee was, and made this challenge unto him, That seeing hee was wont in words to contend with him for valour and prowesse, hee should now determine the question by the speare point and dint of sword, and either bee dispoiled of his glorious armour, if hee were overcome, or else gaine the same with the victorie. Which defiance being brought into the campe to Asellus his eares, hee made no more to do, but went presently to the Consull, to know whither hee might with his good leave and licence, out of his ranke fight extraordinarily, with his enemie that bad him combat. After leave obtained, hee armed himselfe immediatly, mounted on horsebacke, and rode before the enemies corps de guard, eftsoons calling upon Taurea by name, and bidding him come foorth to encounter whensoever hee durst. Now were the Romans by this time gone  forth of the campe in great number to behold this combat: the men of Capua likewise filled not onely the rampiar of their hold, but also the walles of the cittie to see this sight. When as they had made some goodly flourish afore hand with brave words and stout speeches, to set out the action: they set speare in rest, and put spurres to horse, and jousted togither amaine. Afterwards having gotten the libertie of the ground, they dallied one with another, trisling out the time, and making a long peece of worke of it, without giving or taking wound. Then quoth the Campane knight to the Romane, This will bee but a fight of horses, and not of horsemen, unlesse we ride out of the open plaine ground, here into this hollow way, where having no such scope to pricke out at large, we shall soone come to hand gripes, and close togither. The word was not so soone spoken, but Claudius turned his horse head, and rode into the foresaid way. But Taurea a stouter  champion in word than deed: Oh, take heed of all things (quoth he) how you ride a gelding in a ditch: Which grew afterwards to a by-word used amongst the countrie people. Claudius after he had rode in and out, up and downe, a long time in the lane, and never met with his enemie, returned again into the open plain: and rating the cowardise of his enemie, with great joy and gratulation, rode back as conqueror into the campe. Some Annales and Chronicles do record and adde to this combat of horsemen, astraung and wonderfull thing (no doubt) if it bee true, as by the common opinion it is reputed no lesse: namely, that when Taurea fled back into the cittie, Claudius followed hard after him in chase, entred with him at one gate standing open, and rode out cleere at the other unhurt, to the great wonder and astonishment of the enemies. Vpon this, the standing camps were quiet on both sides: and the Cos. removed backward farther off from the citie, that the men of Capua might sow their grounds: neither did he any harme unto their fields, before the corn was come up and so well grown, that the blade therof yeelded good forage and stouver for the horses; which he gathered and brought into the standing camp and hold of Claudius above Suessula, and there he built winter harbors for to make his abode. And hee gave order to M. Claudius the Viz-consull, to keepe still at Nola a competent garison for defence of the citie; and to discharge the rest of the soldiors, and send them to Rome, that they should neither be comberous to their Allies, nor chargeable to the Commonweale. Tib. Gracchus also while^ hee led his legions from Cumes into Apulia to Luceria, sent M. Valerius the Pretour from thence to Brundussum, with that armie which he had at Luceria, commaunding him to keepe the sea coast of the Salentines countrie, and to provide for all things necessarie against Philip and the Macedonian warre.

In the end of this summer, wherein these acts were archieved, whereof I have written, there came a packet of letters from P. and Cornel Scipions, importing how great and how fortunate exploits they had performed in Spaine: but there wanted mony for pay: and apparell and corne to serve both souldiours and marriners. And albeit all these things were away, yet as concerning

 money, if the Cittie chamber and common treasure were not stored, they would make some shift to raise it of the Spaniards: but for all the rest, needs it must bee sent from Rome, for otherwise neither could they keep the army togither, nor hold the province in their allegeance. When the letters were read, there was no man there, but acknowledged that they wrote a truth, and demaunded that which was reasonable. But they considered withall, what great armies both on land and at sea they mainteined: and what a mightie Armada they must prepare and set out a new, in case the Macedonian warre went forward. As for Sicilie and Sardinia, which before the wars began, paied tribute, were scarce able to find and keepe the garisons; that say there for the gard of the provinces and that they were to trust upon their owne revenues and tribute for the maintenance of the charge they were at. But as the number of them that paid rent and conferred tribute,  was greatly diminished by so great overthrowes of the armies, both at the poole Thrasymenus, and also at Cannae so mose few that remained, if they were burdened with many exa^tions and paiments, should be plagued and undone another way, therefore it was concluded, that unlesse the Commonweale mainteined not her selfe by her credite and borrowing mony, she were not able to be susteined by her owne wealth and richesse. So it was agreed, That Fulvius the Pretour must needs assemble all the people together, and lay abroad and declare unto them the necessitie and exigent that the Commonweale was driven unto, and to exhort all them that had enriched themselves and encreased their livings, by renting and taking to ferme the revenues and commodities of the cittie, should now doe good to the Commonweale for a time, by which they were growne to that wealth, and undertake the provision at a price, and furnish the armie  in Spaine, with all necessaries thereto belonging, to bee contented and paied therefore with the first, out of the common chist, when it were stored with money. Thus the Pretor made declaration of these matters in the open assemblie of the people, and with all determined and set downe a certaine day, whereupon hee minded to put foorth the souldiours liveries and apparell, and corne to be provided for the Spanish armie, and all things else requisit for the mariners. When the day was come, there presented themselves unto him three companies of nineteene men, for to take this bargaine. Who made two requests and demaunds, the one, that for that three yeeres next ensuing, there should bee no other Publicanes or farmers of the cittie: the other, that whatsoever they shipped, the Commonweale would make good, against all force of enemie, or violence of tempest. Both being graunted, they tooke upon them the matter, and so the  Commonweale was served, by the money of private persons. This was the demeanure, this was the loving affection to their countrey, that went through all degreesof men (as it were) after one sort and manner. And like as they undertooke with great courage to serve the armie, so with singular fidelitie they performed everything, in such sort, as there was nothing at all wanting, no more than if they had been maintained from a rich treasurie, as in times past. At what time, as this provision came, the towne of Aldea el rio, or Anduiar el rio. Illiturgi was assailed by Asdruball, Mago, and Amil^ar the sonne of Bomilcar, because it was revolted unto the Romanes.
Amids these three severall campes of the enemies, the two Scipios passed into the cittie of their allies, that made resistance against and with great losse of men; and brought corne with them, whereof there was great want: and after they had encouraged and exhorted the  townesmen, that with the same resolution they would defend the walls, as they had seene the Romane armie to fight for them and in their quarell: they led forth their power to give an assault upon the greatest camp, whereof Asdruball was the Generall. Thither also repaired the two captaines and two armies of the Carthaginians, when they saw that the whole triall of the matter was there to be determined, and so they issued out of their tents and fought. Threescore thousand enemies were that day in field, and about 16000 Romanes: and yet the victorie went so cleere with the Romanes, that they slew more of their enemies than they were in number themselves, tooke prisoners more than three thousand men, and not many under a thousand horse; and with all woon 60 militarie ensigns wanting one, and killed 5 Elephants in the battell: and to conclude, were lords that day of three camps. After that the siege was raised from Illiturgi, the Carthaginian  armies were led to the assault of the town Chelua: Incibili, having their companies made up and supplied again out of the province, (as being a nation of al others most desirous and eager of war, so there be hope of pillage or good recompence) and at that time especially full of yong and lustie men. Where there was a second field fought with like fortune of both sides as before. There were slaine above thirteene thousand enemies, and more than 3000 taken prisoners, besides

two and fortie militarie ensignes, and nine Elephants. Then in manner, all the cities of Spain^ revolted to the Romanes. And farre greater exploits were that summer performed in Spaine, than in Italie.


THE XXIIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the foure and twentith Booke.
HIerome, king of the Syracusians (whose grandfather Hiero had beene a friend unto the people of Rome) revolted unto the Carthaginians, and for his crueltie and pride, was by his own people murdered. Titus Sempromus Gracchus the Proconsull, had a fortunate battaile neere Beneventuin, against the Carthaginians and Hanno their Generall, through the helpe especially of the bondslaves, whome for their good service, be commaunded to be made free. Claudius Marcellus the Consull Iaid siege unto Syracusain Socitie, which wholly in manner was fallen away and turned to the Carthaginians. W^re was proclaimed against Philip, king of the Macedonians, who in a night skirmish was surprised, disco^fited, and put to flight: and with his armie welneere disarmed, escaped into Macedonie. To manage that warre, Valerius the Pretour was sent. This booke containeth also the acts atchieved in Spaine by P. and Cn. Scipions against the Carthaginians. Syphax king of the Numidians, having entred into amitie with the Romanes, fought against Masanissa king of the Massilians: who stood for the Carthaginians, and being overcome, passed over into Spaine with a most mightie armie unto Scipio, lying  over against Gades, where the narrow sea runneth betweene Affricke and Spaine. The Celtiberians also were received into friendship, whose aids the Romanes sent for: and this was the first time that mercenarie souldiours were waged, and served in the Romane wares.

HAnno was not so soone returned out of Campane, into the countrie of the Brutij, but by their helpe and guidance he sollicited to rebellion the Greek citties, which continued the more willingly in league and alliance with the Romans, because they saw, that the Brutij, whom they both hated and feared, sided with the Carthaginians. And first hee assaied and went in hand with Rhegium, where he spent certaine daies to little or no purpose. In this mean time, the inhabitants  of Locri, were busie in carrying away with great hast the corne, wood, and fewell, and all things else, necessarie for the use of man, out of the countrey into the cittie; because they would leave nothing for the enemie to prey upon. And daily more and more of them went out of the gates by heapes, so as at last there were no more left in the cittie, than those that were compelled to repaire the breaches of the wals and the gates, and to bring into the turrets and bulwarks store of darts and other shot. Againstthis multitude and confused medley of all ages, sexes, and degrees, raunging over the fields, whereof most were altogether unarmed, Amilcar the Carthaginian, sent out his Cavallerie, giving them direction, and charging them to hurt no person. These horsemen opposed their troupes betweene them and home, onely to exclude them out of the citie, when they were scattered one from another in flight. The Generall himselfe in person  encamped on a high ground, from whence hee might view the countrie and the cittie. And gave commaundement to a cohort of the Brutij, to approch the wals, to call forth the principall cittizens of Locri to parle, and by making promise of Anniball his friendship, to persuade and exhort them to yeeld up the towne. At the first they gave no credite at all unto the Brutij, whatsoever

 they said. But afterwards, when they discovered Hanno and the Carthaginians upon the hils, and heard by some few of their owne cittizens that were fled backe and escaped, how all the rest of the multitude were fallen within daunger of the enemies, they made answere, that they would conferre and consult thereupon with the bodie of the people. So immediately they were assembled together. The most light headed persons were desirous of a change and new alliance: they also, whose kinsfolke and friends were by the enemie intercepted and kept out of the cittie, had their minds engaged and bound sure ynough, as if they had put in hostages: and some few who were well affected inwardly in heart, and liked of constancie and true loialtie, yet durst not be knowne thereof, and shew themselves to stand to it: so as, they all agreed in outward appearance, to surrender themselves to the Carthaginians. And after they had closely conveighed into the  haven, and embarked L. Atilius the captaine of the garrison, and all the Romane souldiours that served under him, to the end, that they might bee transported to Rhegium, they received Amilcar and the Carthaginians into the cittie, with this condition, that presently there should bee concluded a league, upon equall and indifferent covenants and capitulations betweene them. But the promise in this behalfe (when they had once yeelded themselves) was nothing well performed: whiles Amilcar charged the Locrians, with fraudulent dismissing and letting goe the Romanes: and they againe alleaged for their excuse, that they fled away, and made an escape. The horsemen also followed hard in chase by land, if haply either the tide might cause the ships to stay in the current within the streight, or drive them a land. But those whom they pursued, they could not overtake: marry, other ships they espied, crossing the streights from Messana to Rhegium.  Roman soldiors they were, sent from Claudius the Pretor, to lie in garison there, and to keepe the towne. Whereupon they presently departed from Rhegium.
As for the cittizens of Locri, they had peace graunted them by expresse order and direction from Anniball upon these conditions: Imprimis, That they might live free under their owne lawes: Item, That both the cittie and the haven should remaine still in the hands of the Locrians. The substance of the covenant rested and was established upon these tearmes, That the Carthaginians and Locrians should aid and assist one another mutually, both in peace and warre. So the Carthaginians retired from the streights, notwithstanding the muttering and murmuring of the Brutij, because they had left Rhegium and Locri untouched, which two citties they made full account to have sacked and rifled. And therefore they of themselves having levied  and put in armes a power of fifteene thousand of their owne youth, marched forward to assaile Croton, a Grecian cittie likewise, and seated upon the sea. Assuring themselves, much to better their estate, if they could bee possessed of a port and sea-towne, fenced with strong walls and bulwarkes. This onely troubled and perplexed their minds, that they durst not, but send unto the Carthaginians for aid: fearing, least they might seeme to have entered into action and warre, without regard of the common good of their confederates, if they called them not: and doubting besides, that if the Generall of the Carthaginians should proove againe, rather an arbitratour of peace, than a coadjutour in warre, they should fight in vaine against the libertie of Croton, as they had done before, against the cittie of Locri. Whereupon they thought best to send Embassadors unto Anniball for his warrant, and to be  secured from him, that if Croton were recovered by the Brutians, it should be subject unto them. Anniball made answere that this matter required consultation of men present with them in place, and therefore he put them over to Hanno, from whom they received no certaine answere to trust unto. For willing they w
ere not, that a noble and rich citie, as it was, should be spoiled: and besides, they were in good hope, that in case the Brutians should assaile it, and the Carthaginians all the while not seene, either to allow or help them in their enterprise, the citizens would the more willingly revolt unto them. The inhabitants within Croton were not of one mind, and affected alike. For there was one maladie that had infected all the cities of Italie, namely, the dissention betweene the Commons and the Nobles. The Senatours inclined to the Romanes, the Commoners on the other side tooke part with the Carthaginians. This division within the citie,  the Brutij were by a fugitive runaway advertised of in these tearms: namely, that Aristomachus the ringleader and head of the Commons, minded to betray the citie: that it was a wide vast and desolate towne, taking a great circuit of ground: and all the walls being decaied and in sundry places broken downe, the Senatours and the Commons kept their severall gards and watches in sundrie quarters far asunder. And look (quoth he) where the Commons ward, there ye may enter

at your pleasure. Vpon this intelligence and direction given by the fugitive, the Brutij environed  the citie round about: and being let in by the Commons, at the first assault were maisters of all places, saving the Castle. The Nobles held that peece, foreseeing what might happen, and therefore provided themselves of a sure refuge. Thither sled Arislomachus also, pretending that he ment to deliver the citie to the Carthaginians and not to the Brutij. Now this citie Croton had a wall (before Pyrrhus comming into Italie) twelve miles in compasse; but after it was laid wast by that warre, scarce the one halfe of the towne was inhabited. The river that was wont to run through the mids of the towne, passed now along the walls without those streetes where the houses stood thick and well peopled, far from the parts inhabited.
Sixe miles without the towne there stoode a noble temple of Lacinia Inno, more renowmed than the citie itselfe, as being honored with great religion and devotion of all the cities and nations  there about. A sacred grove there was in that place compassed with a thick wood, of tall Firre trees, having in the mids within it divers pleasant and fruitfull pastures, wherein were fed beasts consecrated unto the goddesse, of all sorts, without any keeper and pastour. And albeit this cattaile went forth in the morning by heards and flocks of their owne kinde, severed by themselves, yet at night they used to returne back againe to their owne penns and stalls, without harme received either by the wait-laying of wilde and ravenous beasts, or by deceitfull fraude of men. Great increase therefore and much commoditie acrued by those cattaile, in so much as thereof was made a massy Columne or piller of beaten gold, and consecrated in that place, so as the temple was famous, as well for riches, as holinesse and devotion. And many times it falleth out, that to such notable places there are attributed some strange miracles. For the report goeth, that there standeth an alter in the very porch of the temple, the ashes lying whereupon, no wind was ever knowne to blow away.
But to returne to Croton. The Castle thereof on the one side standeth upon the sea, on the other side it bendeth and looketh toward the land. Defended in times past it was, only by the natural situation of the ground, but afterwards fortified also with a wall; on that part whereas Dyonysius the tyrant of Sicilie, having gained the back rocks and cliffes behind, by craft and guile sometime wan it. This Castle at that time supposed to be strong and safe enough, the Nobles seized and kept, notwithstanding the Brutij and their owne commons besieged them. At length the Brutij seeing the Castle imprenable, by all the forces and assaults that they could make of themselves, were driven of necessitie to crave aid of Hanno. Who having assaied to draw and  urge the Crotoniates to yeeld, upon these conditions, To suffer a Colonie of the Brutij thither to be brought, and there planted; and that thereby a citie lying so wast and desolate, might be replenished and peopled againe, as in auncient time: could not move and persuade any one of them all, but Artstomachus. For all besides, protested and said, they would dye before they would be intermingled with the Brutij, to change their owne rites and manner of life, their customes, their lawes, and within a while their language also, for others that were strange and foreine. Aristomachus alone, seeing that he could not prevaile neither by persuasions to induce them to yeeld, nor find any meanes to betray the Castle like as he had done the towne before, fled away to Hanno. Shortly after, certaine embassadors from Locri, by the licence and permission of Hanno, entred the Castle, and persuaded them to be content for to be translated to Locri, rather than to abide  and stand out the extremitie: saying, that they had sent embassadors already to that intent, unto Anniball, and had gotten a graunt at his hands, that they might so do. So they abandoned Croton, and the Crotoniates were brought downe to the seaside and embarked, and the whole multitude departed to Locri.
In Apulia, the very winter season was not quiet betweene the Romanes and Anniball. Sempronius the Consull wintred at Luceria, and Anniball not farre from him in Arpi: and as they could spie opportunitie, or take their vantage, of the one side or the other, there passed some light skirmishes betweene them. But the Romanes had alwaies the better, and everyday more than other, became more warie and secured from all traines and deceitfull snares of the enemie.
In Sicilie the Romanes found a great change, and all out of order, by reason that king Hiero was dead, and the crowne translated to his nephew, or sonnes sonne, Hieronymus: being yet a child, not like to use his owne libertie with moderation, and much lesse to sway the kingdome and scepter with discretion. His guardians and friends gladly enterteined the protection and government of such a nature, and were readie enough to plunge him headlong into all vice and

 wickednesse. Which king Hiero foreseeing, was willing (by report) in his latter dayes, to have left Syracusa free and at libertie, to the end that so noble a kingdome, acquired and established by good meanes, should not under the lordly dominion of a child, to the great obloquie and shame of the world, be ruinate and come to nought. But his daughters with tooth and naile crossed this his designement, and made full reckning, that the child should only beare the name of a King, but the government of the whole State should wholly rest in them and their husbands, Andronodorus and Zoilus: who were the principall guardians, left to oversee the young Prince. And an easie matter it was not, for an aged man, now fourescore yeares old and ten, so hardly laid at day and night, by the faire speeches, and feminine flatteries of his daughters, to keepe his mind free; and to applie and convert it to intend private regards, and the publicke consideration of the  State.
And therefore he left fifteene tutors to oversee and governe the child, whom he besought upon his death-bed, even when he was going out of this world, to mainteine entier and unspotted, the faithfull alleageance to the Romanes, which he had kept and observed inviolate for the space of fiftie yeares: and to set to their helping hand willingly, to direct the young Prince above all, to tread in his steps, and to follow that discipline wherein he had bene nurtured and taught. After he had given this charge, and yeelded up his breath, the guardians came abroad; brought forth the kings last will and restament, and shewed the young Prince in the open assemblie of the people (and welneere fifteene yeares of ago he was.) Where some few, such as were bestowed here and there of purpose, within the prease of the assemblie for to shout and shew testimonie of their joy and goodliking, approved with open voyce, and allowed the kings will: whereas all  the rest, fared as orphans in a citie bereaved of their king, and (as it were) become fatherlesse, and feared all things that might ensue. The King was interred, and his funerals solemnised, with the love and kinde affection of his people and subjects, more than with any studious care and diligence of his owne friends that were neerest to him. After this, Andronodorus removed from about the Prince all other guardians but himselfe, giving out estsoones, that Hicronymus was past a child, and able to governe of himselfe as King. Thus by deposing the Protectour-ship, which was commune to him and many others, he tooke upon him and usurped the power and authoritie of them all. Hard it was even for a right good king and well governed, that should succeed after Hiero, to find favour and win grace among the Syracusians: so heartily they affected and loved king Hiero. But Hieronymus, as if hee had bene willing  and desirous, that by his vicious and wicked life, they should have a great misse of his grandfather, and wish againe for him; at the very first sight, when hee shewed himselfe abroade in open place, declared unto the world, what difference and great oddes there was. For they who so many yeares togither had never seene Hiero, nor his sonne Gelo, either in habit of apparrell, or in any other ornaments and port, differing from all other citizens, now beheld him in his purple robes, with his regall crown and diademe, attended with his guard and traine of armed pensionars: yea and other while, after the manner of Denis the Tyrant, riding foorth of his court and pallace, in a chariot drawne with foure white steeds. This proud pomp and stately array was accompanied and suited with semblable qualities and conditions. He contemned and despised all men: he scorned most proudly to give audience to humble suppliants: and sent them away with reprochfull  termes and taunts. And not only strangers, but also his very guardians hardly might have accesse unto him: and to conclude, his lusts and delights where unto hee gave himselfe, were new and straunge: his crueltie that hee exercised outrageous and inhumane. So dread and terrible was hee to all, that some of his Tutours, either by making themselves away, or by voluntarie exile were driven to prevent and avoid the danger of cruell torments. Of whom, three onely, who alone had more familiar recourse into the court, to wit, Andronodorus and Zoilus, the sonnes in law of king Hiero, that had married his daughters, and one Thraso, had little or no care given unto them in other matters; but whiles two of them drew toward the Carthaginians, and Thraso to the Romane alliance: with their arguing, debating and dispute, they otherwhile turned the mind of the young king to hearken and give audience to their opinions. Now it hapned that there  was a conspiracie intended against the life and person of the Tyrant, and the same detected by one Calo, the companion and playfere of Hieronymus, and of the same age: one who ever from his childhood had bene familiarly acquainted with him, and inward to all his secrets. This revealer of the conspiracie, could appeach and nominate of all the conspiratours onely Theodorus, by whom himselfe was made privie to the treason, and sollicited to be a complice therein. The partie

was apprehended incontinently, and delivered unto Andronodorus to bee tortured. Who at  the first without delay, confessed himselfe to be guiltie, but concealed all the rest that were accessaries. At the last, when hee had bene torne, mangled, and dismembred, with most dolorous torments, and intollerable for any man to endure: pretending and making semblance, that hee could abide no longer paines; disclosed not for all this, the guiltie persons in deed, but accused the innocent, and said falsly, that Thraso was the first deviser of the whole plot: and unlesse they had borne themselves, and relied upon so mightie an head, to set them on worke, they would never have attempted so daungerous an enterprise. Hee appeached also some other of the Tyrant his guard and houshold servants and daily waiters: even such as came into his mind during the time of his dolours and paines, and whom amid his grones he imagined to bee such, as whose lives might be best spared, and deaths least lame
nted. The naming of Thraso especially made the  Tyrant to beleeve, that the detection sounded to a very truth in deed: whereupon the man was immediately led to execution and put to death: and the other innocents, as cleer as himselfe, rasted of the same cup and suffered with him for companie. As for the conspiratours themselves, albeit one of their fellowes was a long while put to bitter and extreame torture, there was not one of them, that either hid his head or made an escape* so assured confidence had they in the resolute constancie and faithfull promise of Theodorus: and such power and strength had Theodorus himselfe, to keep close the secrets committed unto him. Now when Thraso was ones dispatched out the way, who onely was the meanes to hold them in, and to bind them to their alliance and alleageance to the Romanes: then forthwith they began openly to encline to rebellion, and sent as Embassadours for the same purpose, two noble young gentlemen,
Hipocrates and Epicides unto  Anniball. From whom also they were sent backe againe in embassage. These were both borne at Carthage, but descended in bloud from the Syracusians by their grandfather, that was from thence banished: and were themselves by the mother side, meer Carthaginians. By entercourse of these two Embassadours, a league was concluded between Anniball and the Tyrant of Saracose. And Anniball was content that they should abide still as leggers in the Tyrants court.
When Appius Claudius the Pretour and lord Deputie of the province of Sicilie, heard these newes, hee addressed straightwaies embassadours unto Hieronimus: who saying that they were come to renew the alliance which they had with his grandfather, had scornfull audience given them to deliver their message, and were dismissed and sent away by Hieronimus with a ^rumpe, demaunding of them by way of a scoffe, How they had sped at the battaile of Cannae. For I can  hardly beleeve (quoth he) that all is true which the embassadours report of that field: and I would gladly know the certeine truth, and thereupon deliberate and take counsell, which side I were best to take. The Roman Embassadors said, they would repaire againe unto him, when he could begin once to give audience with gravitie and in good earnest to their embassage: and so after they had warned and admonished, rather than praied and entreated him, not to change, but to stand to the first covenant and promises, they departed. Then Hieronimus sent his Legates to Carthage, for to confirme the league with the Carthaginians, according to the alliance and amitie made with Anniball. In which it was capitulate and covenanted, that when they had expelled the Romanes out of Sicilie (which would shortly come to passe, in case they sent thither ships and a power of men) the river Himera, which (as it were) divided the Iland in the mids, should confine  and limit, both the Saracosian kingdome, and the dominion of the Carthaginians. After this, being puffed up with the faire flattering speeches of such as were about him, who suggested unto him, to remember and call to mind, that not only king Hiero was his grandfather, but also king Pirrhus by the mother side: hee sent Embassadours unto the Carthaginians, to give them from him to understand, That he demed it right and meer, that all Sicilie wholly should lie unto his dominion: and that the Empire of Italie onely, belonged properly to the Carthaginian people to acquire and conquer. This levitie and vainglorious humour, they neither wondred at, as a straunge thing in a giddie brained young man; nor yet greatly blamed and found fault with, so long as they might estrange him wholly and alienate him altogither from the friendship of the Romanes. But all things in him turned to his overthrow and utter confusion. For whiles Hipocrates and Epicides were sent afore with two thousand soldiours, for to sound and sollicite the citties to rebellion, that were held by the garrisons of the Romanes: and himselfe in person entred the countrie of the Leontines, with all the rest of the forces, which amounted to fifteen thousand foot and horse togither: certeine conspiratours, who chaunced all to be his owne souldiours, and

 bare armes under him* possessed themselves of a vake house, standing over a narrow lane, through which the king was wont to go down into the market-place of the citie: there, when other stood armed and well appointed, and waiting when the king should passeby, one of the conspiratours (whose name was Indigemine^) had given him in charge, because he was one of the squires of the kings bodie, when the king approached neere unto the doore of the said house, to find some occasion or other, in that streight passage, to stay the troupe and traine that followed behind. And so liee effected indeed, and put in execution, as it was agreed and contrived. For Indigemines lift up his foot, making as though he would loose and slacke a streight knot of his sho latchet, which hindred his going, whereby hee staied the companie that followed after, so long, that the king passing by alone without his guard of armed men about him, was assaulted in the while* and received  sundrie stabbes and wounds, before they could come to reskue and save him. Hereupon arose an outcrie and tumult, and divers of the guard let slie at Indigemines, who by this time was readie to oppose himselfe, and to ward all venues: howbeit he was hurt onely in two places, and so escaped. The guard seeing the king there lying dead, fled away as fast as they could. The murtheters, some of them betooke themselves into the market-place unto the multitude, that rejoyced for the recoverie of their freedome: others repaired to Syracuse, to intercept and prevent the designments of Andronodorus, and other favourites and followers of the late king.
Whiles things stood in these uncerteine and doubtfull tearmes, Appius Claudius foreseeing warre like to ensue, and that very shortly, addressed his letters unto the Senate of Rome, certifying them that Sicilie enclined alreadie, and was at hand to side with the people of Carthage,  and with Anniball. Himselfe in the meane time, bent all his forces toward the frontiers of the Province and confines of that kingdome, to withstand and hinder all the proceedings and enterprises of the Syracusians.
In the end of that yeare, Q. Fabius by order from the Senate, fortified Puteoli, a towne of merchandise, and which in time of the warres began to be much resorted unto and frequented, and there he placed a garison. From whence as he was in his journey toward Rome against the grand Election of Magistrates, he proclaimed the solemne assembly of the people for that purpose, to be the next Comitiall day that followed upon his arrivall thither: and so it fell out, that he went along the citie side immediatly upon his journey, and came downe into Mars field before he entred the citie. Vpon which day, when it hapned that the centurie of the younger sort was  drawne out first by lot, and had the prerogative, and by their voyces nominated T. Ollacilius and M. Aemylius Regillus for Consuls, The Oration of Q. Fabius to the people of Rome. then Q. Fabius after silence made, rose up, and delivered this or such like speech.
If either we had peace in Italie, or warre at leastwayes with those enemies, with whom if we dealt either negligently or unadvisedly, the matter were not much, nor importing great hazard and danger. I would thinke, that whosoever disturbed and crossed your favours and free affections which ye bring hither with you into this solemne place of assembly, to bestow honors and dignities upon whom ye please, had but small or no regard of your libertie and freedome. But since that in this warre and with this enemie, never any Generall of ours faulted in the managing of his affaires, but it cost us deere, and wee had some great foile and overthrow* it behoveth you, that with what mind and carefull regard yee enter the field to combate in your armour,  in the same yee should come hither into this Mars field in your gownes, and so proceed by your suffrages to elect your Consuls: and that every one of you should thus say to himselfe, I am to nominate a Consull to match with Generall Anniball. No longer since, than this very yeare, when as before Capua, Iubellius Taurea, the bravest horseman and Cavalier of all the Campanes defied the Romanes, and challenged them to sight man to man, Asellus Claudius the noblest knight of all the Romanes, and best man at armes, was chosen to encounter him. In times past, against a Gaule that offered combate upon the bridge over Anio, our auncestours sent out Manlius a couragious, resolute, and puissant champion. Neither can I denie, but upon such another occasion, not many yeares after, the like trust was reposed in M. Valerius, who tooke armes likewise against another Gaule that challenged single fight. And even as we are desirous, and wish  to have our foot and horsemen both, more valourous and hardie than our enemies, or if that will not be, at leastwise equall unto them, and able to countermatch them: even so let us be carefull to find out a Generall of our own, comparable every way to the cheefe commaunder of our enemies. And when we have chosen the best warriour and captaine in the whole cittie, then presently without any longer delay, being elect and created for one yeare, he shall be sent to match

with an old-captaine, that hath ever continued in the field, one, who is not enclosed within compasse  of time, nor restreined and gaged within the streight bounds of law, but that he may order and manage every thing, according as the ocasions and present occurrences of warre do require^ whereas, by that time that we can make all readie, and dispose every thing in order, and set in hand to begin our affaires, the yeare is come about and cleane gone. Now for asmuch as enough hath bene said, what manner of Consuls ye ought to create: it remaineth to speake somewhat of them, whom the prerogative centurie so highlie favoureth, and is so much affected unto. As for M. Acmylius Regillus, he is the Flamin of Quirimus, whom neither we may take from his ministerie of Sacrifice, nor yet retaine and keepe him still, but we shall neglect either the service of the Gods, or the due care and regard of the warres. Octacilius hath maried my sisters daughter, and hath faire issueby her. But your favours and good turnes shewed both to me and also to my  auncestors, are not of so small accoumpt and reckning, but that I ought to preferre the Common-weale before all private regards and alliances whatsoever. Every mariner, yea and any passenger is able to steere and rule a Ship in a calme water: but when a blustering tempest is up, and the vessell tossed in a troubled surging sea, and caried away with violent force of the winds, then there had neede to be a man in deede, and a skilfull Pilot to sit at the sterne, and to guide the helme. We, sayle not now in a still and quiet sea: But we have bene drenched and in a manner drowned with some stormes alreadie: and therefore we ought to have exceeding great care, and be wel advised aforehand, whom we have to be the steeres man. In a matter of lesse consequence and importance, we have made triall o T. Octacilius, of your knowledge and service and you have not given us yet, so good proofe of your vertue and prowessetherein, that we should put you in  trust with the managing of greater affaires. A navie whereof you were Admirall, we rigged and trimmed to your hands this yeare, for three causes: first, to anoy and spoyle the sea coast of Affrick: secondly, to defend and keepe to our behoose the ports and havens of Italy: last of all, and above all, to empeach and stay all supplies and new succours, together with money, munition, and victuall, for being transported unto Anniball from Carthage. If Octacilius have performed, I say not all these things, but in any one quit himselfe well, to the good and benefit of the State, Elect him Consull hardly, and good leave have you. But if it appeere, that while you had the rule of the Armada, all things (that a man would have) passed out of the country unto Anniball, with as great safetie and securitie, as if the seas had bene open and void of enemies: If, I say, the sea coast of Italie hath all this yeare bene more in danger, and subject to susteine harme, than that of Affrick: what reason can you alledge, wherefore the people of Rome should choose you above all others, to oppose as Captaine to confront their enemie Anniball. If you were Consull in place alreadie, we would judge it requisit and good, to nominate and create a Dictatour, according to the example of our forefathers: neither could you take snuffe or be offended, that there should be found in the citie of Rome a better warrior, and more sufficient than your selfe. And surely it concerneth no man more than you, o Octacilius, to see that there be not imposed a burden upon your shoulders, under which you should faile and fall downe right. Wherefore I advise and exhort you all, as much as possibly I can, in electing of Consuls this day, to cary that mind, and use that carefull providence, as yee would, in case yee were standing armed in battaile aray; and to choose out of hand two Generall captaines, under whose conduct and government, ye should  presently fight a field: and make choise of such Consuls, unto whom out children were to take the oth of allegeance: at whose commandement, they should come and assemble together, and under whose charge and protection they might willingly serve as souldiours. The poole Thra^y menus, the plaine before Cannae, are heavie examples for us to remember: but yet they serve for good precedents unto us, to teach us how to avoid the like mischiefe another time. So the prerogative Centurie of the younger and puinie sort, was called againe to a new scrutinie, and to give their voices again. Whereat when T. Octacilius began to cry out aloud and say very stoutly, that Fabius his drift was to continue Consul still, and therwith grew to be clamorous and troublesome to the assembly: the Consul commanded the Lictours to go unto him, and to lay hold upon him. And for as much as yet he had not entred into the citie, but came downe streightwayes into  the Mars field presently from his journey, he put them in mind, that the knitches of the rods together with the axes within them, should be borne before him. And in the meane time the prerogative centurie began afresh to give their voices: and by it were nominated Consuls Q. Fab. Maximus the fourth time, and M. Marcellus the third time: and all the centuries besides without

 any squaring and variance elected the very same. One of the former Pretours likewise was chosen againe, namely Q. E^lvi^s Flaccus. And other new were created, that is to say, T. Octacilius Crassus the second time, Q. Fabius the Consull his sonne, who at that time was Aedile of the chaire* and P. Cornelius Len^^lus. After the Election of the Pretours was ended and finished, there passed an Act and decree of the Senate, that Q. Fulvi^s should extraordinarily have the charge of the citie, and be Pretour there: and that he above all other, when the Consuls were gone forth to the warres, should be president and Governour of the citie of Rome. There fell great raine and much snow that yeare, whereby the Tybre overflowed the fields, overthrew many houses, and overwhelmed much cattaile and people, so as they utterly perished.
Thus in the fifth yeare of the second Punick warre, Q. Fab. Maximus the fourth time, and M. Claudius Marcellus the third time, when they entred their Consulship, set the citie on thinking and musing of them more than usually had bene knowen. For in many yeares there had not bene the like couple of Consuls. And old men would talke and say, that even so were Max. R^llus and P. Declus declared Consuls against the Gaules warre: and after them likewise, Papyri^s and Carvilius against the Samnites and Brutij; against the people also of Lucania and Tarentum. Marcellus was created Consul in his absence, whiles he was with the armie abroad, and Fabius being himselfe present and president of the Election, was ordeined to continue still in his Consulship. The occasion of the time, the neccessitie and occurrence of the warres, and the perill and hazard of the whole state were such, as no man looked nerely into the example and precedent to find fault withall, nor had the Consull in any jealousie of ambition and desire of rule:  but rather every man commended his noble and ^autie mind, who seeing that the Commonwealth stood in need of an excellent Captaine, and knowing himselfe without all question to be the man made lesse reckning and account of the envie and ill will of men, that thereby happily might accrue* than of the good and profit of the Common-wealth. The same day that the Consuls began their office, they assembled the Senatours in the Capitoll: and the first thing they did, was a decree, that the Consuls should either cast lots, or agree together betweene themselves, whether of them two should assemble the people for the election of Censors, before he set forward to the armie. After this, all they had their authoritie prolonged and continued still, who were emploied abroad with the forces; and their commissions were renewed and sealed againe, for to abide in the government of their Provinces: to wit, T. Grace^^s at Luceria, where he  abode with the armie of the Voluntaries: O. Terentius Varro in the Picene countrey: M. Pompomus in the province of Gaule (on this side the Alps.) It was enacted also, that of the Pretors of the fonner yeare, Q. Mulius as Viz Pretour, should governe Sardinia: that M. Valerius at Brundusium* should skoure the river, looke to the sea coasts, and have an eye to all the attempts and enterprises of Philip king of the Macedonians. P. Cornelius Leni^lus the new Pretor was appointed to rule the Province of Sicilie: and T. Octacilius to be admirall of the same navie, which the yeare before he had the charge of against the Carthaginians?
Many prodigious a^d strange signes were reported that yeare, and so much the more, as they were beleeved to be true of the simple and superstitious sort of people. Namely, that within the chappell of Sospita Iano in Lanuvium, the ravens builded their nests. In Ap^lia, a greene palme  tree was on a light fire. At Man^^^a, a poole maintained by the overflowing of the river Mincius, appeared red with bloud. At Cales it rained chaulke, and at Rome in the beasts market it rained blo^d. In a village called (...), a spring under the ground; brakeout and yeelded (...) aboundance of water, that it overturned* tumbled up and downe, and carried away (as it had beene the streame of a river) diverse vessels, as pipes, tunnes* barrels* and terces that were in the place. The open and publicke hall within the Capitoll, the temple of V^le^ne in Mars field, a nut-tre^ in the Sabines countrie: the high street, the wall, and a gate at Gabij, were all blasted with lighte
ning and fire from heaven. And by this time, other miraculous and ^onstrous signes were commonly blowne abroad, to wit, that the speare of Mars in Prenesse, of it owne ^^cord ^^^^red and moved forward: that an oxe was heard speake in Sicilia: that the infant within, the mothers wombe,  in the Marrucines count^^ was heard to crie ^^ Triumphe. At Spoletum, a woman turned to be a man. At Hadria there appeared an alter in the skie, and apparitions or fl^ws of men discovered about the sa^e, arraied in white. At Rome also within the cittie was seene ^ow the second time a swarme of Bees in the very market place: a t^ing wondered at, because it was rare and sildome knowne. Some there were also, that avouched, how they discried armed ^egions on the hill

Ianiculum. Whereupon the citie rose up in armes, and when they were come into the Ianicle, they  said plainely, that there were none there appeared, but the ordinarie inhabitants of the hil. These prodigious sights, by direction from the Aruspices, [i. the Soothsayers] were expiare and the gods pacified with greater sacrifices: and a solemne procession and supplication was proclaimed unto all the gods that were shrined at Rome, and had their chappels there.
After all complements performed, that belonged to the pacification of the gods* the Consuls proposed unto the Senate concerning State matters, and especially about the managing of the warres, Namely, what forces should bee prepared, what numbers of souldiours levied, and where they should be bestowed severally. And agreed it was, That there should bee eighteene Legions emploied in the warres. Whereof the Consuls were to take unto them two a peece the provinces likewise of Gaule, Sicilie, and Sardinia, should bee guarded each of them with other twaine. Q. Fabius the Lord Deputie of Apulia, was to have two Legions under his hand, to commaund the province: and T. Gracchus other two of voluntaries, to keepe the countrie about Luceria* and C. Terentius the Pro-consull, to have the charge of one in the Picene countrie: and M. Valerius another, for the navie about Brundusium: and last of all, twaine were left behind for the guard and defence of the cittie of Rome. For to make out this full number of Legions, s^xe of necessitie were to bee levied new. And the Consuls were appointed with all convenient speed to enroll them: and likewise to provide an Armada that yeare, of 150 gallies, together with those ships which rid in the river, along the coasts of Calabria, for the defence of that countrie. When the muster was done, and the new shippes haled and shot into sea, Quintus Fabius assembled the Centuries for the Election of Censors: wherein were created, M. Attilius Regulus, and P. Furius  Philus.
The rumour still ^ncreased, that Sicilie was out, and up in armes. Whereupon T. Octacilius was commaunded to goe thither with his fleet. And because there wanted sailers and marriners the Consuls by vertue of a decree of the Senat, published an Edict, That as many as in the time of L. Acmylius, and C. Flaminius Censors, either themselves or their fathers were assessed in the Subsidie booke, from 50000 Asses unto 100000 in goods, or who afterwards grew to that worth, should find one marriner, and six months pay. Item, That whosoever were rated above 100000 unto 300000 should be charged with three marriners, and one yeares pay. Item, That whosoever were valued in the Censors booke betweene 300000 and 1000000, should allow five marriners. Item, That those above that proportion should set out seven. And every Senator should provide  eight marriners, and furnish them with a whole yeares pay. According to this Edict, the marriners were set out well armed and appointed, by their maisters, and having with them aforehand mear dressed and sodden to serve them thirtie daies, they were embarked. This is the first time that ever the Romane navie was furnished with sailers and mariners, at the proper charges of private citizens.
This extraordinarie preparation more than usuall, terrified the Campanes most of all other, for feare least the Romanes would begin warre that yeare, with laying siege to Capua. Therfore they dispatched Embassadours unto Anniball, requesting him to come neerer unto Capua with his forces. For why? at Rome there were new armies levied, for to assaile that citie: and the Romans were not discontented more with the revolt of any than of them. And for as much as this message  was delivered in such hast and feare, Anniball thinking it good to make speed, least the Romanes prevented him, dislodged and removed from Arpi, and encamped upon Tisata over Capua, in the sort, where he kept of old. Then, leaving the Numidians and Spaniards behind him both to guard the campe, and also to defend Capua, he went downe with the rest of his armie to the lake Avernus, pretending in shew there to sacrifice; but in very deed to sound and sollicue Putcoli and the garrison there, for to rebell. Maximus was no sooner advertised, that Anniball was departed from Arpi, and in his returne to Campania; but he journied night and day, and never staied, untill he was come againe and repaired to his armie. And withall* he gave order and direction unto T. Gracchis, to remove with his power from Luceria and to draw neere to Beneventum: likewise unto Q. Fabius the Pretour, (who was the Consull his sonne) to supplie the roume  of Gracchus at Luceria. At the same time, the two Pretours took^ their journie and went into Sicilie, P. Cornelius to the armie there on land, and Octacilius to keepe the seacoast, and to bee Admirall of the navie: and the rest sped them every one into their severall provinces. They also who had their authoritie and government continued, ruled the same countries that they did before.
 Whiles Anniball abode at the Lake Avernus, there came unto him from Tarentum, five noble young gentlemen (Romane associates) which had been taken prisoners, some at the poole Thrasymenus, others at Cannae, whom hee had sent home in the same manner of curtesie, as he had shewed ever to all the allies of the Romans.
These gentlemen, in remembrance of his favors and benefits, made report unto him, that they had persuaded and induced a great part of the youth of Tarentum, to entertaine rather the amitie and alliance of Anniball, than of the people of Rome: and for this intent they were sent embassadours from them, to request in their name, that it might please him to come neerer with his forces to Tarentum. For say they, if they might but once see from out of Tarentum his standerd and ensignes, and himselfe neere encamped, the citie would without delay be surrendred up into his hands. For the younger people had the  commons at their beck and commaundement, and the commons ruled the whole state of Tarentum at their pleasure. Anniball after hee had commended and thanked them, and withall loaden them with many faire and great promises, willed them to returne home, to hasten and set forward, and effect these intended designements, saying, that he would be there in good and conuenient time. With these hopes the Tarentines tooke their leave, and departed. Anniball himselfe was wonderfully desirous to be maister of Tarentum. He saw it was a noble citie and a wealthie, seated also by the sea side, and a very commodious port, looking and lying toward Macedonia: and well he wist that King Philip (if he should passe over into Italie, seeing the Romanes were possessed of Brundusium) would arive at this haven. When he had performed the Sacrifice for which he thither came, and (whiles he made his abode there) foraied all the territorie  of Cumes, even as farre as the Cape of the Promohtorie Misenum: sodainely he turned his armie and marched to Puteoli, for to surprise and give a camisado to the fort and garison there. There were sixe thousand of them within the towne: and the place not only by naturall situation strong, but also surely fortified by industrie of man. Anniball having stayed there three dayes, and assaied the fort and the garrison on every side, seeing hee could not prevaile nor effect any thing, went forward from thence, and proceeded to the wasting of the territorie of Naples, upon anger, rather than any hope of gaining the citie. The Commons of Nola, who long time were discontented with the Romanes, and at deadly fewd with their owne Senatours, upon his comming into the territorie and confines so neere unto them, began to rise in a commotion. Wherupon, there came Embassadours unto Anniball, requiring him to advance to Nola, upon assured  promise, that the towne should be delivered into his hands. But Marcellus, who was sent unto by the Nobles, prevented this their plot and designement: and in one day, he reached to Suessula from Cales, notwithstanding hee made some stay to ferrie over the river Vulturnus. And so the next night he sent into Nola 6000 footmen, and 300 horse, for to aid and defend the Senat. And like as the Consull bestirred himselfe with all speed and diligence, to make Nola sure to him aforehand, so Anniball contrariwise temporised, being not so readie now to credite the Nolanes; as having twise before given the like attempt, and to no purpose in the end, and therfore hee trifled out the time, and made small hast.
At the same time also, Q. Fabius the Consull came against Casilinum, which was kept by a garrison of the Carthaginians, to see if he could surprise it. And to Beneventum at one time (as  if they had been so agreed) came on the one side, Hanno from the Brutij, with a great power of foot and horse; and on another side, Gracchus from Luceria: who entred the towne first. From whence, so soone as hee heard that Hanno lay encamped within three miles of the cittie, by the river Calores, and there wasted the countrie, he himselfe issued, and pitched his tents within a mile of the enemie: where he assembled all his souldiours togither, purposing to make a speech unto them. He had with him the legions that consisted most of voluntaries, who already two yeres before, had bene more willing to deserve their freedome in silent maner, than to chalenge and demand it with open mouth. Howbeit he perceived when he departed out of the winter harbors, that they began to murmure and grumble in the armie when they marched: and to complain in this wise. What? shal we never serve in the quality and condition of freemen? Whereupon he had written  unto the Senate, and shewed unto them, not so much what they desired, as what they deserved to have: certifying them, that unto that day they had done him good and valiant service: and wanted nothing save onely their freedome, but they might go for true and lawfull soldiors. Whereupon the lords of the Senate had put it unto his discretion, for to do by them what he thought was expedient for the common-weale.
Thereupon, before that he should joyne battaile with the enemie,

hee pronounced these words before them all, and said: That now the time was come, of obtaining  and acquiring that libertie, which so long they hoped after. For the next morrow, they were to affront their enemies with banner displaied, and to fight in a plaine and open ground, where without feare of any ambush, the triall might be made with fine force and true valour* Who soever therfore can bring me the head of an enemie, him my pleasure and will is, to make free immediatly: and who so looseth ground and reculeth, him will I chastise as a bondslave ought to bee punished. Now every man hath his state and condition lying in his owne hands: and of your freedome, not only my selfe will assure you, but for further warrant, yee have the allowance of M. Marcellus the Cos. and generally of all the LL. of the Counsel, whose advise I sought, and who committed unto my hands the ordering of your libertie. And withall, he read the Consuls letters, and the decree of the Senate in that behalfe. Whereat they set up a mightie crie, in token of their assent  and approbation, and called for battaile, and earnestly urged to give the signall out of hand. Then Gracchus having pronounced the next day for battaile, dismissed the assembly. The souldiours were joyous, especially such as were to have their freedome in reward of one daies service, and bestowed the rest of that day in making their armour and weapons readie. The morrow after, so soone as the trumpets began to sound: they were the first of all other, that presented themselves before the Generall his pavilion, well appointed and readie to fight: and by the sun-rising Gracchus led forth his men into the field in order of battaile. The enemies for their parts, were nothing behind, but forward to encounter them. They were in number seventeen thousand of footmen, most of them Brutij and Lucans: of horsemen, twelve hundred: among whom there were very few Italians, the rest were in manner all Numidians and Moores. The fight was sharpe, and continued  long, and for foure houres it was not seene which side had the better. No one thing else troubled the Romans more, than their enemies heads, which were the prises to redeeme the soldiours libertie. For as any had killed their enemies lustilie, they were faine first, with much a do, to cut off their heads, within the troublesome prease and tumult, and so to loose time: and after that, by reason that their right hands were emploied and occupied with holding the same heads, it fell out, that the best souldiours gave over fighting, and the feeble dastards and fearfull cowards only, were to maintein the medley. Which when the Marshals of the field and Colonels reported unto Gracchus, and namely that there was not a souldiour of the enemies standing, that was wounded and hurt anymore: but they that lay along were hacked and hewed as it were by burchers: and that his owne souldiours instead of swords, held their enemies heads in their hands: hee commaunded in all hast, that upon a signall given, they should fling away their heads from them, and charge afresh upon the enemies. For their valor and prowesse (faith he) was well enough seene alredie, and evidently testified, and so long as they were so hardie men, and bare themselves so manfully, they should not need to doubt of their libertie. Then the conflict began to be renewed, and withall, the horsemen charged the enemies: whom the Numidians received with equall valour: insomuch as the fight of the cavalerie was as bravely performed, as the other of the Infanterie: whereupon once againe the victorie seemed doubtfull, to which part it would encline: whiles in both hosts, the Generals reproached and debased the adverse part. Gracchus said, that the Brutij and Lucanes were so often vanquished and subdued by the Romane auncestors: and Hanno againe girded at the Romanes, calling them bondslaves, and souldiours let loose out of  prison and houses of correction. At the last, Gracchus declared alowd and said, They were not to hope at all for their libertie, unlesse that day their enemies were discomsited and put to flight. This one word of his at length set their bloud in such an heat, that they raised a fresh shout, and as if they had bin cast again into a new mould, they charged upon the enemies so violently, that they could no longer be resisted and withstood. First, they that fought in the vantguard of the Carthaginians were put out of order; then they about their standards and ensignes: and last of all, the whole battaile was driven backe and reculed. Whereupon they faire turned their backes, and fled so fast one upon another into their campe, in such feare and fright, that not so much, as at the very gates nor upon the rampiar, they staied once, and turned againe to make head: so as the Romans following them hard at heeles into their campe, as it were in one traine pell mell, made a new  skirmish even within the rampiar of their enemies. Where the fight was not so combersome, by reason of the streightnesse of the roume wherein they were pent, but the massacre and execution was as cruell and bloudie. The prisoners also that were among the enemies, in this confused medly and tumult joyned themselves and stucke close togither: and having caught up some weapons,

 helped forward the victorie: and either charging upon the backs of the Carthaginians slew them, or else hindred them in their flight and running away. So of that great armie, there were not allout two thousand (and the most part of them horsemen) that escaped with the Generall himself: all the rest were either slain or taken prisoners: and of militarie ensignes were caried away 40 save twaine. Of the victours, there died fast upon two thousand. All the spoyle, but only the prisoners, was graunted to the souldiours. The cattell also was reserved, as many as within thirtie daies the right owners could justly make claime unto for their owne. When they were returned laden with booties and pillage into the campe, there were almost 4000 of the voluntarie souldious, who had fought but faintly, and brake not into the campe with the rest: who for feare of punishment seized a little hill not farre from the campe, and kept it for their hold. But the morrow after, being  fet from thence bythe Colonels, they repaired again to the campe, at what time as Gracchus had summoned his souldiours to an assembly. Where, after that the Proconfull, first had rewarded his old souldiours with militarie gifts, according to each one his prowesse and good service in that battaile: then as concerning the voluntaries, he said thus much, That hee had liever they were all commended by him, good and bad one with another, than that one of them that day should cast of any punishment: and therefore hee pronounced them all free in the name of God, to the benefit, happinesse, and selicitie, both of the common-weale, and also of themselves. At which word, they lift up their voyces alowd with exceeding cheerfulnesse and alacritie: and one while they clipped and embrased one another in their armes, with gratulation and joy: another while againe, they held up their hands toward heaven, wishing and praying at the gods hands,  all good blessings for the people of Rome, and for Gracchus especially.
Then (quoth Gracchus) Before that I had made you all alike, and to have equall part in the right and priviledge of freedome, I would not set upon any of you, either the marke of a stout and hardie souldiour, or the note of a fainthearred and beastly coward. But now that I have discharged my selfe of the trust committed unto me by the Common-weale, to the end, that all difference betweene prowesse and cowardise, should not be forgotten altogither and perish; I will take expresse order, that the names of all them, whose conscience accused them of saint fighting, and avoiding the hazard of battaile, and therefore erewhile withdrew themselves apart, bee brought unto me. And when they are cited and called forth every one by his name, I will compell them to take a corporall oth (quoth hee) that unlesse it be upon sicknesse, so long as they shall continue in soldierie, they neither  eat nor drinke but standing upon their feet. And this punishment (I am sure) you will willingly take in good part: when yee shall consider better of it, and see that you could not have had an easier note of disgrace and shame, for your false hearts and slender service. Then hee gave the signall to trusse up bag and baggage, and sounded the remove, and so dislodged: and thus the souldiours carrying and driving before them their boties, all the way disporting themselves so merrilie and jocund, returned to Beneventum, as if they had come from some great dinner, upon a solemne and festivall day, and not from fighting a bloudie battaile. All the people of Beneventum, came forth in great numbers to meet them at the gates, welcomed the souldiours, bad them joy, embraced them, and envited them to their houses, to give them enterteinment and lodging. The bourds were spread in every mans court-yard, and furnished with store of viands:  they willed them to come and make merrie with them, and requested Gracchus to give his souldiours leave to feast and make good cheere. And Gracchus was content, but upon this condition, that they should all eat their meales abroad in the open street. Then all things was brought forth, and set upon the tables, at every mans doore. The voluntaries tooke their repast and refection, either with their caps on their heads, or else covered their crownes with white wooll: some sitting, some standing: waiting and serving one another at the table, and eat their meat, and fed with them togither. This was such a worthie sight and solemnitie, that Gracchus after hee was returned to Rome, caused the repesentation and resemblance of the celebration of this day, to be drawne and portraied in colours, and the picture to remaine in the temple of the goddesse Libertie, which his father caused to be built in the mount Aventine, of certeine fines and  forfeits, and afterwards there dedicated it.
Whiles these matters thus passed at Beneventum, Anniball having spoiled and harried the territorie about Naples, removed toward Nola, and there encamped before the town. Whom when the Consull understood to be comming, he sent for Pomponius the pro-Pretour, togither with that armie which lay encamped above Suessula, and provided to meet with the enemie, minding

presently to bid him battaile. He sent out Claudius Nero with the strength of his horsemen^ in the dead time of the night at a backe gate, that was farthest from the enemie, giving him ^n charge to cast about closely, and fetch a compasse, and faire and softly to follow the enemie, as he marched: and when he perceived the battaile was begun, then to come forward, and set upon^ him behind on his backe. But whether it were that Ner^ missed of the way, or having not ^^me ynough, could not put this pollicie in execution, I know not. In his absence the a^^nes joined battaile, wherein (no doubt) the Romans had the better hand. Howbeit, for default that the horsemen were not there in due time, the order of the direction failed, and tooke not effect. And not^ withstanding that the enemies gave ground and reculed, yet Marcellus durst not follow hot upon them, but sounded the retreat to his own men, being in a good way of victorie. Yet were there by report above 2000 of the enemies slaine that day, but of Romans under 400. And about the  sunneset, Nero who all the day and night past, had tired horse and man, and done no good, and now returned, without so much as a fight of the enemie, was sharply rebuked of the Cos. insomuch, that he gave him this checke to choke him, That it was long of him and none else, that they had not cried quittance with the enemie, for the overthrow and losse received at Cannae. The day following Marcellus came downe againe into the field, readie to give battell. But Anniball, as one that secretly confessed himselfe to be overcome, held himselfe close, within the strength of his campe. And on the third day, giving over all hope to get Nola, (an enterprise that never sped well) he departed in the still time of the night toward Tarentum, upon a better and more assured hope to gaine it by treason.
The civile affaires at Rome were managed with no lesse courage at home, than the warres in  the field abroad. For the Censors, who by reason that the citie treasure waxed low, were eased of their care of setting out the publick works of the cittie by the great: and having nothing els to do, emploied themselves in reformation of mens manners and chastising of vices and enormities, which sprung upon warre: like as mens bodies, which by long and lingering sickenesse growne weake, ever and anon breed new diseases. And first they convented before them those citizens, who after the battail at Cannae, were (by report) minded and disposed to leave the Commonweale, and to depart out of Italie. The ringleader of them all was L. Cecilius Metellus, who hapned then to be Treasurer of the cittie. He, with the rest of that crue, who were culpable in the same crime, were commaunded to make their answere, and plead their causes: but when they were not able to cleare and quit themselves, the Censors charged them openly, that they had given out certaine  words, and made speeches against the State, tending to a sedition and conspiracie, for to abandon Italie. Next after them were cited to appeare, those cunning and craftie companions above said, who with their over-subtile interpretation and construing of words, would seeme to avoid their oth: those captives, I meane, who being on their way to Rome, came backe secretly into the camp of Anniball, and tooke themselves thereby freed and discharged, because they had sworne to returne againe. But these and the others afore rehearsed, as many as served upon the citie horses, had their horses taken from them, were displaced out of their tribe, and condemned all to loose their voices, and to serve without cittie pay. Neither were the Censors carefull to correct the Senate, and reforme the degree of the knights onely, but also they proceeded to rase out of the publicke checkroll of the younger cittizens, the names of all those, who for soure yeares space  had not served in warres, as many, I say of them, as could not justly plead and alleage, either ordinarie immunitie by law, or sicknes for their excuse. And of these, were found guiltie above 2000: who were awarded to be Aerarij, and all of them to be removed out of their tribe. And besides this shameful disgrace and note of ignominie awarded by the Censors, there passed an heavie decree of the Senate against them, to wit, That all they whome the Censors had thus scored and noted, should bee bound to serve on foot in the warres, and be confined and sent over into Sicilie, to the residue there, of the armie that remained at Cannae. And no other time of service and warfare was limited unto this sort of souldiours, but untill the enemie were driven cleane out of Italie.
Whiles the Censors, as is aforesaid, upon occasion that the citties stocke was so decaied, gave  over and forbare to bargaine for the repairing and maintenance of the churches and holy temples, and for the finding and provision of chariot horses for the State, and such like; there resorted unto them a great number of those that were woont at the speare to take these bargaines at their hands by the great, and for a grosse summe of money: who exhorted the Censors, to deale

 in those matters still, and to set, let, and enter into bargain with them, as if the citie chamber wanted no mony; making this offer, that none of them all would demaund paiment out of the common chist, before the warres were fully ended.
Then repaired unto the Censors, the maisters of those bondmen, whom T. Sempronius had mannumised and set free at Beneventum, saying, that they were sent for by the Triumvirs, out of the office of the Bankers called Mensarij, for to receive againe their monies, according as they priced and valued their slaves: how beit, they would not, before the warre was finished. And as the hearts of the Commons were thus favourablie affected, to sustaine and support the povertie of the treasure house; so the stockes of money also that belonged first to Orphanes, and afterwards to widdowes, began now to be bestowed in the chamber of the citie: and they that presented and  brought in those monies, beleeved assuredly, that they could not lay them up more sure and safe, than in the publicke credite and securitie of the citie. And whatsoever out of these stockes was disbursed and defraied, for to buy and provide any thing for the Orphanes or widdows aforesaid, the treasurers kept a book therof, and noted it down in a register. This kindnes and benevolence of privat persons unto their countrey, extended it selfe from the citie, even as far as to the camp: insomuch, that neither horseman nor centurion would take their wages, but rebuke and rate them, that could find in their hearts to receive their pay, tearming them no better than mercenaries and hirelings.
Now Q. Fabius the Consull lay in camp before Casilinum, which citie was kept with a garison of two thousand Campanes, and seven hundred of Anniball his souldiers. They had for their captaine and commaunder, one Statius Metias, sent thither by Cn. Magius Attellanus, who  for that yeare was The head magistrat, as lord Maior* Mediastuticus of Capua. He put the bondslaves and commons in armes, entermingled one with another, for to enter upon the camp of the Romanes, whiles the Consull was busie in assaulting Casilinum. Fabius was nothing ignorant of all these things, and therefore he sent unto Nola to his colleague there, signifying unto him, that there was neede of a second armie to make head against the Campanes, whiles the other was employed about the assault of Casilinum: and telling him besides, that either he must himselfe come in person, leaving a meane garison behind him at Nola: or els if he might not be spared from thence, for feare of danger from Anniball, he would send for T. Graccbus the Proconsull, from Beneventum. Vpon this message, Marcellus having left in Nola a gard of two thousand souldiers, with the rest of his forces, presented himselfe before Casilinum: upon whose comming, the Campanes  who were readie to set forward, stayed themselves and were quiet. So both Consuls togither jointly began to assault Casilinum: where, the Romane souldiers that rashly came under the walls received much hurt: and Fabius seeing little good done, judged it best to surcease and give over the enterprise, being a service of small consequence, and nath'lesse very dangerous: and to depart from thence, seeing there was businesse toward of greater importance. But Marcellus contrarywise was of opinion and said, that as there were many things which great warriours were not to attempt: so if they were once taken in hand, and the adventure given, they were not lightly to be given over and laid aside; for as much as in it lay matter of great consequence, for same and reputation, both wayes^ and so he prevailed, that the enterprise was not neglected and abandoned. Whereupon, there were mantilets, and all other kinds of fabricks  and engines of batterie and assault, bent against the citie ^ so, as the Campanes besought Fabius, that they might depart to Capua in safetie. And when some few were gone forth, Marcellus possessed himselfe of that gate whereout they went and then they fell to kill and slay one with another, first about the gate: and after they had rushed once in, they put to like execution those also within the citie. Fi^tie there were or thereabout of the Campanes, that first gate out of the towne, and fled for mercie to Fabius: and they by his gard and safe conduct, arived at Capua. But see, Casilinum, through the lingering slacknesse of the inhabitants that craved protection, was (by advantage taken of their long parley, and temporising) woon by the enemies. The captives, so many as were either Campanes or Anniball his souldiours, were sent to Rome, and there clapt up fast in prisons. But the multitude of the townesmen, were distributed into sundrie cities  adjoyning, and there kept in ward:
At the very same time that the Consuls after their conquest, retired from Casilinum, Graccbus being in the countrie of the Lucanes, and having gathered and enrolled certaine cohorts and companies of souldiours out of those parts, sent them out a forraying, under the conduct of a captaine of Allies, into the territories of the enemies. Hanno encountred them as they stragled

in scattering wise out of order, and set upon them, and paid his enemies againe with the like diffeature  and losse, or not much lesse, than that which he had received at Beneventum: and in great hast withdrew himselfe into the country of the Brutij, for feare least Gracchus should overtake him.
The Consull Marcellus returned back to Nola, from whence he came, and Fabius went forward into Samnium, to spoile and wast the countrie, and to recover by force of armes the cities which had revolted. The Samnites about Caudium were piteously and grievously damnified: their villages in all places set on fire, their fields laid wast and destroyed, and great booties both of cattaile and people driven away. Sixe townes forced by assault, namely, Compulteria, Thelese. Telesia, Cossa, Melae, Fuisulae, and Orbitanium. In the Lucanes countr^e, the towne of (...). Blandae: and in Apulia the citie Call^^^. Ancae was assaulted. In these townes and cities, there were taken prisoners and  slaine 25000 of the enemies: of fugitives and rennegate traitours there were recovered 370, whome the Consull sent home againe to Rome, and being thither come, they were all beaten and skourged with rods in the Comitium, and then pitched downe headlong to the earth, from the rock Tarpeia. These exploits were atchieved by Q. Fabius, within the compasse of a few dayes. But Marcellus by occasion that he lay sick at Nola, was hindered from performing any feates of armes. The Pretour likewise Q. Fabius, who had the charge and jurisdiction of the province about Luceria, woon by force about the same time the towne Accua, and fortified a standing camp planted before Ardoneae.
Whiles the Romanes were thus employed about these affaires in divers other places, Anniball was come unto Tarentum, to the exceeding great damage and detriment of all places where  he journeyed: but being arived once in the territorie of Tarentum, he began to march and lead his armie more peaceably. There he did no harme at all, made no havock, nor once went out of the high way. And it was evidently seen, that all this was done not upon any modestie that appeared either in souldiour or captaine, but only to win unto him the hearts of the Tarentines. But when he approched the walls of the citie, and saw no commotion, nor insurrection from thence upon the discovery of his Vantgard, as he thought he should, he pitched his camp almost a mile from the towne. Now had M. Valerius the Viz-Pretour, who was Admirall of the Fleete at Brundusium, sent T. Valerius his Lieutenant unto Tarentum, three dayes before that Anniball shewed himselfe before the walls. He had mustred and enrolled the floure of the Nobilitie, and so bestowed at every gate, and about the walls where neede required, good gards for  defence: with such vigilant diligence both day and night, that he gave no opportunitie and advantage either to the enemies to adventure any assault, or to the doubtfull and untrustie friends to practise any treason. So Anniball, having spent there certaine dayes in vaine, and seeing none of them who repaired unto him at the lake (...) Tri^^^. Avernus, either to come themselves, or to send messenger or letters: and perceiving now that he had rashly and foolishly followed vaine promises, and so was deluded; dislodged, and removed from thence. And even then also he spared the territorie of Tarentum, and did no hurt at all: and albeit his feined and counterfet lenitie and mildnesse hitherto tooke no effect: yet he hoped still thereby to corrupt their faithfull alleageance to the Romanes: and so he went to Salapia. And (by reason that now midsomer was past, and he liked well of that place for a winter harbour) he conveyed thether all the come from out off the  territorie of Metapontum and Heraclea. Then he sent out the Numidians and Moores, to fetch booties and prises from out of the Salentine countrey, and all the woods and chases next unto Apulia, from whence they drave of other cattaile small store: but of horses especially they brought away great numbers, of which there were foure thousand divided amongst the horsemen to be handled, broken, and made gentle.
The Romanes seeing there was like to be war in Sicilie; and the same not lightly to be regarded: and that the death of the tyrant there, rather gave the Saracosians good captains, than wrought any change in their minds, or alteration in the cause: assigned unto M. Marcellus, one of the Consuls, that province to governe. Presently upon the murder of Hiero^y^us, first the souldiours in the Leontine countrie, began to mutine and make an uprore, and boldly spake and said, That  the kings death should be expiate, and his obsequies solemnised with sacrificing the blo^d of conspiratours. But afterwards, when they heard often iterated the sweet^^^me of liberti^ and freedome restored unto them: and that there was good hope that the souldiours should have a largesse dealt amongst them out of the kings treasure, and be under the commaund of captaines of

 better qualitie, and having besides all this, a bederoll rehearsed unto them of the Tyrant his crueltie and soule facts, and of more silthie and lothsome lusts: their affections were so altered, that they suffered the bodie of their king to lie above ground unburied, whom a little before, they so greatly desired and wished for. Now as concerning the conspiratours, whiles the rest of them remained behind to assure and possesse themselves of the armie, Theodorus and Sosis tooke the kings horses and rode post, as hard as ever they could, to Syracusa, for to surprise upon a suddain all his followers and favourites (who knew nothing of that which was done) and fall upon them unawares: but they were prevented not onely by the same (which above all other things in such cases is most swift) but also by a courrier one of the kings servants. Whereupon Andronodorus had seized before hand of that part of the citie which is called the Iland, togither with the castle, and all other places that hee could come at, which were thought of any good importance; and them he fortified with good gards. Theodorus and Sosis being entred within the citie at The citie of Syaracuse was divided into foure parts, Hexapylos, Tiche, A^chradina and Insule. Hexapylos after the sunne setting, in the twy-light and shutting in of the evening: and shewing the kings roiall robes all embrued with bloud, and the ornament and attire likewise of his head, he passed through In other authors called Tyche, or (...) Fortuna, whose temple there stood. Thica, and called alowd unto the people to fight all at once for their libertie, and to arme themselves, and willed them to repaire into Achradine of others. Acradina. The people some of them ran out into the streets, others stood in their entries and porches, divers looked out at the windowes from within their houses, and asked what the matter might be? Every place shone with torch and cressetlight, and was filled with sundrie garboiles and hurlyburlies. As many as were in armes gathered togither in the open places of the citie: those that were unarmed, tooke downe off the temple of ^up. Olympius, the spoiles of the Gaules and the Illyrians, which the people off Rome had given as a present to king Hiero, and which he set alost for a memoriall: praying unto Iupiter that hee would vouchsafe them this gracious favour, as to bestow those sacred weapons and harnish upon them, that meant to arme themselves therwith, for the defence of their countrie, for the maintenance of the churches and shrines of the gods, and for the recoverie of their libertie. This multitude also joined with the Corps de gards, that in the principall quarters of the citie, were bestowed in places convenient. But Andronodorus amongst other places that he fortified, made sure also with strong gards of armed men the publike garners of the citie within the Iland. There was a place enclosed round about with foure-square stone, and built strongly like a fortresse^ this was possessed by the youth that had bene appointed for to guard and defend that quarter: and they  sent messengers into the Acradina, to signifie that the garners and the corne were kept by them to the behoose of the Senate. And on the morrow at the breake of day, the whole people, as well armed as unarmed, assembled togither in Acradina, within the pallace. And there before the altar of Concordia, which in that place stood erected, one of the principall and chiefe cittizens, named Polyneus, made an oration unto them all, with franknesse of speech enough, tending unto libertie, and yet seasoned with modestie and moderation, in this wise.
Men (qd.he) that have experience of servitude and other indignities, fall to abhorre the same, and their stomackes rise against them as known evils. But as for civill discord, what calamities and miseries it bringeth with it, the cittizens of Saracose have heard their fathers tell, and not seen and tasted themselves. That yee have bene so readie to take armes and weapons in hand, I commend you for it: but I would  con you more thanke, if yee used them not, unlesse ye be driven thereto by extreame necessitie. For the present, I hold it good, and my counsell is, that embassadours be sent unto Andronodorus, to intimate unto him, yea and to require and charge him, to submit himselfe unto the Senat and people, and by them to be ordered: to set open the gates of the Iland, to put away from about him his guard, and deliver up the castle and garrison. But in case hee intend under the pretence of being guardian or protectour to the kingdome of another, therby to usurpe it to his own use; he must be given to understand, by mine advise, that we will seek to recover our libertie out of the hands of Andronodorus, more fiercely and forcibly than from Hieronymus. And so presently upon this assembly, embassadors were sent. Then the Senate went togither and sat in counsell: for, as during the raigne of Hiero, there was a set and ordinarie publike counsell of State: so after his death  unto that day, the Senatours were neither called togither, nor their advise taken or sought in any matter. When the embassadours were come unto Andronodorus, and had delivered their message, hee was himselfe (verily) for his owne part, moved with the generall consent of the citizens; but especially when hee considered, that among other quarters of the cittie possessed by the adverse side, that one part also of the Iland, which was the strongest, was betraied (as it were) and held

out against him.
But when the Embassadors called still upon him to come forth, his wife Dem^rata, daughter of king Hiero, pussed up still with the proud mind and haughtie stomack of a prince, and full of the vaine humour and spirit of a woman, put him eftsoones in mind of a saying, that Denis the Tyrant had evermore in his mouth, namely, That a man should not ride on horsebacke to be deposed from royall dignitie and estate of tyrannie, but be led faire and softly a foot-pace, and go to that, as a beare to the stake. An easie matter (quoth she) it is for one to yeeld and forgo the possession of high place and honor, and a thing that may be done in the turning of an hand, whensoever one will: but to compasse and attaine thereto, is a right hard matter, and of all other most difficult. You were best therefore to borrow some respite of time of the Embassadours, for to take farther deliberation of this maine point, and in the mean while, to use the advantage thereof, to send for the souldiours out of the Leontine countrie: unto whom no doubt, if you  would promise a reward out of the Princes treasure, you shall be lord of all. This perilous unhappie counsell of a woman, Andronorus neither despised and rejected altogither, nor yet presently accepted and embraced: supposing it a better and safer course, if hee meant to aspire unto high dignitie and great puissance, for the present to temporize and give place unto the necessitie of the time. And therefore hee willed them to carrie backe unto the Senate this answere from him, That hee submitted himselfe, and would be ordered and set downe by the Senate and the people. The morrow after, so soone as it was daylight, hee caused the gates of the Iland to be set open,The Oration of Andronodorus. and shewed himselfe in the market place of Acradina: where hee ascended up unto the altar of Concord, from which the day before, Polyneus had made a speech unto the people.
Hee began his oration with an excuse of his late comming and long stay behind, and ctaved pardon  therefore: alleadging that hee had kept the gates shut, not because he meant to separate his own affairs from the State, and not to take such part as the citie tooke: but when swords were once drawn, hee feared, what would be the end and issue of murders and massacres, and whither men would stay their hands, when there was assurance of libertie effected, (as being contented with the death only of the Tyrant) or whither, as many as either in bloud and kindred, or in affinitie and alliance, or in other offices or service, were toward the K. and his court, should be touched culpable in the fault of another, and so likewise have their throats cut. For after that (quoth hee) I understood once, that they who had delivered and set free their countrie, were minded and willing to save and preserve it, thus enfranchised; and that there was consulting on all hands indifferently, for the good of the state, I made no longer doubt of the matter, but to yeeld both mine owne person, and also  all that ever was under my hand (as committed unto me upon trust and fidelitie) unto my native countrie: now that he, who put all into my hand, is through his own follie and outrage overthrown and brought to confusion. Then turning to the murderers of the tyrant, and by name calling unto Theodorus and Sosis. A noble and memorable peece of service yee have alreadie done, (qd. he) but trust me truly, your glorie in this behalfe is begun onely, and not throughly finished and performed: nay, a great daunger is yet behind, unlesse yee see to the generall concord and unitie of all parts, that the common libertie of the cittie, turne not into pride and insolencie beyond all measure.
After his speech ended, he laid downe the keies of the gates, and of the kings treasure, at their feet. And so for that day, when the people were dismissed from the assemblie, with joy and mirth  they went in procession and supplication with their wives and children, round about all the Churches and chappels of their gods. The day following, the solemne Election was held for the creation of Pretours. And first, before all others, Andronodorus was chosen, and the rest for the most part, the very murderers of the Tyrant. They elected also two that were absent, to wit, Sopater and Deomenes. Who being advertised of all matters that passed at Syracuse, delivered up the kings treasure which lay in the Leontines countrie, and was now brought unto Syracuse, into the hands of the Treasurers; who for the same purpose were created. Likewise that which was in the Island, and in Acradina, was committed over unto their custodie. That part also of the wall, which devided the Island from the rest of the cittie, and was supposed too strong a bar betweene, was by common consent cast downe and rased. And as their minds were thus affected and enclined  to procure and mainteine libertie, so all other matters sorted sutable, and followed a^ter accordingly.
Hippocrates and Epicides, when tidings came of the Tyrants death (which Hippocrates would faine have had concealed, and therefore flew the messenger that brought newes thereof) being

 forsaken of the souldiours, returned to Syracusa; supposing for the present, that to bee the safest course they could take. Where, because they would grow into no suspition, nor be noted to seek for some opportunitie and occasion of change and alteration in the State, first they presented themselves before the Pretours and Governours of the cittie, and so by their mediation, they had accesse to the Senate.
They gave out, that they had been sent from Anniball unto Hieronymus as unto a friend and confederate, and had yeelded obedience unto him, as they were willed by their owne Generall and Commander. Now their desire was, to return againe unto Anniball. But for as much as they might not trava^le in safetie, for the Romane forces, that ra^nged all over Sicilie, they craved a convoy and sufficient guard to conduct them, as farre as to Locri in Sicilie: assuring them, that by this small courtesie and defart of theirs, they should reape great thanks of Anniball, and come into high favour with him. The suite was soone obtained. For desirous they were, that those Cavaliers that used to lead the king, and were expert and skilfull besides in war, and there with needie and audacious, should bee sent away: but they made not so good speed to put this their desire in execution, as they should have done. For in the mean season, these young and lustie martiall men, and such as ever had conversed with the souldiours, went up and downe one while to them, another whiles to the fugitive straungers that were revolted, (who for the most part were sailers and sea men that came from the Romanes) yea, and sorted themselves with the basest and most abject persons of the Commoners, spreading tales, and whispering into their eares, sundrie suspitious matters of crime against the Senatours and great men of the Nobilitie, saying, that they plotted and practised closely under hand nothing else, but that Syracusa under  a colour of reconciliation and accord, should be reduced to the obedience of the Romanes: and then, the side and faction, and some few with them that are of counsell to renue the association, might bee lords, and tyrannize over the rest. By this meanes there flocked multitudes, everie day more than other, to Syracusa: whose eare were tickled, and itched still to heare such sunnises, and were apt ynough to give credite thereto. And they gave not onely Hippocrates and Epicides, but Andronodorus also good hope of an alteration, and a new world. For he (being at length overcome with the importunate suggestions of his wife, whoever put into his head, That now was the only time to usurpe and take upon him the rule of the State, whiles all things were troubled, and in a confused medley, upon their new and unknowne libertie; whiles the souldiours were presented in their way, to bee dealt with all, and dayly mainteined and fed out  of the kings eschequer; and whiles those captaines sent from Anniball, by reason of their acquaintance with the souldiours, were present to set forward, and further his designements) first therefore acquainted Themi^tius, who had married Gelo his daughter, with his complot: and after a few daies (full unadvisedly) imparted his mind also, unto one Aristo, an Actor of Tragedies, whom he used aforetime to make privie unto his other secrets. This Aristo was well borne, and descended of a worshipfull house, a man in good place and of honest reputation: and his profession (for among the Greekes it is reputed no matter of shame, to play either in Tragedies or Comedies) was no blot^ither to his birth, or disgrace to his calling: and therefore as one who made more reckning of his dutie to his country, than of private friendship, bewrayed and disclosed all the treason unto the Pretors. Who finding by good proofes and certaine evidences  that this was no forged and counterfet information, after consultation had with the auncients of the counsell, by their warrant and direction, set a gard of armed men about the dore of the Senate house, and so soone as Themistius and Andronodorus were entred in place, slew them outright. And when there began some uprore upon this fact, which in shew seemed very horrible and heinous (especially to all the rest that knew not the cause:) at length they appeased the tumult, and caused silence, and brought the enformer into the counsell house, that had detected the intended treason: who declared all things orderly in particular: namely, that this conspiracie was devised and sprung first from the mariage of Harmonia the daughter of Gelo, who was wedded unto Themistius: that divers auxiliarie souldiers of Affricanes and Spaniards, were appointed and provided to massacre the Pretours, and other principall citizens: that their goods were  promised unto the murderers to be ransaked and rifled: that besides, there was a band of mercenarie souldiours (such as were wont to be at a beck, and readie to execute the commaundement of Andronodorus) set in a readinesse, to seize the Island againe, and keepe it to his use. And when hee had laid every thing abroad in order, with all circumstances, what the practises were, and by whom they were to be performed and executed, and shewed before their eies most plainly,

the whole conspiracie^and namely, what persons and what forces should have beene emploied^ Then the whole bodie of the Senate were likewise verily persuaded, that they had deserved such an end, and were as justly murdered as Hieronymus. But without the counsell-house dore, the confused multitude, composed of all sorts of people, who were doubtfull of the matter, and knew not what to make thereof, cried out. And albeit they menaced and threatened before the entrie and porch of the Senate, yet at the sight of the dead bodies of the Conspiratours, lying before their face, they were affrighted and soone hus^^^so as with great silence they followed the whole bodie of the Commons to the publicke place of assemblie. Vnto whome, Sopater by order from the Senate, and his fellow Pretors, was commaunded to make an Oration.
Hee began formally to inveigh against Andronodorus and Themistius,Sapater his speech to the people of Syracus^. (as they that accuse men at the barre) and ripped up their former life past, charging them with all the wicked deeds  and impious facts, committed since the death of Hiero: For what (quoth he) did Hieronymus; nay what could he doe of himselfe, so long as he was but a child and stripling, and scarcely come all the while he lived, to have any haire on his face? His officers and guardians, were they that ruled all, and managed the kingdome at their pleasures, but so, as the blame and heavie load lay upon him. Who if they had perished either before Hieronymus, or at leastwise together with him, they had been but well ynough served. But they, who long ago had deserved to die, and for whom the gallowes had alreadie groned, ceased not still, after the death of the tyrant, to devise and plot new mischiefes, one in the necke of another. At the first, openly in the sight of the world, Andronodorus by shutting the gates of the Island, entered by way of inheritance upon the kingdome, and sought to seize in his owne right, as immediat heire apparent, upon those things that hee held  under the prince, only during his nonage. Afterwards, being betraied by them that were in the Island, and besieged round about by the whole citie (which was possessed fully of the Acradina) seeing, that in vaine he had attempted to be king by apert and open force; he sought meanes now to aspire thereto secretly, and by cunning sleights. Neither could hee bee so much as reclaimed and woon, by any favours and honors done unto him: who being himselfe a traitor to the freedome of the state, was notwithstanding advanced to be Pretour, among other redeemers of the libertie of their countrie. But no marvell it was (quoth he) that these men were of this haughtie spirit, and longed to bee Kings; for they had to their wives two princely dames, the daughters, one of king Hiero, and the other of his sonne Gelo.
At these words, the people from all parts of the assemblie, began to crie out with one voice, that neither of them both were worthie to live, nor any one besides of the kings stocke and linage ought to remaine upon the face of the earth. See the nature and disposition of the multitude. Either they serve basely, or rule prowdly. Libertie that is the meane betweene, they have neither the skill to despise with reason, or the grace to entertaine in measure. Now, there wanted not (ye may be sure, as at all times else) readie instruments and firebrands, to helpe forward, and kindle more anger, such, as seeing the Commoners distempered already, and bloudily minded of themselves, put them forward to murder and massacre. As it appeared then. For immediately, as the Pretors put up a bill, that all the kings stocke should be rooted out, and the whole line utterly extinguished: before in manner that it was all red out and published, it passed cleare, and was graunted. And presently there were sent certaine persons from the Pretours, that murdered Demarata and  Harmonia the daughters of king Hiero and Gelo, the two wives of Andronodorus and Themisti^^. Now there was another daughter of Hiero, named Heraclea, wife to Sosippus, who having ben sent as Embassador from Hieronymus, to king Ptolomeus, chose a life in voluntarie exile, and lived not with his wife. She having an inkling given her aforehand, and knowing that the murderers were comming also toward her, tooke her two daughters, virgines: and together, with their haire loose hanging downe their shoulders, and in other most poore array and rufull habit, able to have moved pittie and compassion, The pittifull words of dame Heracles. they were fled into a privat Oratorie or chappell unto their house-gods, to save themselves.
The mother seeing the murtherers, fell to entreating them most pitteously, and recommended unto them the late remembrance of her father Hiero, and her brother Gelo: Beseeching them not to suffer her (an innocent and guildesse person) to fare the worse, and be punished upon harred that was borne unto her nephew Hieronymus. As for me (quoth she) I reaped no good by his reigne and kingdome, unlesse it were the banishment and absence of my husband: and as by the life of Hieronymus, my fortune was not so good as my sisters; so after hee was murdred and dead, my cause is not so bad, nor like unto hers. Moreover,

 over and besides, in case Andronodorus had effected his designements, my sister should have ben a Queene, and reigned together with her husband: but as for me, I must have bene a subject and servant with the rest. Againe, if there were any messenger sent unto Sosippus, to report the death of Hieronymus, and the restitution of Saracose to libertie: who can make doubt, but that forthwith he would be embarked and take the seas, and returne againe into his countrey? But how much are men put besides their hope, and deceived of their expectation? And who would ever have thought, to have seene in a freed state his wife and children in danger to lose their lives? For wherein do we hinder the common libertie, or the course of lawes? What danger can come to any person from us, one desolate lone woman and in manner a widow, and two yong maidens living as orphans fatherlesse? And if it be said againe, that there was in deed no feare of hurt to  be imagined from us; but only the kings bloud and kinred was odious in the eyes of the people: Then quoth she, let us be sent away farre from Saracose and Sicilie, and confined over to Alexandria, the wife to her husband, the daughters to their owne father. But when they would neither give eare to her words, nor incline their hearts to pitie and compassion: then, because she would not spend longer time in vaine (for now she saw some of them drawing their swords forth) she gave over all intreating for her selfe, and be sought them instantly to be good yet, to the yong fully girles, and spare their lives, unto whom being of that age, even the very enemies in their heate of anger forbare to offer violence: and that seeing they were to be revenged of tyrants, they would not play the tyrants themselves, and commit that wickednesse, which they seemed to hate in others. Amid these words the murderers (sent from the Pretors) pulled her forth of the inward  and most secret place of the chappell,The tragicall murder of Lady Heraclea and her two daughters, yong virgins. and cut her throte: and when they had so done, they assayled and sell upon the maidens, besprent with the bloud of their mother: who for sorrow of heart and feare together, being past themselves and out of their wits, and as it were in a furious fit of frenzie, ranne against them, and gate out of the chappell: minding, if they could have escaped foorth and recovered the streete, to set the whole citie on an uprore. And so they shifted for themselves poore wenches, by running too and fro within the house, (which was not large and spatious) that for a good while they escaped amongst the thickest of so many armed men, and oftentimes avoided their reaches, and caught no hurt: yea and when they had caught hold of them, notwithstanding they were to strugle with so many hands, and those so strong, yet they wound away from them all: untill at length after they had received many a  wound, and filled every place with bloud, they fainted and sunke down, and yeelded up their innocent spirits. This murder, no doubt, was of it selfe piteous; but much more lamentable, by occasion of a present accident. For streight after, came a messenger with expresse commandement, to spare the women, and not to kill them: for that upon a sodaine the hearts of the people relented, and enclined to mercie. But when they heard that there was so quick dispatch made of execution, that neither they had time to bethinke themselves and repent, nor space to coole upon their heat, they fell from pitie and compassion, into an extreme fit of anger and choler. The multitude thereupon began to mutter and murmure, and called to have an election of Pretours in the roume of Andronodorus and Themistius (for they were both of them Pretours:) which new election was not like to fall out in the end to the good liking and contentment of the other Pretours  in place. So a day was set downe, and proclaimed for this election. At which time, it hapned that beyond all mens expectation, one from the farthest part of the assembly nominated Epicides: and then another from thence named Hippocrates. After which, the same voyces came thick and threefold still, so as it seemed the multitude would wholie goe that way. The people there assembled, were a confused sort intermingled as well of a number of souldiers, as of a companie of citizens and commoners: yea and many of them were strangers fugitives, shuffled among, such as rather than their life, desired a generall change and alteration. The Pretours at first dissimuled all, and would seeme to take no knowledge thereof: but thought it best to put off the matter to a farther day: yet overcome at last with the common accord and consent of the people: and fearing withall a mutinie and sedition, pronounced and declared the men aforenamed,  for Pretours. Neither would they, at first hand so soone as they were created, set that abroach which was in their mind and desire
to effect: notwithstanding they were displeased and discontented much, both for that there had bene embassadors dispatched unto Appius Claudius, about a truce for ten dayes: and also when it was obteined, that there were others addressed, to treat for the renewing of the auncient league with the Romanes.

At the same time (Ap.Claudius) the Romane Generall lay at Murgantia with an Armada of  100 gallies, waiting there to heare what was the event of the troubles which arose upon the murder of the tyrants: and how far-forth men would proceede upon this their new and unwonted libertie. And much about those dayes, when as the Saracosian Embassadours were sent from Appius, unto Marcellus now comming into Sicilia, Marcellus himselfe after he heard the conditions of peace, thought they would grow to some good agreement and conclusion in the end: and therefore sent other embassadours also to Saracose, personally to debate and conferre in the presence of the Pretours concerning the renewing of the league aforesaid. But by tha^ time, they found not the citie in the same quiet tune and peaceable state. For Hippocrates and Epicides, after newes came that the Carthaginian navie was arived and rid at anker under the bay ofP^rts L^ngobardo, or Cabs Pass^o. Pachynus, confidently and without all feare buzzed in the ^ares one while of the mercenarie souldiours, another while of the fugitive traitours, many false surmises against their brethren in office, and namely, that they went about to betray Saracose to the Romanes. But Appius began to keepe his Armada at anchor in the very mouth of the river, listening to know what hart and hope they of the contrary faction had, to effect that which they intended. Much credit was given (as it should seem) unto those slaunders and lewd suggestions: insomuch as at the first, the multitude ran to the water side in a great hurrey and tumultuous manner to hinder their landing, if haply they attempted it. In this troublesome confusion of all things, it was thought good, that the people should meete together to deliberate what was best to be done. In which assembly, whiles some drew one way, other haled and pulled another way, and were at the point to mutine and grow to asedition, Apollonides one of the principall and chiefe citizens made a speech to  very good purpose for preservation of the publicke peace,The Oration of Apollonides, to the people of Saracosse. and thus he said. Never was there any citie neerer, either to hope of assured safetie, or to feare of utter destruction, than this of ours at this present.
For if all would goe one way together, and with one accord either incline to the Romanes, or bend to the Carthaginians, there were not a citie under the cope of heaven, whose state were more happie and fortunate than ours. But in case we be distracted, and the Commonweale go divers waies, there would not be more bitter and cruell warre betweene the Saracosians and the Romanes, than among the Saracosians themselves: when within one and the same walls, there should be banding one against another, and each side have their forces, their armor, and their captaines of their owne. And therefore we ought of all hands to endevor what we can, that all may be of one mind and draw in the same line. As for the maine point now in question, Whether societie and alliance be the better and more commodious, the Romanes or the Carthaginians, is a matter of far lesse moment and importance than to be consulted and studied long upon. Howbeit, in choosing our friends and allies, we are to be directed bythe authoritie and act of Hiero, rather than of Hieronymus: and to preferre that amitie which we have tried for 50 yeares in much felicitie, above a friendship for the present unknowne, and sometime heretofore found unfaithfull. It maketh somewhat also, to resolve upon this course, that in case we should deny peace and alliance to the Carthaginians, we neede not presently go to warre with them: but with the Romanes we must out of hand make accoumpt either of peace, or els of hot warres. This speech of his, the lesse that it favoured of offactious partialitie and affection, the more auctoritie and sway it caried with it. And besides the deliberation of the Pretours and choise Senatours, the advise also of the martiall men was taken. And therfore the captaines of all their owne ensignes and companies, yea and the great commaunders of the auxiliarie forces of their allies were willed to fit in counsell together with them. When the matter had bene often debated, and muc
h contention and hot words passed betweene, at the last, because there appeared no colourable reason or cause to make warre with the Romanes, they agreed that a peace should be concluded, and that together with their embassadors, there should be others also from them sent to ratifie and confirme the thing.
There passed not many daies between, when out of the Leontines countrie there arrived certeine Oratours, to crave helpe and succour for the gard and defence of their marches. This embassage seemed to come very fitly and in good time, for to exonerate and rid the citie of the unruly  and disordered multitude, and likewise to send out of the way, their chieftaines and ringleaders. So Hippocrates the Pretour was commaunded to lead thither the fugitive straungers. Many also of the mercenarie souldiours, that were waged to helpe them in their warres, accompanied them: so as in all, the number amounted to foure thousand. This expedition and journey contented

 greatly as well the senders and setters of it out, as also the parties themselves that were sent foorth. For these of the one side had a good occasion and opportunitie now offred them, to contrive a chaunge in the state (the onely thing that so long they had desired) and those of the other, were right glad, that the sinke (as it were) of the cittie was now well scoured and voided away. But this was like the palliative cure of a sore, and a lightning for the present of a sick bodie: wherby it might soone after by relapse fall backe, as it were, into a recidive, and a worse disease and more daungerous than the other. For Hippocrates began at first to make rodes by stealth into the confines bordering upon the Romane Province, and there to wast and spoyle: afterward when Appius had sent a power of men to defend the frontiers of his confederates, hee-charged with his whole power upon that guard that was opposed against him, and flew many of them. Whereof,  when Marcellus was advertised, hee dispatched embassadours incontinently to Saracose, to charge them with the breach of peace: and to give them to understand, that there would never bee wanting some occasion or other of quarrell and warre, unlesse Hippocrates and Epicides were removed, and sent farre enough out of the way, not onely from Saracose, but also quite out of Sicilie. Epicides for feare least if hee remained present in the cittie, he might be charged and brought in question, for the fault and trespasse of his brother absent, or be wanting for his part, in the raising of new warre; went himselfe also in person into the Leontines countrie: and seeing them there forward enough of themselves, and provoked alreadie against the Romanes, began also to alienate and turne their harts from Saracose.
For in these termes he suggested and informed against the Saracosians: namely, how they had capitulated with the Romans, that all the cities and nations  which were under the kings, should be subject unto them, and within their jurisdiction: so as now they cannot be content (quoth hee) with their libertie, unlesse they rule also like lords and kings. I would advise and counsell you therefore, to send word unto them and give them to understand, that the Leontines likewise deeme it good reason, that they should themselves be free: in regard either that the tyrant was killed within the ground of their citie, or because the first alarme for libertie began there. For they leaving and abandoning the captaines there that followed the king, ran at once from thence to Saracose. And therefore they are (faith hee) to rase that foresaid article out of the instrument of the covenants, or not to accept at all of peace with that condition. Soon were the multitude persuaded here unto. And therfore when the embassadors of the Saracosians came to the Leontins, both to make complaint for killing of the Romans Corps de guard, and^  also to commaund peremptorily, that Hippocrates and Epicides should depart either to Locri, or to what other place they would rather chuse, so they went their waics and voided clean out of Sicilie they returned unto them this stout answere againe: that neither the Saracosians had any commission and warrant from them, to make peace with the Romanes in their name, neither would they bee tied and obliged to any confederacie made by others than their owne selves.
This answere the Saracosians made report of to the Romanes, and said plainly, that the Leontines were not under their jurisdiction, to be ordred and confu^ed by them and therefore, any thing comprised in the league with them notwithstanding, the Romanes might warre against them without breach of any covenant: and in that warre they would not for their parts, fail^ them, but doe their best: upon condion, that when they were once subdued^ they might be reduced againe under  their obedience, according to the covenant comprehended in the league. Wherupon Martellus with his whole power went forth against the Leontines, and sent for Appius also, to assaile them on the other side: and so hote were his souldiours in this service, and bare themselves so resolute, for anger that the guard was slaine, during the time that there was treatie of peace betweene, that at the very first assault they woon the cittie. Hippocrates and Epicides, after they saw the walls skaled, and the gates of the citie broken open, betooke themselves for their safetie, with some few into the castle, from whence by night they made a secret escape, and fled to Herbesus*
As the Saracosians marched from home with a power of eight thousand armed men, and were come forward, as far as to the river Myla, they met with a messenger, who told them that the citie Leontium was forced. They reported other newes besid^s as well lies as ^oths, one with  another, namely, that townsmen and soldiours indifferently without respect were (...) to the sword that ^e^ thought verily, there was not left one alive of fourteene yeares of age and upward, that the cittie was put to the sacke, and all the rich mens goods were given away. At this so fearfull and horrible news, the armie staied and went not forward. And when they all were greatly troubled,

their leaders Sosis and Diomenes, consulted what to do. This lowd lie, arose not upon nothing, but was occasioned by mistaking of a matter. For there were scourged and beheaded of fugitive traitours, to the number of two thousand. But of Leontines and other souldiours, there was not one hurt, after the cittie was lost. And every man had all his owne goods restored unto him againe: saving that onely which in the first hurlyburlie of a cittie newly woon, hapned to miscarie and perish. Howbeit upon this bare report, they neither could be induced to go forward to the Leontines, complaining and grieving that their fellow souldiours were so betraied and murdered, nor yet to abide there still, for to expect and heare more certeine tidings. The Pretours perceiving their minds disposed to revolt, and yet hoping that this mutinous fit of theirs would not continue long, in case the captaines and heads of their furie and follie were once rid out of the way, led the armie to Megara: and went themselves in person with a few horsemen toward  Herbesus, hoping to gaine the cittie by treason, whiles they all there were affreighted. But seeing that enterprise would not prevaile, they minded to use forcible meanes. The morrow after, they dislodged and raised their camp from Megara, purposing with all their forces to assaile Herbesus. Hippocrates and Epicides supposing this to be the only way for them, although at the first sight not the safest, (considering all hope besides was cut off) namely to put themselves into the hands of the soldiours, who were for the most part acquainted with them, and besides, upon the bruite of the execution and massacre of their fellow souldiours, throughly chafed, went out to meet the armie. The foremost ensigns in the forefront, hapned to consist of those six hundred Cretensians, who in the warres of Hieronymus had served under them, and received a favour and benefit at Anniball his hands. For being taken prisoners at Thrasymenus, among other auxiliaries that  came to aid the Romanes, they were set at large and sent away without ransome. Whom when Hippocrates and Epicides knew by their colours, habite, and fashion of their armour, they held out branches of olives and other veiles and tokens of suppliants, beseeching them humbly to receive them, and being once received, to vouchsafe to protect them, and not to deliver them into the hands of the Saracosians: by whom they should soon be yeelded unto the people of Rome, for to be murdered and cut in peeces. At this, they all cried alowd with one voice, and willed them to be of good cheere, for they should fare no worse than their owne selves. Vpon this communication the ensignes staied, and the armie stood still and marched not forward: but the generall captains wist not as yet what the cause might be of this stay. After the rumour was spred that Hippocrates and Epicides were come, and that all the hoast throughout by a generall applause seemed  to like well of their comming: the Pretours incontinently set spurs to horse, and rode forward apace to the forefront of the vantgard, demaunding of the Cretensians, what manner and fashion this was of theirs? and how they durst be so bold, as to parle and talke with enemies? and without license of their Pretours, to entertein them within their companies? And herewith they gave commandement, that Hippocrates should bee apprehended and bound sure with chaines. At which word the Cretensians set up such a crie, and the rest so aunswered it againe with the like, that it was well seene, in case they had proceeded forward as they began, they should have incurred themselves no small danger. And thus in great perplexitie, and feare of their owne lives, they commaunded to turne ensignes, and retire unto Megara, from whence they came; and dispatched messengers presently to Saracose, to signifie in what tearmes they stood. Hippocrates seeing  the souldiours given to be suspitious and readie to beleeve every thing, devised a cunning shift besides, in this manner. After he had sent out certein of the Cretensians to beset the waies betweene them and Saracose, he pretended that they had intercepted some letters from thence, which hee read unto the souldiours, and were in deed framed and indited by himselfe. The ^^nor of the letters ran in this forme. The Pretours of Saracose, to M. Marcellus their friend, greeting.
After these salutations and commendations premised, as the maner is, it followed written thus: You have done well and orderly, in sparing none at all of the Leontines. But all other mercenarie souldiours besides, are in the same Predicament: neither wil Saracose be ever in quiet, so long as any forraine aide be either in the cittie or in your armie. And therefore our advise and counsel is, that you would endevour to get them into your hands, who with our Pretours are encamped  before Megara, and by execution of them to deliver and set Syracusa free in the end.
The contents of these letters were not so soone read, but with such an outcrie and al'arme they ran to their weapons on all hands, that the Pretours amid this garboile, were fain to ride away as fast as they could gallop, toward Syracuse. But although they were fled, the mutinie neverthelesse

 continued and was not appeased: for the soldiors fell upon the Syracusians that were in the camp amongst them, and they had all drunke of the same cup, and not one escaped, but that Epicides and Hippocrates, came betweene, and opposed themselves against the multitude in this their furious rage, not upon any pittifull compassion that was in them, or regard of common humanitie; but because they would not cut themselves from all hope of returne: and besides, they were not onely desirous to have the souldiours themselves affectionate unto them and faithfull, and withall in steed of hostages: but also purposed, by this so great desert, first to gain and win unto them the kinsfolke and friends of those souldiours, and afterwards to oblige and bind them fast, by so good a pawne and gage, remaining still among them. And having good experience, with how small a puffe and gale of wind, the common people turneth every way, they suborned a soldiour,  one of them who was besieged within the citie of Leontium, to carrie newes to Syracusa, suting with those false tidings that were reported at the river Myla: yea, and to aver the same confidently upon his owne knowledge, and tell things that were doubtfull, as if they were most certain, and by himselfe seene and knowne: thereby to stirre up men to anger and indignation.
This fellow was not onely credited of the common multitude, but also being brought into the Counsell house, he greatly mooved the Senate: insomuch, as some of them, more light of beleefe than others, gave it out openly and said, That it was happie, that the avarice and crueltie of the Romans was thus discovered among the Leontines. And God blesse us from them here. For if they set foot once within Syracusa, they would commit the like outrages, yea, and worse too, a great deale, and more horrible; as they should find there greater matter to work upon, and to satisfie their  covetous and greedie appetite to the full. Whereupon, they agreed in generall, to shut the gates and to stand upon their guard, and defend the cittie. But they all feared not alike, nor hated the same persons. For the martiall men, in a manner every one, and a great part of the common people abhorred the name of the Romanes: the Pretours, and some few of the principall citizens, albeit they were in the huffe, and possessed with the false report aforesaid, yet they had more regard to provide for a mischiefe that was more imminent and neere, and readie presently to fall upon their heads. And now by this time Hippocrates and Epicides were come before Hexapylos. Within the citie, the kinsfolk and friends of those citizens which were in the armie, drew together in conventicles, conferred among themselves to set the gates open, and agreed to have the common countrie of them all, to be defended against the violence of the Romanes. Now, when one onely  wicker of Hexapylos was opened, and they readie to enter in thereat, the Pretours came upon them in the manner. And first they commaunded by word of mouth, and threatened them; after that, by vertue of their place and authoritie, they seemed to fright and terrifie them: and last of all, seeing nothing could prevaile, forgetting their owne dignitie and majestie of their calling, they fell to pray and intreat them, not to betray their countrie to those, who aforetime were the instruments and supposts of the Tyrant, and now the corrupters of the armie. But so deafe care gave all the multitude in this their rage and furious fit unto the Pretours, that they within; as well as without, set their hands to, by all forcible meanes to burst downe the gates, and so when they were all broken open, the armie was let in safe, and received within the Hexapylos. The Pretours fled for refuge with the youth and strength of the citizens into Acradina. The mercenaries,  the fugitives, and all the souldiours that were left in Syracusa (of them who served the king) joined to the armie, and augmented their forces. And so Acradina also, was upon the first assault woon). All the Pretours; but those that escaped by flight, and saved themselves in the mids of this hurrie, were slaine: and the night comming upon them, staied the massacre. The day following, all bondslaves were called to receive the cap, and made free: the prisons were set open, and the prisoners let goe at large. And this confused rable and multitude of all sorts, created Hippocrates and Epicides Pretours. And thus Syracusa, having for a short time libertie shining favourably upon it, fell backe againe into her old servitude.
When newes hereof came to the Romanes, incontinently they dislodged and removed the campe from Leontium; and marched directly toward Saracose. It hapned the same time that  the embassadors sent from Appius by the way of the haven, were embarked in a galeace of five banks of ores: but another galley of foure banks which was sent before, was not so soone entred into the mouth of the harbour, but it was taken: and the Embassadours hardly, and with much adoe escaped in the other. And now, the world there was growne to this passe, that no lawes of peace, no nor so much as the very laws of arms were observed, but broken clean: at what time as

the Romane armie lay in campe a mile and an halfe from the citie, at Olympium, the temple of  Iupiter.
For when it was thought meet to send Embassadours from thence, Hippocrates and Epicides with their followers encountred them without the gate, and charged them upon their perrill not to enter the cittie. The Romane Oratour alleadged and said, That he came not to proclaime warre against the Syracusians, but to bring aid and helpe, as well unto those, who having escaped out of the middest of the slaughter fled unto the Romane campe, as also unto them, who being kept under with fear, endure bondage and thraldome more miserable than banishment, yea and death it selfe. Neither will the Romanes (saith hee) put up that shamefull and cruell murder of their allies without due revenge. And therefore, if those persons who were fled for succour unto them, may returne home safely into their countrie: if the authors of that massacre above said, be delivered into their hands: and if the Syracusians may enjoy againe their libertie, together with  their lawes, there shall not need anyhostilities or warre. But in case these conditions bee not performed, they would persecute with fire and sword, all such as shall hinder and stand against the same, whosoever.
To this, Epicides framed his words in this wise. If (saith hee) yee had any message and commission, to parle with my brother and mee, wee would returne you an answere accordingly. In the meane while, yee were best be gone for this time, and returne againe when the citie and state of Syracuse shall be under their governance, unto whom yee were sent. As for war, if the Romanes thinke it good to deale that way, they shall find and know by experience, trie when they would, that it is one thing to assaile Syracusa, and another to set upon Leontium. And so leaving the Embassadors, he made the gates fast against them.
From this time forward, the Romans laid siege unto Syracusa, and began to beleaguer it both by sea and land at once. On the land side at Hexapylus, by water at Acradina, upon the walls whereof the sea beateth. And like as they wan the citie of the Leontines, by terrifying them at the first assault, and therfore distrusted not, but that they should force and enter this also, oneside or other, being so large and vast as it was, not compact, but built so scattering, one part farre asunder from another, they approched with all their fabrickes, engines, and ordinance of batterie against the walls. Which enterprise of theirs, so resolutely begun, and so hotely and forciblie followed, had sped well and taken effect, if one man at that time had not been in Syracusa. Archimedes was hee, a singular Astronomer. A rare man for contemplation and beholding the skie with the plannets, and other starres therein fixed: but a more wonderfull enginer, for devising  and framing of artillerie, ordinance, fabrickes, and instruments of warre, whereby he would with very little ado and at ease, checke and frustrate all the inventions which the enemies with so great difficultie had prepared for to give the assault. This cunning artificer and admirable workeman, had planted engines of all sorts, upon the curtaine of the wall, which stood on certaine hils, and those not of even height: and having for the most part, high places that yeelded hard accesse, and some other low againe, whereunto men might come on even and plaine ground, hee fitted and furnished every place accordingly. Now Marcellus from out of his gallies of five ranckes of oares, assaulted the wall of Acradina, which (as is abovesaid) is washed and dashed upon, with the sea. And from the other gallies, the archers, slingers, yea and the light armed darters (called Velites) whose javelins are of that fashion, that they be unhandsome to be launced backe againe  (by those that have not the cast and skil of it) so assailed the defendants, that they hardly suffered any one to stand upon the wals without hurt and danger. These, I say, kept their gallies far distant from the wall, because archers and darters had need of some space and compasse to launce and let drive their shor. But unto the gallies of five course of oares, there were adjoined other two of either side: for which purpose the oares within were taken away, that they might close larbourd to starbourd, and so be coupled one unto the other. And thus being rowed as one entire gallie, by the helpe of the utmost oares without forth, they carried upon them platformes of timber, framed with floutes and losts of plankes, and other engines and instruments within them to batter and shake the wals. Against this artillerie from the gallies, Avchimedes bestowed and disposed upon the walls counter-engines of sundrie sizes, some greater, some smaller. Against those  gallies that were furthest of, he weighed and discharged stories of exceeding maine weight, and those that were neerer, he annosed with lighter bullets, but those hee shot far thicker upon them. And last of all, to the end, that his owne citizens, might without taking harme, make a counterbatterie against the enemies, and so annoy them, he caused certaine barbacanes or loopeholes,

 almost a cubit deep, to be pierced through the wals, and to stand thick from the foot therof, to the parapet; and all to flank the enemie, through which ouvertures: they within shot closely against the enemies, some arrowes out of bowes, some quarrels out of scorpions and brakes, of meane and indifferent bignesse. And against those gallies, which approched more close and neer under the walls (because they would be within the shot, and that they within might carie and levell over them) he devised a crane or swipe to be planted aloft upon the wals, having at the one end, which hung over the sea, a drag or grappling hooke of yron like an hand, fastened thereto with a strong chaine: which tooke hold upon the proo of a gallie, and when the heavie counterpoise of lead at the other end, weighed it downe to the ground, and therewith drew with it the proo up on high, whiles it hung thus aloft in the aire, the gallie stood in a manner endlong upon the  poupe. And then the swipe being let go again all at once sodainly with a sway, dashed the gallie, tumbling (as it were) downe from the top of the wall, with such a swinge and violence against the water (to the exceeding feare of the marriners) that if it had fallen directly downeright upon the keele, yet needs it must have received good store of water into it. Thus all their provision for assault by the sea side, was deluded and made void: and then they turned their whole forces from thence, to give assault by land. But even that part of the wall likewise, was as wel furnished with all manner of engines and ordinance, provided at the great charge of Hiero, and by his careful forecast for many yeers together: but devised and framed by the artificiall cunning and skil only of Archimedes. Besides, the naturall situation of the ground was a great helpe: for that the rocke, upon which the foundations of the wall stand, is for the most part so steepe and bending forward, that  not only the shot levelled out of any engine, but also whatsoever was but rolled and tumbled down, with the very own weight and poise, came with a great force and violence upon the enimie. Which foresaid cause, made the assailants to have difficult climing up, and as unstedfast footing and keeping of their hold. Whereupon they went to counsell. And considering well, that all their attempts and enterprises were thus deluded and mocked by the enemie: it was thought good to give over assault, and only by long and continuall siege, to cut them off from all victuals both by land and sea. In the mean while Marcellus with one third part (welneere) of the armie, went forth in expedition, to recover againe those cities, which taking occasion upon these troubles, were revolted to the Carthaginians. And he gained Pelorus and Herbesus, which yeelded on their own accord. As for Megara, which he woon by assault, he rased it downe to the ground, and sacked it, to the  fearefull example of all the rest, and especially of the Saracosians.
And much about that time, Himilco also, who had a long time rid in the Bay of the Cape Pachynus with his Armada, disbarked and set a land at Heraclea (which they cal Minoa) 25000 footmen, 3000 horsemen, and 12 Elephants. He had not all this power of men when he lay with his fleet under Pachinus. For after that Hippocrates had taken and held the possession of Saracose, he went to Carthage: where, being sent unto both by embassadors from Hippocrates, and also by letters from Annibal (who moved him and made remonstrances, That now the time was come to recover Sicilie again with much honor and glorie: and being himselfe there present in person no bad sollicitor by word of mouth to further and follow the cause) he easily persuaded the Carthaginians and prevailed that as great a power both of horse and foot as might possibly be raised, should passe over into Sicilie.  Being arived at Heraclea, within few daies after Agrigentum was delivered up into his hands. And all other cities, which had banded and taken part with the Carthaginians, were put in so good hope to drive the Romans out of Sicilie: that even they at last who were besieged within Saracose, took hart unto them; and were so in their ruffe, that supposing part of their forces sufficient enough to defend their citie, they parted between them the charge and managing of the whole war in this manner: That Epicides should remaine behind for the guard and defence of the citie, and Hippocrates ioyne with Himilco, and warre jointly against the Romanes. Hee with 10000 foot, and 500 horse, set out by night: and passed betweene the Corps de guard, where none at all warded, and encamped about the citie Acerrae. As they were fortifying their campe, Marcellus came upon them as hee retyred backe from Agrigentum, possessed now by the adverse part: whether  he had made great hast, but in vaine, in hope to prevent his enemies, and get thither afore: but little thought he (and nothing lesse) than in his returne from thence, at that time and in that place, to meete with an armie of Saracosians that should make head against him. Howbeit, for feare of Himilco and the Carthaginians, whom he knew to be abroad, and with whom he was not able to make his part good with that power which he had about him, he marched as circumspectly

as he could, having his eye on every side, and led his army in good order of battaile against  all occurrences whatsoever might happen by the way. And so as good hap was, that carefull forecast and diligence, which he was provided with against the Carthaginians, served him in very good steed against the Sicilians. Finding them therefore busie in pitching their tents, without order, and skattred asunder, and most of them unarmed, he environed soone all the Infanterie that they had, and put them to the sword. But the Cavallerie after a slight skirmish begun, fled with their leader Hippocrates to Acrae. Marcellus after he had by this fight repressed and kept in the Sicilians, who were at hand to fall away and revolt unto the Romanes, returned to Saracose: and after some few dayes, Himilco joyned with Hippocrates, and encamped about eight miles from thence, upon the river Anatis.
Likewise about the same time or very neere, it hapned that 55 war-ships of the Carthaginians, under the conduct of Bomilcar, Admirall of the Armada, put into the great haven of Saracose out of the deepe and maine sea: and also the Romane fleete of thirtie gallies, with five ranks of ores, arived at Panormus, and landed the first legion there: and thus the warre was turned and diverted from Italie. So wholly seemed both nations, as well Romanes as Carthaginians, amused upon nothing now but Sicilie. Himilco making full accoumpt to prey upon the Romane legion which was set a land at Panormus, as they should come to Saracose; missed of the right way to meete with them: for he marched and led his power far within land higher in the countrey, but the legion coasted along by the sea side, accompanyed as it were with the fleete which flanked them: and came to Pachinus unto Appius Claudius, who with part of his forces went out to meet them on the way. But the Carthaginians made no long stay about Saracose. For Bomilcar having  small trust and confidence in his ships, considering that the Romanes were comming toward him with a fleete, and were twise as many in number: and withall seeing, that by sojourning there, he did no other good but with his companie empoverish and eate out his friends, spred and halfed up saile, and with a mery wind passed over into Affrick. Himilco also, who had dogged and followed after Marcellus in vaine as far as Saracose, to espie some good opportunitie and vantage to bid him battaile, before he joyned with a greater power: seeing that he was hereof disappointed, and the enemie lying about Saracose safe and secure, as well in regard of their fortifications, as their forces: because he would not spend any longer time to no purpose in sitting there still, to looke upon their allies how they were besieged, he dislodged and removed from thence: attending, wheresoever there were any hope and likelihood of revolt from the Romanes, thither tocome with his armie, and shew himselfe in person, to encourage and animate by his presence, those that favoured his part. And first he recovered Murgantia, where the Romane garison was betrayed by the inhabitants, and delivered unto his hands. Into which citie the Romanes had conveyed great store of corne, victuall, and provision of all sorts. Vpon this revolt, other cities also tooke hart unto them, and the Romane garisons were either thrust and driven out of the castles and fortresses, or els were treacherously betrayed, surprised, and destroyed.
The citie Aenna, seated upon an high hill, and on every side inaccessible, as it was by naturall situation of the ground imprenable, so it had a strong garison within the castle, and a captaine of that garison, one, that was not so easy to be compassed and over-raught by deceitfull traines. His name was Pinarius, a wittie man, and hardie withall, who reposed more trust in his owne diligence  to prevent, that he might not possibly be deceived, than in the truth and faith of the Sicilians. And at this time more than ever before, he stood upon his gard, and tooke heedful care of himselfe and his charge, by occasion that he heard of so many treacheries and treasons, so many revolts of cities, and massacres of garisons: and therefore as well by day as night, he looked that the castle was well provided and furnished of good watch and ward continually, and the souldiers never departed from their armor nor their appointed place. Which when the chiefe citizens of Aenna perceived, who already had covenanted with Himilco, and promised to betray the fort and the garison: and saw that the Romane captaine was so wary, that he lay not open unto the opportunitie of any fraudulent and guilefull course, they resolved by apert and open meanes to effect this their designed enterprise. They alleaged therefore unto Pinarius, that the citie and castle  both, ought to be in their power: since that they entred into league and amitie with the Romanes as free men, and were not yeelded as slaves to be kept in duresse and prison. Reason would therefore, and meete it was (as they thought) that all the keyes of the gates were delivered unto them. With good and trustie allies, their owne faith and truth is the surest bond. And no doubt, the

 people and Senate of Rome would con them greater thanke, and esteeme more deerely of them, if so be they of themselves not by constraint but of willing mind, would abide and continue in their sound allegeance and fast friendship. Pinarius made answere againe, That he was by his generall placed there, captaine of the garison: at his hands he received the keyes of the gates, and the Constableship of the castle, and the same to hold and keepe neither at his owne will, nor at the pleasure of the men of Aenna, but at his disposition, who sealed him his commission. Now for a captaine to abandon his fort (quoth he) is a capitall crime among the Romans, by vertue of a law, which our fathers themselves have confirmed, even by the exemplary punishment and death of their owne children, who have transgressed the same. And seeing the Consull Marcellus is not far off; ye may if it please you, send your embassadours unto him, of whom you may be certified,  under whose power, commandement, and government I am. Tush, say they, we will never send unto him. But if words and reasons may not prevalle, we will worke some other meanes to recover our libertie againe. Then quoth Pinarius to them,Pinarius his speech to his souldiours. If ye thinke much to addresse your messengers to the Consull, yet do me this favour, as to call a common counsell of the people for my sake, that I may know whether these demaunds proceede from some few, or from the whole bodie of the citie. So it was accorded and agreed, that a generall assemblie should be proclaimed against the morrow. Then Pinarius after that he was departed from this parlie, returned into the fortresse, and calling his souldiers together, spake unto them in this wise. I suppose, ye have heard alreadie (my souldiers) in what sort the Romane garrisons have, these dayes past, bene betrayed and murdred by the Sicilians. That treacherie, hitherto ye have avoided and escaped; first and principally  through the goodnesse of thegods: next and immediatly by your owne valour and prowesse, and by continuall watch and ward, standing in your armor both day and night. And I would to God ye might passe as well the time to come, without falling into this hard choyse, either to endure and suffer some horrible mischiefe: or to execute and commit a fearefull example of crueltie. This intended treason of theirs, hath bene carried and conveyed closely and cautelously all this while, and seeing they cannot as yet, meet with any advantage to surprise us, they would seem now openly and without dissimulation, to demaund for to have all the keies of the gates under their hands. Which we should not so soon part with and render unto them, but presently Aenna would turne to the Carthaginians, and more cruelly should we heere be murdered and hewen in peeces, than the garrison was at Murgantia. Much a do I had to obtaine of them respite of this one  night, to take further counsell: that I might advertise you of the present danger, wherin both I and you stand. To morrow morning by day light, they purpose to hold a solemne assembly of the people, and to make a speech unto them, to accuse me, and to stirre them up against you. And to morrow is the day, that the citie Aenna shall overflow either with the bloud of you, or of the inhabitants. And be yee well assured, that as ye shall loose all that you have, if they surprise you: so in case you prevent them and begin the fray, there shall no perill at all betide you. Looke who first laieth hand on his sword and draweth it, he shall carie away the victorie cleer. Therfore ye must beethere, prest in your armour, and attentive to expect a signall from me. I my selfe will bee present in the assembly, and with parling and debating, temporise and draw out the time, untill ye be all in readinesse and every thing in order. And so soone as I shall give you a signe with my  gowne, then let me heare you set up an outcrie, then let me see you fall upon the multitude: down with them and spare not, and put them all to the sword. See in any case there be not one of them escape your hands and remaine a live, from whom yee may feare any harme, either by fraud or force. And now I beseech thee o Dame Ceres, and thy daughter Proserpina, and all other gods in heaven above, or in hell beneath, who inhabit this cittie, these holy lakes and sacred groves, wherein yee are honoured and worshiphed, to vouchsafe to be propice and favourable unto us; in case wee enter into this action and enterprise, for the avoiding of treacherie intended against us, and not to offer mischiefe unto other: and not otherwise. I would use more words unto you my friends and souldiours, for to animate and encourage you, if it were that you had to deale with men in armes: but since they are naked, unarmed, and unwarned, you shall kill and sley them  at your pleasure, and satisfie your selves with their bloud. And to the end thatyou need not feare any harme from Himilco and the Carthaginians, loe the Consull himselfe lieth encamped neere at hand. After this exhortation; they were dismissed, to take their refection and rest. The next day, they were bestowed in sundrie parts of the cittie, some to beset all the streets, others to stop the passages and the waies against the townsmen, that they might not escape. But the most of

them stood upon and about the Theatre, and were nothing suspected, as being used heretofore  to behold and see the assemblies of the people. The Romane captaine Pinarius, was by the magistrates brought forth and presented before the people where hee pleaded, That it lay not in his hands, but in the power and authoritie of the Consull, to dispose of that which they demanded: and he iterated for the most part, the same allegations that he shewed the day before. At first they began gently, some few by litle and litle: afterwards more and more of them, required him to deliver up the keies; and so consequently all with one voice, charged and commaunded him so to do: and when hee seemed to make some stay and deferrethe matter, they menaced and threatned fiercely, yea, and seemed as if they would no longer for beare, but proceed to extreame violence. Then the captaine made a signe with his robe, according to the former agreement and with that, the soldiers who had their eies upon him, waitingwistly for the signall and were readie for execution, set up a lowd crie and ran some from aloft, upon the multitude assembled over against them; others stood thicke at every corner of the Theatre, where the people should go forth, and opposed themselves against them. Thus the men of Aenna, shut up and penned within the theatre, wer massacred and lay tumbled one upon other; not they onely that were killed, but such also as fled one over anothers head: the sound fell upon the wounded, the quick upon the dead, one with another, by heapes. Then there was running from thence sundrie waies, and as if the citie had bin taken upon assault by the enemie, there was nothing but murdering and flying away in every place. And as hote and furious were the soldiers in the execution of this unarmed multitude (whom they judged worthily and justly to be killed) as if like danger presented unto them, or choller raised in set battel, had provoked them therto. Thus Aenna was held still for the Romanes by this means: were the  deed simply ill, or by circumstance needful and necessarie; Marcellus misliked not of the fact, and granted the pillage of the citizens of Aenna to the soldiers: supposing that the Sicilians throghly frighted by this fearfull example, wold betray no more garisons. The calamitie and hard fortune of this citie, (standing, as it did, in the very hart of Sicilie) was in one day divulged and noised throughout the Iland, from one end to the other. And otherwise, a famous and renowned town it was, either for the natural situation so exceeding strong or because all places in it, were accounted sacred and holy, in remembrance of Proserpina; who in times past left her footing and traces there, at what time as she was stollen away and ravished [by Pluto.] Now it was generally thought by the Sicilians, that this cursed and detestable massacre, had defiled and polluted not onely the habitations of men, but also the temples of the gods: whereupon even they likewise, who stood but doubtfull  and indifferent before, fell now away from the Romanes, and turned to the Carthaginians.
Then Hippocrates retired to Murgantia, and Himilco to Agrigentum: who were sent for, by the conspiratours and traitors within Aenna, and approched with their forces, but to no purpose. Marcellus returned to the Leontines countrie: and after hee had brought into the campe corne and other victuales, and left there a mean guard, hee presented himselfe to the siege that lay before Saracose. And when hee had sent Appius Claudius to Rome to sue for the Consulship, hee commited the charge in his roume of the armada there, and the old leaguer unto T. Quintius Crispinus. Himselfe erected and fortified his wintring harbours five myles from Exapylos, at a place which men call Leontia. And these were the affairs of Sicilie unto the beginning of winter.
In the same summer, the warre began likewise with king Philip, which long before had bene  suspected. For there came Embassadours from Oricum to M. Valerius the Pretour, Admirall of the fleet, for the defence of Brundusium, and the sea coast therabout, of Calabria, and made report that Philip first assaied to win Apollonis, and was come up the river with one hundred and twentie light gallies, or foists with two rankes of ores against the streame: and afterwards, seeing hee could not effect his purpose so speedily as hee hoped, privily by night hee approched with his armie to Oricum: and that the cittie, situate upon a plaine, neither strongly fenced with walls, nor well manned with souldiours, ne yet furnished with armour and munition, was at the first assault surprised and woon. And as they recounted these newes, so, they besought him to graunt aid and succour: and to make head against this undoubted enemie of the Romanes, either by land, or forces at sea, and to chase him away from them: who for no other reason were by him assailed, but because they were neer neighbors to Italie. M. Valerius leaving the guard of that place to T. Valerius his Lieutenant generall, with a fleet of ships well rigged, furnished, and appointed; and having embarked these souldiours (which the gallies for war would not receive) in the merchants ships of burden, arrived at Oricum on the second day after: and finding that citie

 kept with a small and slight garrison, which Philip when he departed from thence, had left there, recovered it without much resistance. Thither repaired unto him Embassadous from Apollonia, who brought word that they were besieged, because they refused to revolt from the Romanes: and were not able to hold out any longer against the forcible attempts of the Macedonians, unlesse a garrison of Romanes were sent unto them. Hee promised to effect whatsoever they desired, and so shipped a thousand elect and choise souldiours in gallies, and sent them to the mouth of the river, under the conduct of a captaine of Allies Naevius Crispus, an industrious man and an expert souldiour. He having landed his men, and sent the gallies backe to Oricum (from whence hee came) to the rest of the armada, conducted his souldiours higher in the countrie, farre from the river side, by a way that was not beset nor held by the kings forces: and in the night season,  unwares to all the enimies, entred the citie. The day following they rested, only the captain tooke a survey of the youth and able men of Appollonia, of their armor and the munitions and forces of the citie. When hee had seene and perused all, thereupon hee was well appaied and encouraged to fight, and wit hall, hee had learned by the escoutes and spies, how retchlesse, ydle, and negligent the enemies were without. So at midnight hee went forth of the cittie without any noise, and entred the campe of the enemies so carelesly guarded as it was, and lying so open: that by credible report, there were above one thousand men gotten within the trench and rampiar, before that any one was ware therof: and if they had held their hands and not fallen to killing, they might have passed on still even as farre as to the kings pavilion. But by reason that they slew the warders next the gates, the enemies were raised: whereupon, they were all so frighted and terrified, that  not onely there was never a souldiour tooke weapon in hand, and went about to repulse the enemie out of the campe but even the king himselfe, halfe naked as he was, and newly wakened out of his sleepe; clad in simple apparrell, scarce decent for a common souldiour, much lesse ywis for a king, was faine to run toward the river side to his ships. Thither also the other multitude fled disordered in heapes. There were not many under three thousand, either slaine or taken prisoners in the campe. Yet there were more by oddes of the enemies taken, than killed. In the rifling of the campe, the Apollonians met with Catapults and Balists, and other engines provided for the assault of the cittie, which they conveighed all to Apollonia, to serve for defence of their walls against the like occasion of needfull service. All the bootie besides of the campe was graunted unto the Romanes.
 Tidings hereof being come to Oricum, M. Valerius presently set forth the Armada as far as to the mouth of the river, that the king might not flie away and escape by sea with his ships: wherupon Philip distrusting his power as well by sea as shore, and doubting he was notable to match the Romanes, drew up some of his ships to land, setfire upon the rest, and so by land went into Macedonie, with a great part of his souldiors disarmed and spoiled. The Romane fleet wintered at Oricum with M. Valerius.
The same yeere in Spaine the affairs went variably on both sides. For before that the Romans passed over the river Iberus, Mago and Asdruball defeited a mightie host of Spaniards, so as, all the farther part of Spaine had fallen from the Romanes, but that P. Cornelius made hast to transport his armie over Iberus, and came in good time to settle the wavering and doubtfull minds of the  allies. At the first, the Romans encamped at Chaslian hatit:Castrum Altum, a place memorable for the death of great Amilear. The castle was well fortified, and thither afore, they had conveied corne. But because all those quarters thereabout were full of enemies, and sundrie times their Cavallerie had charged the Romane footmen, and gone cleere away without any harme, whereby there had ben slain at times upon a 2000 of them, which either made small hast away, and staied behind, or straggled loosely over the fields: the Romans departed from thence, neerer unto places of more securitie and peace, and fortified themselves in campe upon the mount of Victoria. Thither earne Cn. Scipio with all his forces, and likewise Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, the third captaine of the Carthaginians, with a full armie. And they all encamped beyond the water, over against the for^ of the Romanes abovesaid. P. Scipio, accompanied with certaine light armed souldiors, was gone  out closely to discover and take view of the places thereabout howbeit, nor so covertly, but hee was espied by the enemies, and (no doubt) they had put him to a shrewd foile in the open plaine champion, but that hee tooke a little hill thereby for his vantage. Where hee was environned and beset round about: but by the comming of his brother Cneus, he was delivered out of that daunger.

Castulo, a famous and strong citie in Spaine, and so neere linked in affinitie to the Carthaginians, that Anniball from thence maried his wife, raunged to the Romanes. The Carthaginians came against Illiturgum, and began to assault it, because a garison of the Romanes lay there: and like they were to be maisters of the towne, by occasion especially of a great dearth and scarcitie of victuals within. But Cn. Scipio for to relieve his friends and the garison, went out with a legion lightly appointed without cariages, and marching betweene the two camps of the enemies, skirmished with them, slew many of them, and entred the citie. The morrow after, he sallied out, joyned in fight with the enemie, and sped as well: so as in both battailes there were slaine of them, above twelve thousand in the place, more than ten thousand taken prisoners, and 36 militarie ensignes caried away. Thus the siege brake up at Illiturgum. After this, the Carthaginians began to lay siege unto Bigerra (a citie also confederate with the Romanes.) But Cn. Scipio at  his comming raised that siege without any conflict. Then the Carthaginians from thence went forward against Munda, and the Romanes followed them thither streight after. There they encountred together, and fought a set battaile with banners displayed, for the space welneere of foure houres. And as the Romanes bare themselves bravely, and had gotten the better, and were at point of the victorie, the retreat was sounded, by occasion that Cn. Scipio was hurt fore in his thigh with a barbed javelin, and the souldiers about him were greatly afraid, that the wound was deadly. But no doubt, if it had not bene for that stay and hinderance, the very camp of the Carthaginians might that day have bene forced. For not only the souldiers, but the Elephants also were driven already so farre as the trench, and even there upon the very banke, 39 of them were sticked with darts and pikes. In this battaile like wise, were killed (by report) twelve thousand  men, almost three thousand taken prisoners, and 57 militarie ensignes woon. Then the Carthaginians retyred back to the citie Aurinx, and the Romanes followed upon them, because they would give them no time to rest and breath themselves after their fright. Where Scipio being brought into the field in a litter, gave them battaile the second time, and got the victorie cleere: but sewer of the enemies were slaine by the one halfe than afore, because there were not so many in number left to fight. But (as they are a nation given naturally to renew warre, and to be ever fighting, and can not give over) they soone repaired and made up all their forces. For Asdruball (...) sent his brother Mago, to levie and gather new souldiours: whereupon they tooke fresh hart againe to try another field. These, being for the most part other souldiours (new come) fought as it were in revenge, and to uphold that side which in few dayes space had so often taken the foyle, and demeaned themselves as couragiously as they before, and sped as untowardly. For there were slaine of them above eight thousand, not many under one thousand taken captives, with militarie ensignes 58. In rifling of them, there was found very much spoile of the Gaules, as rings of gould, carkanets, colars, and bracelets great store. Over and besides, two great lords or princes of the Gaules, whose names were Moenicaptus and Civismarus, were slaine outright in that conflict. Eight Elephants taken alive, and three killed.
Now when as the affaires in Spaine went thus fortunately with the Romanes, they began at length for very shame to thinke of Saguntum, a towne that was the cause of all these warres, and had now five yeares already bene in the hands and possession of the enemie. Whereupon by force of armes they recovered it, drave out of the towne the garison of the Carthaginians, and  restored it againe to the auncient inhabitants, as many as remained alive, and had escaped these broiles of warre. As for the Turdetanes, who were the occasion of the warres betweene the Saguntines and the Carthaginians, they subdued them, and brought them under their subjection, sold them in port sale, and destroyed their citie utterly. These were the atchievances in Spaine during the time that Q. Fabius and M. Claudius were Consuls.
At Rome, when the new Tribunes of the commons were once entred into their office, presently L. Metellus one of the Tribunes aforesaid, arrested the Censors P. Furius, and M. Attilius, peremptorily to make their apparance and answere before the people. These Censors had taken from him being Treasurer the year before, his horse of service allowed him by the citie, cassed and displaced him out of his Tribe, deprived him of libertle to give his voice, and made him Aerarius, and all, for being a partie with them at Cannae, who complotted to abandon Italie. But by the meanes and mediation of the other nine Tribunes, they were discharged: for they would not suffer, that the Censors should come to their answere whiles they were in office. And the death of one of them, namely P. Furius, was the cause that they could not accomplish the sessing and numbring

 of the citizens. And then M. Attilius surrendred up his Magistracie. Qu. Fabius Max. held the solemne assembly and parliament of the people for the election of Consuls, wherein were created Q. Fabius Max. the Consul his sonne, and T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time, both absent. For Pretours, there were elected M. Atilius, and with him, they who at that time were Aediles of the chaire, to wit, P. Sempronius Tuditanus, Cn. Fulvius Centimalus, and M. Aemylius Lepidus.
This yeare, as it appeareth in old Records, were the Stage-playes first set out by the Aediles of the chaire, and continued foure dayes. This Aedile Tuditanus aboue named was he, who at Cannae (when all besides him for feare were astonied, in that wofull calamitie) brake forcibly through the mids of the enemies, and escaped. When Q. Fabius the old Consull had  finished the Election, then the new Consuls Elect were sent for, to repaire unto Rome, and they entred their Magistracie. Then they assembled the Senate for to consult and take order for the warre, for the provinces as well their owne, as those that were under the Pretours: also concerning the armies, and the disposition of every charge and place of commaund. So the provinces and armies were divided in this wife: The warre with Anniball, wheresoever it fell out, was committed to the managing of the Coss, with the charge of one armie, which Sempronius himselfe had before under his conduct: and of another, commaunded by Fabius the Consull. And those were two legions. M. Aemylius the Pretour, whose lot it was to have the jurisdiction over the foreiners, had committed his auctoritie unto his Colleague Atilius, the Pretour of the citizens of Rome, that he might governe the province about Luceria, and those two legions, over  which Q. Fabius now Consull, had the commaund, whiles he was Pretour. To Sempronius the Pretor, befell the province of Ariminum. To Cn. Fulvius was allotted Suessula, with two legions likewise: so as, Fulvius should have the leading of the legions of citizens, and Tuditanus receive his from M. Pomponius. The government of the forein provinces continued still in the former deputies. M. Claudius ruled Sicilie, so farre as the dominion of king Hiero extended: and Lentulus the Viz-Pretour, had the charge of the old province. T. Octacilius was high Admirall of the navie, without any new supply or augmentation of forces. M. Valerius was employed in Greece and Macedonie, with one legion, and the armada which he had before. Q. Mutius was L. Deputie in Sardinia, having under him the old armie, consisting of two legions. And C. Terentius had the administration of the affaires in Picenum, with that one legion which long time he had bene  captaine of. Moreover, it was decreed and agreed upon, that there should be mustred and enrolled two new legions of citizens, and twentie thousand men besides levied of allies and associates. With these captaines and these forces abovesaid, they provided for the defence and maintenance of the State and Empire of Rome, against many warres at once, either in hand alreadie, or suspected shortly. The Consuls having enrolled two legions of citizens, and chosen a supplie to make out the rest, before that they set foote out of the citie, procured the pacification of the gods, for the fearefull and prodigious tokens that were reported. For the wall and gates of Rome were blasted and smitten with lightning from heaven: and likewise the temple of Iupiter at Aricia. Other vaine objects and illusions also of the eyes and eares, which men imagined they saw and heard, were beleeved for truthes. Namely, there appeared in the river of Tarracina  certain resemblances and shewes of gallies, whereas in deede there were none such. And in the temple of Iup. Vicilinus, which standeth in the territorie of Cossa, there was heard; forsooth, rustling of armour: and the river of Amiternus seemed to run with bloud. When satisfaction was made for these strange signes, the gods pleased, and all well againe, according to the direction set downe by the Priests and Prelates, then the Consuls set forward in their expedition, Sempronius into Lucania, and Fabius into Apulia. Where, it so fell out, that Fabius the father repaired into the camp at Suessula, as Lieutenant and assistant unto his sonne. And when Fabius the yonger went forth tomeete him, and his sergeants or huishers marching afore, said not a word to Fabius the father, nor put him aside to give way, for very reverence of his person, (such a majestie he caried) the old man rode forward, and passed by eleven of the said Lictors with their  bundels of rods. Then the Consull commaunded the Serjeant that was next himselfe to do his office: and with that, the said huisher called upon old Fabius, to alight from his horseback: and at last, as he set foot a ground: I did all this but to try quoth he, my sonne, whether you knew well that you were a Consull or no.
There came that night secretly to the Consull while the camp lay there, one Cassius Attinius

an Arpinate, with his three bondslaves, promising, that if hee might have a good reward for his  service, he would betray Arpos into his hands. Fabius then proposed this matter unto his counsell, to be debated off. Some were of opinion, that Altinius was to be whipped and put to death, fugitive renegate and false knave as he was: a common enemie, and a dangerous to either part, and playing with both hands, like a double-hearted hypocrite. Who first, after the overthrow at Cannae (as if hee might turne with the wheele of fortune, and goe from his woord and faithfull promise, and change ever as (he changeth) raunged himselfe unto Anniballs and by his example, drew with him Arpos to revolt and rebell: now, after that he seeth the Roman estate to rise again and hold up head (and that, beyond his hope, and contrary to his desires) he would play the villain and turne-coat againe, and come with a new practise of a more shamefull treason than before: as if trecherie andfalshood were of the nature and qualitie of a judgement passed in Septenivirall  court: and as if he might be allowed to carrie two faces under a hood, and alterevery houre. Faithlesse friend, that he is, not to be trusted, and slipperie enemie, not to be regarded. A good deed it were, that together with that same traitour of Falerij, and the other of king Pyrrhus, hee made a third, and were punished accordingly for exemplarie justice, to teach all rogues and renegates hereafter, how they run from their lords and maisters. On the other side, old Fabius (the Consuls father) replied againe and said, That men now adaies had forgotten how to make difference of seasons, and in the very heat and middest of warres, reasoned and gave their opinion and censure of every thing and person, as in a free time of open peace: when as indeed, wee are to thinke, consider, and deliberate of this point, that (if possible it might bee) no more of our allies revolt from the people of Rome, rather than invite and incite them thereto: and after one is  started aside, and upon repentance returned againe to the auncient amitie, to fall a reviling and rebuking of him, and bitterly to say, that he deserveth to be made an example to all others. For if it may be lawfull for one to turne from the Romanes, and held unlawfull to returne again unto the Romanes, no man need doubt, but shortly the Romane Empire will bee forsaken of all her consederates and allies, and we shall see within a while all the citties in Italie linked and consedered in fast league and friendship with the Carthaginians. And yet (quoth hee) I am not the man, that thinketh Altinius worthie to bee trusted in any thing for all this, but I would take a meane course and middle way betweene both extremities. My opinion is therefore, that for the present he should be taken neither for enemie nor friend, but commaunded to ward, and to have the libertie of a prisoner, and only be kept forthcomming in some confederat and trustie citie, not far from  the campe, during the time of the warre. And when the warre is once finished and ended, then I hold it good to deliberate and consult, whither that his former revolt hath deserved more punishment, than this his present returne meriteth favour and grace. Every men liked well of this advise of old Fabius, and gave their assent. So he was bound with chaines, and both himselfe and his companie delivered over and put in custodie, and a good round summe of gold, which he then had brought with him, was by commandement reserved for his use. At Cales he made his abode: where all the day time he used to walk at libertie, with his keepers following him, but in the night they kept him close prisoner. But at Arpi, where his home was, they of his own house began first to misse him, and seeke for him: afterwards, when it was noised throughout the whole citie, that he was out of the way, and could not be found: the fame hereof caused a tumult, for the losse of a  principall person as hee was, thus revolted to the enemie. And for feare of an alteration in the State, presently the newes thereof was sent to Anniball. Who was nothing offended thereat, both because long asore he had the partie himselfe in jelousie and suspition, as one neither fish nor flesh, a man of no credit, and hardly to be trusted: and also for that he found a good occasion and quarrell to seize upon the goods of so rich and substantialla citizen, and to make sale therof. But to the end, that the world might thinke, that hee was more angrie against his person, than greedie of his substance, he joined with crueltie, a grave course also of judiciall severitie, that the one might serve as a fuile to give lustre to the other. For having sent for his wife and children into the campe, first he examined them straitly, for to know whether he was fled, and what store of silver and gold he had left behind him at home in his house: and when he had learned ynough of  them touching every particular, and as much as he desired, he burnt them quicke to ashes.
Fabius being departed from Suessula, purposed the first thing that hee did, to assaile Arpi. Where he lay encamped a mile from the town: and after hee had well viewed by neere approch, the situation of the cittie, and considered the wall, looke where hee saw it was most strong

 and sure, and therefore guarded most slightly and negligently, there especially he purposed to give the hotest assault. And when he had sufficiently provided and got together all ordinance and engines, requisite for the batterie of cities, he made choise of the most hardie and valiant Centurions of the whole armie, and set over them certaine Tribunes and marshals, valourous and doubtie goodmen, and appointed unto them a regiment of sixe hundred souldiours (for so many he thought sufficient for the present service) with direction and commaundement, that when the trumpet sounded the reliefe of the fourth watch, they should bring skaling ladders to that place aforesaid. Now there stood a gate low and narrow, answering to a street not much used and frequented, by reason that quarter of the citie was not inhabited, but stood void. That gate hee gave them order first to scale and climbe over, and then to goe forward on the wall, and from with-in-forth  to breake downe the barres, and levell the said gate, and when they were maisters of that quarter of the citie, then to wind the horne, and give signall to the rest of the forces for to approch and come hard to the towne, saying, That he would have all things in readinesse, and in good order. This direction was performed accordingly with great diligence, and that which was thought and feared, would have been an hinderance and let unto them in the action, was the onely thing which helped them most, that they were not descried. And that was a smoking shower of raine that began after midnight, which caused the warders and watchmen to quit their standings, forsake the Sentinels, and to flie into the houses for covert. The first noise of the storme pouring downe with such force, made, that the rumbling of the souldiours could not bee heard, as they were breaking downe the gate; and as it grew after to raine more softly, and so kept still at one,  it sounded gently and sweetly in their eares, untill it brought a good many of them fast asleepe. Now after they had seized the gate, the marshals gave order, That the Cornettiers should be bestowed in that void street aforesaid, distant equally asunder, and to wind their hornes, for to waken and raise the Consull. Which being done, according as it was before agreed, the Cos. commaunded the standards and ensignes to be brought forth, and somewhat before day light, entered at the said broken gate into the citie. With that, the enemies at length began to rouse themselves, for now the shower and storme was past, and the day approched. There was a garrison in the citie at hand of five thousand of Anniball his souldiours, armed and well appointed: and the Arpines of themselves were 3000 strong. Those the Carthaginians put in the forefront, as a forlorne hope, and opposed them against the enemie, for feare of some trecherous pranke  that they might play behind their backes. First they began to arraunge themselves to fight in the darke, blind, and narrow lanes. For the Romanes had filled and taken up not onely all the streets, but also the houses that were next the gate, to the end, they might not be gauled with shot, and wounded from aloft. Some Arpines and Romanes fell at length to meet, to take knowledge and acquaintance one of another, and so began to commune and talke together. The Romanes asked what the Arpines meant to rebell; for what offence and harme given of the Romanes, and for what desert and benefit received from the Carthaginians, should they (being naturall Italians) maintaine warre, for Aliens, straungers, and barbarous nations, against the Romanes their old friends and auncient allies; and so to bring Italie in subjection to Affricke, to do homage and fealtie, yea and to become tributarie, and to pay pension unto it? The Arpines excused and cleered  themselves, saying that they (simple men, and ignorant of all things) were bought and sold by their great rulers and principall cittizens, and lived in manner as captives and slaves under the commaund of some few persons, that might do all. Vpon this beginning, more and more of them grew to parling and conference. At length the Pretour of Arpi himselfe, was by his own people and citizens brought and presented before the Consull: where, after faithfull promise passed, betweene the ensignes and the battailes; the Arpines immediatly bent their forces on the Romanes side aginst the Carthaginians. The Spaniards likewise (who were not many under one thousand men) after they had capitulate and agreed with the Romane Consull, nothing but this one article, That the garison of the Carthaginians might be sent forth and passe away safe without harme: came with their colours to the Consull. Then all the gates were set open for the Carthaginians  to depart: and being sent away upon safe conduct, without any harme at all or dammage unto Anniball, arrived at Salapia. Thus Arpi was restored againe to the Romans, without the losse and detriment of any one man, but one onely old traitour and new fugitive revolt. The Spaniards were appointed to have double allowance of victuals: and they performed good, faithfull, and valiant service many times after to the Commonweale.

When one of the Consuls was in Apulia, and the other in Lucania, one hundred and twelve  men of armes, Gentlemen of the nobilitie of Capua, having license graunted by the magistrates to go out of the citie, pretending to make a rode into the enemies countrie, and to fetch in booties and prises, came directly to the Romanes campe, lying about Suessula. And meeting with the Corps de guard, declared who they were, and that they would parle with the lord Deputie. Now Cn. Fulvius was the Generall and commaunder of the armie there: who being advertised and certified heereof, gave order that ten onely of all that number, should bee brought before him unarmed. When he had heard their suite and demaund, which was nothing else, but that when Capua was recovered by the Romanes, they might have their goods restored unto them: he received them all into his protection. The other Pretour also Sempronius Tuditanus, woon by force the towne Cliternum: where there were taken prisoners above seven thousand men: and a good  deale of copper and silver coine gained besides. At Rome there chanced a fearfull and pittifull fire, which continued two nights and one whole day. All between Salinae and the gate Carmentalis, togither with the Aequimelium and the street Iugatium, were burned downe and made even with the ground. Likewise without the gate the fire spred far all about, and in the temples of Fortuna and Dame Matuta, and Spes, consumed much, as well hallowed as prophane.
The same yeare, when all things prospered well and had good successe in Spain, P. and Cn. both Scipions having recovered many associates and those of ancient league, that came in again to him and yeelded themselves; and besides, gained some new consederates: conceived good hope, and tooke heart to proceed farther even into Affricke.
Syphax king of the Numidians, on a suddaine fell out with the Carthaginians, and became  their prosessed enemie. Vnto him the Scipions addressed three Centurians as Embassadours, to treat with him about a league and alliance: and to promise withall, that if he went on still to trouble and molest the Carthaginians, by making warre upon them, hee should do an high favor to the Senate and people of Rome: and that they would endevour and bring about, that in good time and place, hee should be well requited for that kindnesse, and receiue at their hands a double recompence with thankes. This embassage pleased the barbarous king right well.
And after he had conferred and reasoned with the Embassadors, concerning militarie affairs, and the knowledge of warfare: and heard those old and experienced soldiers talke of war, he soone found his own wants, and how unskilfull himselfe was in many points and feats of armes, in comparison of that methodicall and orderly discipline, whereof they had discoursed. The first thing then, that he requested  at their hands, was this: that as they were good friends and faithfull allies, two of them only would go back with their embassie unto their generals, and that the third might remain with him, to read unto him a lecture in the militarie science of warfare. Saying, that the nation of the Numidians, were raw and altogither unskilfull in footmens service, and onely nimble and practised in fight on horseback. So (quoth he) from the first beginning of our nation have our ancestors used to warre: and so have we from our childhood bene enured to fight. Mary, an enemie I have, trusting and presuming much upon on his Infanterie, whom I would gladly be able to match every way in all kind of service. Footmen I am able to set out as well as another: for why? my realme is populous, and yeeldeth aboundance of men: but altogither ignorant wee are, how to fit them with armour, how to marshall them, how to order and set them in battaile array: insomuch as all  my people in battell go to it pell mell, and are as a multitude hudled and thrumbled togither at a venture, without skil, without discretion and advisement. The Embassadours aunswered and said, that for the present, they would do according to his will and pleasure: but withall, they had his faithfull promise and word of a Prince, that hee should immediatly send backe their companion againe, in case their Generals approved not their deed in that behalfe. Q. Statorius his name was, that staied behind with the king. So Syphax sent by the two Romans, his answere to the foresaid embassage, into Spaine: and besides, with them other Numidians, Embassadors of his own, to receiue farther assurance and securitie from the Romane Generals: unto whom hee gave in charge, that foorthwith they should sollicit, persuade, and entice all the Numidians that were auxiliarie souldiours unto the Carthaginians, and served in any campe, cittie, or garrison  town of theirs, for to abandon them and come to him. And Statorius for his part, having mustered a great multitude of serviceable young men, chose forth and enrolled a power of footmen, to serve in the kings warres: and when hee had sorted them into bands and companies, and ordred them in battaile array, as neere as possibly hee could, to the manner of the Romanes: he

 trained them in their running to follow their colors: he taught them to keep their places in their rankes, and to double their files: and likewise he accustomed them to travaile and do worke: and so acquainted them with other militarie orders and exercises, that within short time, the king reposed as good confidence, and was as mightie in his new Infanterie, as in his old cavallerie: and in a set pitched field on even ground, was able to meet the Carthaginian with banner displaied, and give him the foile in a full battaile. The comming of the kings Embassadors into spaine, was to the Romanes also a matter of great consequence and importance: for upon the rumour and fame that went thereof, the Numidians began to fall away apace, and to come thicke unto the Romanes. Thus were the Romanes joyned in amitie and friendship with king Syphax.
When the Carthaginians had intelligence of this new alliance, they addressed immediatly  their embassadours to Gala, who reigned in another part of Numidia, over a nation called Massyla.
This Gala had a sonne named Masanissa, of seventeen yeares of age, but a youth of such towardnesse, and so forward in vertue, that even then hee made good and apparant shew, that he would another day enlarge his dominion, and make a more flouring and mightie kingdome, than his father should leave it unto him. These Embassadors declared unto Gala, that for as much as Syphax had entred league, and was banded with the Romanes, to the end that by their alliance and societie, he might be more mightie and puissant against other kings and nations of Affricke: it were also better for him and much more commodious, to joyne with the Carthaginians in all convenient speed: before that either Syphax passed over into Spaine, or the Romanes into Affricke: And Syphax (say they) may soone be defeated and overthrown now, while that hee hath  gained naught yet, but the bare name of the Romane league. Gala was soone persuaded to send a power of men, especially at the earnest instance of his son, who was very desirous of that war, and to have the mannaging therof. He with the helpe of the Carthaginian legions, vanquished Syphax, and gave him a great overthrow. So as at that field there were slain by report, in one day thirtie thousand. Syphax himselfe in person, with some few Numidian horsemen fled backe to the Maurisians, that inhabit the farthest coasts, hard upon the Ocean over-against Gades. But the Barbarous people at the same of his comming so resorted in great numbers to him out of all parts, that in a short space, hee was able to arme mightie host. And before he could with them crosse ouer into Spaine, which was divided from Affricke, with a narrow arme of the sea, Masanissa was come with his victorious armie: who in that place, of himselfe, without any help or aid  of the Carthaginians, gave Syphax battaile, to his great honour and singular glorie. In Spaine no memorable exploit was atchieved, but that the Romane Generals allured and drew to them the able and serviceable manhood of the Celtiberians, for the same hire and stipend, that they bargained for with the Carthaginians: and sent from thence above three hundred Spaniards of the noblest parentage into Italie, to solicite their countrimen who served under Anniball as auxiliaries, to follow them and take part with the Romanes. This onely, touching the affaires of Spaine that yeare, is a thing worthie to bee noted and remembred, That the Romans never waged soldiour to serve in their war before that time, when the Celtiberians began to be their mercenaries, and first received pay.



THE XXV. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the five and twentith Booke.
PVublius Cornelius Scipio, surnamed afterwards Africanus, was made Aedile, before he was of Lawfull yeares. Anniball woon the citie Tarentum (all but the castle, into which, the Romane garison was retired) by meanes of certain young Tarentine gentlemen, who had made semblance, that they went by night a hunting. The solemne plaies in the honour of Apollo, were  now first instituted, upon occasion of certaine propheticall verses of Martius, wherin the overthrow at Cannae had been foretold. Q. Fulvius and App. Claudius Consull, sought fortunatly against Hanno, a Duke or captaine of the Carthaginians. T. Sempronius Gracchus the Proconsull, was by a Lueane (his host that gave him entertainment) trained into the danger of an ambush, and slaine by Mago. Centenius Penula, who had served in the warres as a Centurion, having made sent unto the Senate, to have the leading of an armie, and promised, if this petition were graunted, to win the victorie of Anniball, and to vanquish him, tooke the charge of eight thousand footmen, and gave battaile to Anniball: but hee was slaine himselfe, and his whole armie defeited and put to the sword. Cn. Fulvius the Pretour fought unfortunately against Anniball, and lost the field: in which fight there died sixteene thousand men. Himselfe, with two hundred horsemen fled and escaped. Capua was besieged by Q. Fulvius, and App. Claudius, the Consuls. Claudius Marcellus in the third year of the siege, wan Syracusa, and bare himselfe in that service like a worthie and noble knight. In that tumult and burliburlie  when the citie was newly taken, Archimedes, whiles he was busily occupied about certaine Geometricall figures and forms that he had drawne in the dust, was killed. The two Scipions, Pub. and Cornel. after so many and so worthie exploits performed fortunately in Spaine, came to a wofull and bearie end, being themselves slaine there, with the losse welneere of their whole armies, in the eight year after that they went into Spain. And the maine possession of that province had beene quite lost, but for the singular manhood and industrie of L. Matius a knight of Rome, who having rallied and gathered together the remnants of the armies, so encouraged them, that by their valiant service two severall encamped holds of the enemies were woon, seven and thirtie thousand of the enemies slaine, and eighteene hundred taken prisoners, and a great rich bootie obtained. Wherupon he was called Captaine Martius.

WHiles these affaires thus passed in Affricke and in Spaine, Anniball emploied the summer season in the territorie of Tarentum, in hope by  treason to be maister of the cittie of the Tarentines. In which meane while, certaine base cities of the Salentines, and townes of no importance revolted unto him. And at the same time, of those 12 States of the Brutij, which the yeare before had turned, and banded with the Carthaginians, the Consentines and Thurines were rallied wholly again to the devotion of the people of Rome. And more of them had returned likewise, but for L. Pomponius Veientanus, captain of the allies: who after he had made certaine rodes into the countrey of the Brutij, and sped his hand well with many booties, tooke upon him the countenance of a sufficient Colonell, and was no lesse reputed: and having gathered a power of men, suddainly in hast without good advisement, fought  with Hanno. In which conflict, a mightie multitude of his men were either slaine or taken prisoners. But, as good hap was, they were but a disordered unruly rable of rusticall clownes and bondslaves: and the least losse of all other, was the captaine himselfe, who amongst the rest was taken captive: a man as then, the authour of a rash and foole-hardie fight, and had beene aforetime a

 Publicane or farmer of the citie revenues, and alwaies (through his naughtie practises and cunning fetches and shifts wherein he was become skilfull) a disloiall person, and daungerous both to the publicke State, and also to those privat companies and societies, with whom he had commerce and dealing. Sempronius the Consull, lying in the Lucanes countrie, made many light skirmishes, but not any one worth remembrance, and woon certaine poore townes, and of small regard, belonging unto the Lucanes.
The longer that this warre continued lingering, whiles prosperous successe and adverse mishap interchangeably wrought much varietie and alteration, as well in the inward minds of men, as in their outward state and fortune; such religious zcale and superstition (and the same for the most part in forein ceremonies) had so seized and possessed the citie, that either the men or gods therof,  were sodainly all at once become clean altered, and transfigured. In so much as now the Roman rites and holy observations were contemned, not only in secret, and within dores at home in their privat houses, but abroad also in the open streets, yea and in the common place and Capitoll: where there flocked alwayes a fort of women, that neither offred sacrifice and oblations, nor said their prayers, and did their devotions according to the use and custome of their native countrie and citie. Certaine od priests and chaplaines, yea and doting wiseards and blind prophets, had inveagled the minds and consciences of men: whose number was the greater by reason first of the rurall people and paisants of the countrie, who for neede and povertie, and for feare together, were driven to quit their lands which they had not tilled and husbanded, by reason of the long warres, and many invasions and rodes that laid all wast, and so retired into the citie: afterwards  by the easy occupation and readie meanes of gaine which they found by the errour of others, whom they soone seduced and abused: which trade they used and practised openly, as if it had bene a lawfull art and misterie. At the first, divers good and honest persons began secretly to grieve and be offended herewith, yea and to mutter and utter their griefes in private: but afterwards in processe of time, the matter was presented before the LL. of the counsell, and brake forth to open complaint in publick places. The Aediles and Triumvirs capitall were blamed much, and sharply rebuked of the Senate, for not redressing these disorders: and when they went in hand, to rid the common place of this multitude, and to cast down, overturne and fling away the preparation and provision for their sacrifices and oblations, they had like to have bene misused and mischieved by the people. When this maladie and misorder seemed now to be greater  than might be remedied and reformed by the meaner and inferior Magistrate, M. Aemylius, Pretor of the citie for the time being, received commission by order from the Senate, to see that the people were eased and delivered from this new religion and superstition. He not only red unto them in a publike assembly the decree of the Senate in that behalfe, but also made proclamation, Imprimis, that whosoever had any bookes of prophesies or prayers, or treatises written of this art and science of sacrifices, should bring in all those books and writings unto him before the Kalends of Aprill next ensuing. Item, that no person should sacrifice either in publick place, or sacred Church, after any new forme or forein rites and traditions. And in that yeare, there dyed certaine publick Priests, to wit, L. Cornelius Lentulus the Arch-prelate, or high Priest: and C. Papyrius Masso, the sonne of Caius, a Bishop. Also P. Furius Philus an Augur, and C. Papyrius Masso  the sonne of Lucius, a Decemvir, deputed for holy mysteries. In place of Lentulus and of Papyrius, were M. Cornelius Cethegus, and Cn. Servilius Cepio substituted high-priest and bishop. For Augur, there was created L. Quintus Flaminius: and L. Cornelius Lentulus was chosen Decemvir over sacred ceremonies and divine service.
Now the time drew neere of the solemne election of new Consuls: but because it was not thought good to call the old away, (busied as they were in the warres) T. Simpronius one of the Consuls, nominated for Dictator, to hold that election aforesaid, C. Claudius Cento, who named for his Generall of the Cavallerie Q. Fulvius Flaccus. This Dictatour, the first comitiall day following, created for Consuls Q. Fulvius Flaccus abovenamed, his Generall of horsemen, and Ap. Claudius Pulcher, who in his Pretourship had the jurisdiction and government of the province  of Sicilie. Then were the Pretours elected, Cn. Fulvius Flaccus, C. Claudius Nero, M. Iunius Syllanus, and P. Cornelius Sulla. When the Election was ended, the Dictatour resigned up his place.
That yeare was Aedile Curule, together with M. Cornelius Cethegus, one P. Cornelius Scipio, whose surname afterwards was Africanus. When he stood and made suite for the Aedileship, and

the Tribunes of the Commons were against him, objecting that he was not eligible and capable  of that office, for that he was not of lawfull age to be a competitor, and to put in for it: If (quoth he) all the Quirites and citizens of Rome will choose me Aedile, I have yeares enough on my back. Whereupon, in favour and furtherance of his suite, there was such running and labouring on all hands to the Tribes for their voices, that the Tribunes sodainely surceased their purpose to hinder him. And this was the largesse and donative that the Aediles bestowed. The Romane Games were, according to the wealth of that time, exhibited and set out with great state and magnificence, and continued one day longer than ordinarie: and for every street throughout the citie, was allowed a A^out a wine gallon.Congius of oyle. L. Villius Tappulus, and M. Fundanus Fundulus Aediles of the Commons, accused certaine dames and wives of the citie before the people, of dishonest and incontinentlife: and sonie of them being condemned, they forced into banishment. The Games called Plebeij, were renewed for two dayes: and by occasion of these games, a solemne feast or dinner was kept for the honor of Iupiter.
Then Q. Fulvius Flaccus the third time entred the Consulship, together with Appius Claudius: and the Pretours cast lots for their Provinces. It fell unto P. Cornelius Sulla his lot, to have the jurisdiction both of citizens and strangers, which before was executed by twaine. To Cn. Fulvius Flaccus fell Apulia: to C. Claudius Nero, was allotted Suessula: and M. Iunius Syllanus his hap was to have the rule of the Tuscanes. The Consuls were appointed by decree of the Senate to warre with Anniball, and to have under their commaund two legions apeece: and that one of them should receive his legions of Q. Fabius, the Cos. of the former yeare: and the other take his, at the hands of Fulvius Centimalus. As for the Pretours, Fulvius Flaccus had commission for  the conduct of the legions at Luceria, which served under Aemylius Pretour there: and Nero Claudius was to have the leading of those that were under the hand of C. Terentius in Picenum: and that they should provide themselves of supply to make up the full number of the companies. M. Iunius had the charge of the legions of citizens mustred the yeare before to serve in Tuscane: T. Sempronius Gracchus, and P. Sempronius Tuditanus continued still in the government of their provinces, the one of Lucania, the other of Gallia, and kept their owne forces. Likewise P. Lentulus governed the old province in Sicilie: M. Marcellus was L. Deputie of Saracose, and so far as the realme and dominion of king Hiero reached. T. Octacilius Admirall of the navie. Greece was governed still by M. Valerius. Sardinia by Q. Mutius Scaevola. Spaine by P. and Cornelius Scipiones. To the old armies before, there were other two new legions levied and enrolled  by the Coss. So as in all, the whole forces for that yeare amounted to 23 legions.
When the Consuls should muster the souldiours, they were hindered by occasion of a lewd pranke plaied by one M. Posthumius Pyrgensis, to the great trouble and disquiet of the state and publike peace. This Posthumius was by his vocation and calling a publican, who many yeares togither for crastie and deceitfull dealing, for avarice and covetousnesse, had not his fellow in all the cittie, but it were L. Pomponius Veientanus againe; the same man, whom the yeare before, as hee forraied the territories of the Lucans rashly and unadvisedly, the Carthaginians by the conduct of Hanno had taken prisoner. These two (for as much as it was covenanted and indented before, that the transporting of those things which were for the provision of the armies beyond sea, should be warranted by the citie against all danger of tempest; and that all dammage and losse of goods that  way miscarrying, should not lie upon the shoulders of the Publicanes, who had undertaken by great, to serve the armies, but be made good againe out of the common chest and treasure:) these Publicans (I say) not only gave false information of certain shipwracks, but also if they brought word at any time truly of some ships that were perished, they were such onely as were lost by their owne fraud and deceit, and not cast away by chaunce or violence of weather. For they would fraight and charge certeine old vessels and shaken bothomes, with some few wares of small or no worth at all, and suffer them to sinke for the nonce in the deepe sea, and save the marriners and sailers, with small pinnases and cockbotes prepared aforehand for the purpose: and when they had done, lie shamefully and say, that they had lost merchandise and commodities in those ships of sundrie sorts, and of great valew. These cunning parts of theirs had bene the yeare past revealed  and notified to M. Aemylius the Pretour, and the Senate by him made acquainted therewith: howbeit there was nothing done, nor any act of Senate devised for the chastisement of the offender: because the LL. of the Counsell in no case would offend the companie and societie of these publicans and fermers, in such a time especially, when there was some need of them. Then

 the common people tooke the matter into their owne hands, for to proceed with more severitie against these lewd and fraudulent practises. At length, two of the Trib. of the Com. Sp. and Lucius, both Carvilij, arose up and shewed themselves. For seeing how odious and infamous an indignitie this was, and not to be suffered, they brought M. Posthumius in question, and laid an action and set a fine upon his head, of two hundred thousand 625 lib. ster.Asses. When the day of triall was come, whither the fine aforesaid should stand and be paid, or taken off and remitted; and that the commons were assembled in so great number, that the great court-yard of the Capitol would scarcely hold the multitude: the defendant spake for himselfe and pleaded at large. But the onely hope that hee seemed to have was this, in case C. Servilius Casca a Trib. of the Com. a friend and neere kinsman of Posthumius, would by vertue of his place come betweene and stop the course  of law for proceeding farther, before that the tribes and wards were called forth, to go togither and to give their voices. The two Tribunes abovenamed, having broughtforth the witnesses to depose, and their depositions being taken, commanded the people to void and make way: And the lotterie casket or fosser was brought forth to cast lots, in what tribes the Latines should give their voices. All this while the Publicanes were earnest with Casca, to dissolve the assembly by one means or other, and put off the court for that day. The common people on the other side, called on hard, and gainsaied it. And as it fell out, Casca sat formost in one of the points and corners of the assembly. Hee wist not what to do, his mind was so perplexed for shame of the one side, if he did not helpe his friend and kinsman, and for feare on the ether side, because hee saw the people so egerly bent. The Publicanes seeing small hope of helpe in him, with full intent to make some  sturre, and to trouble the court, put forward forcibly and advaunced themselves through a void way, seized upon an high place, and between the Tribunes and the people, rushed in upon them, and fell to quarrell and braule both with the people of the one side, and also with the Tribunes on the other: insomuch as they were like to go togither by the eares. Wherupon Fulvius the Consull; See ye not (quoth hee to the Tribunes) how basely yee are accounted of, and made of no better reckoning among them, than private persons? See yee not a roiot and mutinie toward, unlesse yee make hast and breake up the assembly? So the commons were dismissed, and a Senate called:The complaints of the Consuls to the Romanes. Where the Consuls made relation unto the Lords of the Counsell, and complained how the solemne Session and Court of the Commons, was by the audacious violence of the Publicanes disturbed:
That Court (I say) wherein M. Furius Camillus, upon whose exile ensued the destruction  of the cittie, suffered himselfe to bee condemned by ungratefull cittizen: wherein the Decemvirs afore him, by vertue of whose good lawes, the cittie is governed, and wee live at this day: and wherein many principall citizens afterwards, have bene content to be set down and judged by the people. Moreover, how Posthumius Pyrgensis by force wrested from the commons, the libertie of their voices and suffrages: subverted and made void the judiciall Session of the commons: curbed the Tribunes and had no regard of them: came as it were in warlike manner against the people of Rome: and gat for their vantage the higher ground, to keepe the Tribunes from comming unto the commons: and to stop the tribes for being called to scrutinie and to give their voices: and nothing else it was that kept men from committing a fray, and shedding bloud, but the patience of the magistrats themselves: in that for the present, they gave place  to the furious rage and malapart saucinesse of a few: and for his will and pleasure brake up the assembly, before they could go togither about the matter they were met for: (which the defendant himselfe with force and armes was readie to stop and hinder for going forward) because they might have no occasion given them to quarrell, which was the onely thing that they sought for. When this matter with all the circumstances was throughly skanned of, and the best men there had spoken their minds, and given their opinion according to the outragiousnesse and indignitie of the thing: and therupon the Senate decreed, that this violence tended to the breach of common peace, and the hazard of the state (a most daungerous precedent to bee suffered) then without more ado, the two Carvilij Tribunes of the Com. laid aside cleane all debating about the penall fine aforesaid, and indited Posthumius of a capitall crime: and commaunded him to be attached  by a principall Sergeant, and to be led to prison, unlesse hee put in good sureties for his apparance to aunswere the cause, such as would be bound for him bodie for bodie. Posthumius put in baile: and made default at his day. Then the Tribunes called the Commons togither, preferred a bil unto them, which they granted to passe as an act, in this forme: That if M. Posthumius came not forth and made apparance before the 1. of May.Calends of May, and being cited and called that day, aunswered

not to his name, and no lawfull excuse alleaged for his absence, they judged him to bee a  banished man, and therefore awarded his goods to be sold in portsale, and himselfe to bee excommunicate, and interdicted the use of water and of fire: and to loose the benefit of a cittizen for ever. This done, they began also to endite all those, one after another, of a capitall crime, who were his abbetters, and the movers and stirrers of a sedition and commotion of the people, and to call for personall pledges. At the first they committed as many of them as could find no such sureties: and afterwards, those also that were sufficient to put in baile. For the avoiding of which daunger, most of them departed into voluntarie exile. This was the end of the Publicanes fraudulent dealing: and this was the issue of their audacious enterprise, in defence and maintenance of their guile and deceit.
After this, a solemne Court was called for the creation of the Arch-prelat, and M. Cornelius Cethegus newly elected Prelat, was the President of this election. Three competiours there were, who sued for that Prelacie, and strived earnestly one against the other: namely Q. Fulvius Flaccus, Consul for the time being, who also had before bene twise. Consull, and Censor besides; also T. Monlius Torquatus, a man of great reputation, for that he had bin likewise dignified with a double Consulship, and one Censureship; and last of all, P. Licinius Crassus, who as yet, was to sue for the Aedileship: howbeit, this young man in that sute and contention was superiour, and carried it away from those grave, auncient and honourable persons. Before him, for the space of an hundred and twentie yeares, there had not bene created any one, the highest priest, (save only P. Cornelius Scapula ratherCalussa) but had fit before in the yvorie chaire and borne office of state. The Consull had much ado, to go through with the levie, and to enroll the full legion of soldiours, by reason  that the small number of young and able men would hardly affoord both to furnish out the new legions of cittizens, and also to supply and make up the old. Howbeit the Senate would not suffer them to give over their enterprise which they were about, but agreed that there should bee chosen two Ternions of Triumvirs: the one sort of them to be sent out, within the compasse of fiftie miles every way from Rome, the other to go farther; with commission, to take good view and survey, both within that precinct and without, in all through-fares and market townes: in boroughs and places of frequent assemblies; of all persons of free condition that they could set eie on: and so many as they thought able men of bodie to beare armes, although they were not come to the lawfull age for service, to prest them for soldiours. Also it was decreed, that the Tribunes of the commons, if they so pleased, should put up a bill, that all under seventeene yeares  of age, who had bound themselves by militarie oth, should have as good pay, as if they had bene enrolled souldiours at seventeen yeares or upward. By vertue of this decree, the two Ternions aforesaid of the Triumvirs being chosen, made diligent search, and visited all the countrie over for free borne men accordingly.
At the same time letters came from M. Marcellus out of Sicilie, concerning the demaunds of those souldiours who served under P. Lentulus, and they were red in the Senate house. That armie consisted of the residue which remained after the field lost at Cannae, and was confined into Italie (as hath bene said afore) with this condition, not to returne back into Italie before the Punick warre should be ended. These souldiours obteined licence of Lentulus to send as embassadors unto Marcellus (where he lay in winter harbour) the principall men of armes, such as served  on horses allowed by the citie, the chiefe centurions also and the bravest souldiours and choise floure of the legions. One of these in the name of the rest, having libertie graunted for to speake, made his oration in this wise.The oration of (...) We had come to you into Italie, o M. Marcellus when you were Consull, immediatly upon that decree made against us (which if it were not unjust and unreasonable, yet surely it was heavie and rigorous enough:)
but that we hoped to be sent into this province (so generally troubled and out of order by the death of the KK.) there to be employed in some dangerous and cruell warre against the Sicilians and Carthaginians both at once: and so with our bloudshed and grievous wounds to make satisfaction for our trespasse unto the Magistrates and rulers of Rome. Like as in our fathers dayes, they which were taken prisoners by king Pyrrhus before Heraclea, made amends for their fault by their good service  against the same Pyrrhus. And yet, I can not see, [my LL. of the Senate] for what ill desert of our parts, ye either have bene displeased aforetime, or are offended at this present with us. For me thinks, I see both Consuls, and the whole bodie of the Senate of Rome, when I behold your face o Marcellus: whom if we had had to our Consull at Cannae, it would have gone better both

 with the Common-weale, and with ourselves, then it did. For I beseech you, suffer us now, before I make mone, and complaine of our hard state and condition, to purge our selves of that crime for which we are blamed. Set case, that neither the wrath of the gods, nor destinie and fatall necessitie (upon the law and decree whereof dependeth the immutable order and infallible course and consequence of all things in the world) was the cause that we were diffeated and overthrowne at Cannae, but our owne selves, and our default was the occasion: let us see then, whose fault it was, the souldiours, or the Generals? For mine owne part, I remember I am a souldier, and of my Captaine and Generall I will never speake but well; of him especially, unto whom I know the Senate rendred thanks, for that he despaired not of the common-wealth; and whose government ever since his flight and running away, hath bene proroged from yeare to yeare,  and who hath had the conduct of armies continually. Neither wil I say ought of the rest likewise, who escaped that unfortunate foile and diffeature, I meane our militarie tribunes and Colonels, who (as we here say) sue for dignities, beare honourable offices in citie, yea and rule whole Provinces as LL. Presidents in forein parts. Is it so indeede my LL? do ye so easily pardon and forgive your own selves and children? and deale ye so hardly, so rigorously and cruelly, against us base abject persons, and vile wretches? And was it no shame and dishonor imputed to the Consull and other great personages of the citie to flie, when there was no other hope? and were the poore souldiers sent by you into the field with this intention, to be al killed up, and none to escape? At the battaile of Allia, the whole armie in a manner fled away: Also at the straights of Caudium (to say nothing of other shamefull foiles of our armies) the host yeelded up their armour to the enemie,  before they joined battell, and fought one stroke. Yet, so far off it was, that those armies sustained any infamie and shameful reproch therefore, that both the citie of Rome was recovered againe by the means of those regiments which fled from Allia to Veij: and also the Caudine legions which returned to Rome naked, were sent againe into Samnium well armed: who subdued and brought under the yoke of subjection, the very same enemies, who had taken such pride and joy in that dishonour and ignominie of theirs. And now, for the armie before Cannae, is any man able to come forth and charge them justly, that either they fled, or for cowardly fear behaved themselves unseemely, and not like souldiours? Where were slaine in field above fiftie thousand men: from whence the Consull fled with fiftie horsemen, and no more: and of which companie there is not one remaineth alive, but whom the enemie, wearie with killing, spared and left. I remember, at  what time as the prisoners taken there, were denied money to pay for their raunsome, then every man commended and praised us, for saving and reserving our selves against another day, to be emploied in the service of the Commonweale: for returning unto Venusia to the Consull, and for making a good shew of a complet armie. But now, in worse case are wee, than in our fathers dayes, captives have beene that were taken prisoners. For they onely had their armor and weapons changed for worse, their rancke in the battell shifted, their place in the campe where they should quarter, altered: which notwithstanding, they recovered again al at once, by performing their good devoir to their countrie, and winning a victorie in one fortunate battell. Not one of them was ever confined (as it were) to a place of exile: none put beside hope to be discharged from soldierie by serving out his full time: and to bee briefe, they were set to fight with some enemie  or other, where they might once for all, either loose their life, or end their dishonour. And wee, against whom nothing can be objected at all, unlesse it be this, that wee were the cause, and none but wee, that some citizen of Rome might bee said to remaine alive of all those that were at the battell of Cannae: we I say, are sent farre ynough off, not onely from our native countrey, and Italie, but also from all enemies: where we waxe old in exile, to the end, that we should have no hope, no occasion and opportunitie to wipe away and cancile our disgrace, to mitigate and pacifie the anger of our fellow cittizens, and finally to die with honour. But it is neither end of shame, nor reward of vertue and valour, that we desire and crave: but only that we might be permitted to make proofe of our courage, and shew our prowesse. Paines and perils wee seeke for, and to be emploied in daungerous adventures, like hardie men and brave souldiors. Two yeares  alreadie there hath beene sharpe and hot warre in Sicilie. Some cities the Carthaginians woon by force, othersome the Romanes tooke likewise by assault. Whole regiments of foote, many troups and cornets of horse encounter together, and assaile one another. At Saracose there are great enterprises and worthie feats of armes, both by sea and land. The shouts of them that fight, the very clattering and ringing againe of their armour and weapons, wee can heare where

we are, and we sit still like idle luskes, and doe nothing, as if we had neither hands nor weapons to  fight with. T. Sempronius the Consull, with legions of bondslaves, hath bidden battell to the enemies, and fought with them in plaine field so oft, that they are well recompensed for their labour with gaining their freedome first, and then the Burgeoisie of the citie. Let us yet, in place and qualitie litie at leastwise, of bondslaves taken up and bought for money against these warres, fight with those enemies, as wel as they have done, and by our fight trie, whether we can regain our enlargement and libertie. Will you yourselfe, o Marcellus, make triall of us, and of our valour, by sea, by land, in pitched field, and battell raunged, or in giving assault and winning of walled townes? Put us to it, and spare not. The hardest adventures, the most paineful and daungerous enterprises, are they which we require most gladly: that we may have that betimes, and at once, which we should have come unto at Cannae: seeing that all the time we have lived since, hath been destined to our  ignominie and disgrace.
At these words they fell downe prostrate at Marcellus his feet. Marcellus answered them, that he had neither power of himselfe, nor commission otherwise, to content them, and satisfie their request. Howbeit, write to the Senate he would: and according as the LL. should give advise and direction, so he would do and not faile. These letters (as I said before) were brought to the Consuls, and by them red in the Senate house. And after deliberate consultation about their contents, the Senate passed this decree: That as concerning those souldiours, who had forsaken their fellowes fighting before Cannae, the Senate saw no reason, why they should be put in trust any more with the affaires of the Common-wealth: but if M. Claudius the Proconsul thought it good otherwise, he might do according to that which he judged convenient, and to stand with  his owne credit, and the safetie of the State. Provided alwayes, that not one of them be dispensed with, and freed from service or charge of souldierie: nor rewarded with any militarie gift in testimonie and token of his valour: ne yet reduced home againe into Italie, so long as the enemie made abode there.
After this, the Pretour for the citie, by vertue of a decree from the Senate, and an act of the Commons, assembled the people together. In which Session were created five Commissioners called Quinqueviri, for the reedifying and repairing of the turrets and the walls: Likewise two other fraternities of Triumvirs, the one for taking an inventarie of all sacred things, and to signe and note all offrings and oblations: the other for reedifying the temples of Fortune and dame Matuta, within the gate Carmentalis, and likewise of Spes without the gate, which the yeare past were consumed by fire. Great and fearefull tempests hapned this yeare. On the Albane mount it  rained stones continually for two dayes. Many places were blasted and smitten with lightning from heaven, and namely two chappels in the Capitoll, and the rampier about the camp and fort above Suessula in divers places thereof: and two watchmen in their Sentinels stricken starke dead. The wall and certaine turrets thereon at Cumes, not only smitten, but also shaken downe and overthrowne with lightnings and thunderbolts. At Reate there was seene an huge stone to flie to and fro in the aire. The sunne also appeared more red than it useth to be, and like to bloud. In regard of these prodigious fights, there was a solemne Procession and supplication all one day: and the Consuls for certaine dayes together, attended onely upon divine service of the gods: and the Novendiall sacrifices were devoutly celebrated nine dayes together.
Now whereas a long time alreadie both Anniball hoped, and the Romanes also suspected that the Tarentines would revolt: there fell out betweene, an occurrence and outward accident, which hastned it the rather. There was one Phileas a Tarentine, who having abode long at Rome under colour of an embassador leger, a busie headed man, and of an unquiet spirit, one that of all things could not away with rest and peace, in which so long as he lived he thought every day a yeare, and that now he was waxen old and aged therein, found meanes to haue accesse unto the hostages of the Tarentines. Kept they were in the Close belonging to the temple of Liberty, with the lesse attendance and carefull eye, because it was expedient and good neither for themselves, nor for their citie, to make an escape, and deceive the Romanes. These hostages he had oftentimes sollicited and persuaded by much talke and many reasons, and at length having bribed and corrupted  two sextaines and wardens of the said temple, he trained them forth in the evening out from the place where they were in safe custodie: and when he had accompanied them onward on the way as a guide, and directed them how to passe secretly, he fled himselfe and they together. By day breake the next morning they were missed, and their escape was noysed throughout the

 citie. Whereupon, men were sent out after them from all parts, to fetch them in againe: who having overtaken them at Tarracina, laid hold of them, and brought them back to Rome: where in the Comitium, they were, by the consent of the people, beaten with rods, and then throwne downe headlong from the cliffe Tarpeia.
The cruell rigor of this punishment, caused much anger; and provoked two of the noblest and most famous Grecian cities in Italie to indignation, not only in publick generally, but also in private particularly: according as any man was either in bloud joyned, or in alliance and friendship linked to them who were thus fouly and shamefully put to death. Amongst whom there were about thirteene noble gentlemen of Tarentum, conspired together, and the chiefe of them were Nico and Philomenes. These conspiratours before they would stirre and enter into any  action, thought best to speake and confer with Anniball first: and so having gone forth of the citie, under a pretence as if they went to the chase a hunting, by night they came unto him. But when they drew neere unto the camp, the rest hid themselves within a wood neere unto the high way: Nico and Philomenes only went forward to the watch, and there being taken (as they requested themselves) were brought before Anniball. Who when they had delivered unto him their complot, and upon what occasions they entred into that designement, they were highly commended, and promised great rewards, and willed and charged by him, that to the intent they might beare their countrymen in hand, how they ever went out of the citie to fetch in some booties, they should drive afore them into the citie, certaine cattaile of the Carthaginians, which were put out to pasture and feeding: and herewith gave them his word to do it safely, and  without any impeachment and resistance whensoever. Thus these yong gentlemen were seene to bring in good store of cattaile: and as they were knowne to make this adventure the second time and oftner still, men marvailed the lesse at the matter, and suspected nothing. Now upon a new parling and communication with Anniball, they covenanted with him upon his faithfull promise in these termes, Imprimis, for the Tarentines themselves, to enjoy freely their lands and goods, and live under their owne lawes. Item, to pay no pension nor tribute unto Anniball, nor be forced to receive a garison against their wils. And last of all, to betray the garison souldiours of the Romanes, and all their fortresses and places of strength deliver up into the hands of the Carthaginians. When these conditions and capitulations were agreed upon, then Philomenes used much oftner to go forth and come in againe in the night: and as he was knowne to be a great hunter,  and much delighted in that exercise, he had his hounds following him hard at his heeles, and all other furniture about him fit for huntsmen: and lightly ever he tooke some wild beast or other with his hounds, or els got something from the enemie, that of purpose lay readie for his hands: and alwayes as he brought home ought with him, he would bestow it either upon the captaine of the Romane garison, or deale it among the warders of the gates. And they all, verily beleeved and were persuaded, that his going out and in thus, most by night, was only for feare of the enemies. Now, when he had used this so accustomably, that he had made it an ordinary practise, in so much, that at what time of the night so ever he had but once lured or whistled, the gate was streight set open for him: then Anniball thought it time, to put the plot abovesaid in execution. Three dayes journey he was off. Where because he would have men the lesse mervaile, why he  kept a standing camp so long stil in one place, he seigned and made himselfe sick. The Romanes also, that lay in garison at Tarentum, gave over to suspect his long abode and leaguering there. But after that he was determined and resolved to advance toward Tarentum, he picked out ten thousand foote and horsemen together, whom he supposed for nimble bodies, swist footmanship, and lightnesse of armour, to be most meere for expedition: and with them at the fourth watch of the night, he marched forward with his ensignes. And having sent out afore-hand fourescore Numidian light horses, he commaunded them, to ride about and scoure all the waies on every side, and to cast their eye to espye and discover all the coasts, that no countrie people a far off might descrie and view the armie on foote, but they should be seene: and withall, to bring in, as many as were gone before, and kill all them they met and encountred: to the  end that the paisants there inhabiting, might thinke they were theeves and robbers, rather than the vantcurriers and foreriders of an armie. Himselfe in person marching with great speed and celeritie, pitched his camp almost 15 miles from Tarentum. Neither would he there, be knowne unto his men of his purpose, nor tell them whither they should go: onely he called his souldiers togither, and charged them to hold on the direct way, and not suffer any one to turne aside,

not in the march go out of his ranke or file: and above all things, to be readie for to receive their  charge and commaundement from their captaines, and do nothing without their warrant and commission. As for himselfe, hee would when he saw his time, let them know his mind, and what the service was that he would have done. And about the same very houre and instant, newes came as farre as Tarentum, that some few Numidian horsemen forraied the countrie, and had put the villagers in great fright all about. At which tidings, the captaine of the Romane garrison was no more moved, nor made any other hast, but only gave order, that some of the horsemen the next morning by day light should ride forth, to keepe the enemie from farther excursions. In the meane time, they that had this charge, bare themselves so carelesly in providing themselves to execute that which they were commaunded, that contrariwise, they tooke those outrodes of the Numidians for a good argument, That Anniball with his armie was not dislodged, but abode  still in leaguer where hee lay first. Anniball when it was once darke and dead night, began to set forward. Philomenes was there readie to be his guide, loden with his game hunted as his manner was. The rest of his conspiracie waited their time to execute their several charges, as it was agreed among them. Now it was ordred betweene them afore, that Philomenes comming in at the usuall little wicket, with his venison that he had hunted, should bring in with him some armed men: and Anniball on another part, come to the gate called Temenis, which looked toward the East, and stood on the land side of the cittie, a good way within the wall, as it were in a nouke. When Anniball approached the said gate, hee made a fire, in token that hee was come (as it was devised between them before) and it flamed forth and gave a shining light. The like did Nico againe. Then the fires on both sides were put out, that they made no more blaze. And Anniball in great  and still silence, led his armie close to the gate. Nico came suddainely at unawares upon the watchmen fast asleepe, killed them in their beds, and opened that gate. Anniball entred with his regiment of footmen, and commanded the cavallerie to stay behind, to the end they might have libertie of open ground to ride, whithersoever there was need, and as occasion required. Now by this time, Philomenes also was come neere to that little gate on the other side, where he used to make his egresse and ingresse to and fro. And when he had raised the watchman with his voice so well knowne, and with his whistle wherewith now he was familiarly acquainted, and said withall, that hee was troubled with tugging and lugging of a foule and heavie beast: therewith the wicket was set open. Two lustie fellows there were carrying in the wild bore between them, and he himselfe followed with one of the huntsmen, lightly and nimbly appointed, and whiles the watchman  his eye was upon the two porters that carried the beast, wondring at the bignesse of the bore, and tooke no heed to himselfe, Nicomenes thrust him through with his bore-speare. Then there entred in after them, about thirtie men armed, who killed the rest of the watch, and brake downe the great gates withall: and immediatly there entred the companies with banner displaied: and so, forth from thence they were conducted and brought to the market place, without making any noise, and there joyned themselves to Anniball. Then Anniball dividend two thousand Gaules into three: regiments, whom hee sent into sundrie parts of the cittie: and gave order to the Tarentines and the Affricanes, to get possession of the most principall and populous places of the citie; and when the crie and shout was once up, to kill all the Romanes wheresoever, and to spare the townsmen. But to the end that this might bee orderly done, hee gave direction to the young  Gentlemen aforesaid of Tarentum, that so soone as they espied a farre off, any of their owne cittizens and countriemen, they should bid them be quiet and still, to hold their peace, to bee of good cheere and feare nothing. By which time, they began to set up a shout and crie, as men use to do in a cittie taken by assault: but what the matter should be, no man of the towne or garrison could certainly tell. For the Tarentine inhabitants supposed verily, that the Romane souldiours of the garrison were risen up to sacke the citie: the Romanes on the other side, thought that the townsmen mutinied, and they were in doubt of some traiterous practise. The Captaine himselfe awakened and raised at the first tumult, escaped to the key, where he tooke a small barge or whitrie-bote, and fled to the castle. The trumpet also that sounded from the Theatre, made the greater terror: for it was both a Roman trumpet, provided aforehand for the purpose by those traitors, and a Grecian blew it, one who had no skill; and so it was doubtful, both who he was that sounded, and who they where that he gave signall unto. When day appeared, and the Romans saw the armour of the Carthaginians and Gaules, then they wist well in what doore the wind was, and how the world went: and the Greekes seeing the Romanes lying along every where slaine, were soon

 ware that the cittie was taken by Anniball. But after it was broad day light, and that the Romanes who remained unkilled, were fled into the castle, and the noise and hurliburly began by little and little to slake and give over: then Anniball commaunded the Tarentines to bee called to a generall assembly, and to present themselves without armes. When they were all come togither, but onely those who with the Romanes were fled for companie into the castle, there to abide such fortune as they; Anniball spake kindly unto the Tarentines, gave them good and friendly words, rehearsed with great protestation what favors he had shewed to all their cittizens, whom hee had taken prisoners either at Thrasymenus, or at Cannae: and withall, after he had bitterly inveighed against the lordly and proud rule of the Romans, he commaunded every man to repaire home to his own house, and set his own name upon his dore: for that, so many houses as had not  the name written upon them of themaster thereof, he would presently upon sound of trumpet, commaund to be rifled. Over and besides, that if any one should happen to write his own name, and set it on the doore or lodging-house of a Romane (for he saw divers of their houses emptie) he would take him for an enemie, and deale with him accordingly. After this speech ended, and the assembly dissolved, when the dores were marked with their titles and inscriptions aforesaid, wherby the houses of friends and enemies were known distinctly one from another: the signall was given by sound of trumpet: and then there was running every where from all parts, to ransake the lodgings of the Romans. And some pretie sprinkling of pillage they met withall. The next day after, he advanced against the castle to assault it, which after he saw imprenable and not possible to be woon, either by forcible assault, or by artificiall devises of fabricks and engines, by reason that both the sea came to it, wherwith the greater part therof was compassed, in maner of a demie Iland, and  also fortified besides on another part with exceeding high and steepe rockes: and withall, fenced from the cittie with a strong wall and deepe ditch: therefore, because hee would neither let nor hinder himselfe from atchieving greater affaires, whiles he was carefully busied onely about defending the Tarentines, nor yet leave them without a strong guard, for feare least the Romanes from out of the castle, might at their pleasure come upon them, hee determined to raise a rampiar for a partition betweene the castle and the cittie, for their defence against the said garrison. And he was not out of hope, but that when the Romans should offer to issue forth to hinder the said worke, they might also be fought withall: and in case they adventured rashly to run on, and engage themselves too far, they might be cut off in their heate, and the forces of the garison might  be to diminished and abated by some great slaughter and execution, that the Tarentines of themselves should be able with case to defend their cittie against them. The said worke was not so soone begun, but the Romanes all of a suddaine, set open the castle gate, sallied forth and charged upon the pioners as they were labouring about their bulwarke. The guard that attended for the defence of the workemen, and stood before their worke, fell off and suffered themselves to be put backe, to the end that the enemies upon their first successe, should be more adventurous: supposing that the further they gave ground, the more of the other would follow after and chase them. Which being perceived, the Carthaginians whom Anniball had kept close for this purpose, and had in readinesse very well appointed, rose out of all parts, and made head againe. Neither were the Romanes able to abide their forcible violence. And flie they could not in multitudes,  by occasion that the straightnesse of the place would give no leave: and besides, many things lay in their way: partly the work that was begun, and partly other provision of stuffe brought for the same, which mightily hindred and impeached them. Most of them fell headlong into the trench: and to be short, more perished in their flight, than were killed in the fight. After this, the fortification went in hand againe, and none durst venture to hinder it. So he cast a mightie deep ditch, and raysed an high rampier within it. Also behind it, a pretie distance off, he went in hand to build a mure or wall to it, in the very same quarter; that they might be able even without any guard at all, or strength of men, to defend themselves against the Romanes. Howbeit, he left them an indifferent band of souldiours, which might withall help out somewhat in making of  the wall. Himselfe then departed with the rest of his armie as farre as the river Galesus (five miles off from the citie) and there encamped. From which standing camp, he came back once againe to survey the worke: and finding that it went better forward than he looked for, he began to conceive some good hope that the citadell also might be woon by assault. For why, it was not defended surely by situation on high ground, as others are, but seated on a plaine, and divided from the citie, by a wall only and a ditch. Now when as it began to be assailed with fabricks, and artillerie

devised of all sorts, there hapned a new supply to be sent from Metapontum to aid the garison: whereby the Romanes tooke hart unto them, in so much as in the night time of a sodain, and before they were looked for, they set upon the fabricks and ordinance of the enemies planted thereupon: some they cast downe and overthrew, others they fired and consumed. And there an end of Anniball his assault of the castle from that side.
The onely hope behind now, was in continuall siege: and yet that hope promised no great effect, because they that held the castle, had the sea free at their command, all that side, whereas the said fort (standing as it were in an halfe Island) overlooketh the mouth of the haven: and the citie contrariwise, was wholly secluded from all entercourse of passage and commodities comming in by sea, and liker were they that besieged the fortresse, to feele the want and scarsitie of victuals, than those that were besieged within it.
Then Anniball, after he had called together the principall  citizens of Tarentum, laid open unto them all, the present difficulties, saying, That he neither saw any way to win by force the castle so strong and fortified as it was, nor had any hope at all to gaine it by siege, so long as the enemies were lords of the sea. But if they had ships once, wherby they might hinder and stay the comming in of their victuals and other commodities, the enemies immediatly would either quit the peece, or yeeld themselves. The Tarentines held well with that, and approved the devise. But (say they) he that giveth us that counsell, must also affourd us meanes to effect the same. For the Carthaginian ships, if they were sent for, and set out of Sicilie might well doe the seat: mary, as for our own which lie shut up as it were, within a little creek and bay, considering, that the enemie keepeth the mouth and entrie of the haven, how is it possiblie that they should get out from their harbour into the open sea, and passe without daunger? Passe  (quoth he?) Passe they shall, make no doubt of that. Many things, I tell you, considered in their owne nature are combersome and difficult, but by pollicie and wit of man are easily welded and wrought with a sleight. Yee have a cittie here seated upon a plaine and champaine ground, the waies answering to every side of it, are even, large, and broad ynough, yea, and open to all quarters. I will chuse that way which crosseth the middest of the cittie, and passeth along to the haven and the sea, and so will carrie and transport the ships upon waines, with no great adoe and trouble. And so, both the sea shall bee ours cleare, which now the enemies keepe, and also wee shall besiege the castle round, as well by sea as by land: nay, more than that, within shorttime wee shall either enter it, being abandoned of the enemies, or else bee maisters both of it and them together.
These words not onely put them in good hope, that the enterprise would be effected, but also set them in a wonderfull good conceit and admiration of the captain himselfe. Then out of hand, all the waines and carts were taken up from all places as many as could bee had, and were put together, and coupled one to another. Divers cranes and other instruments were set to, for to draw up the ships to land, the way made plaine and levell, that the carts might go more easily, and passe away with lesse trouble and more expedition. After this they got together draught oxen, cartjades and other labouring beasts, yea, and men also for to draw: and thus the worke was lustily begun, insomuch, as within few daies, the fleet well rigged, appointed, and dressed, was brought about the castle, and rid at anker even in the avenue and entrie of the haven. In these tearmes stood Tarentum, when Anniball left it, and returned backe to his wintering harbours. But authours write  diversly of this revolt of Tarentum, whither it happened the yeare past, or at this present. But the greater number of them, and those that lived neerer to that time, when the remembrance of these matters was fresh, affirme that it was this very yeare.
At Rome, the Consuls and Pretours both remained still, untill the 17 Aprill.fifth day before the Calends of May, by occasion of the Latine holydaies, upon which day, when they had performed a solemne sacrifice, with all complements thereto belonging, on the Albane hill, they departed every one to his severall charge and province. After this, there crept into the minds of men a new scrupulositie of conscience upon certaine propheticall verses of one Martius, a noble and famous prophet in times past. Now, by reason that in the yeare before, there was diligent search and inquilition made, for such bookes of Fortune, according to a decree graunted out of the Senate, those verses came to light, and to the hands of M. Aemylius Pretour of the cittie, who sat upon that commission. And he immediately gave them to Sulla the new Pretour. Of two prophesies of Martius, the one, which afterwards caried the greater authoritie with it, by reason of the event that happened so right, and declared it so evidently, caused the other also, whereof the time was

 not yet come, to be of credite and beleeved. The former contained a Prediction of the overthrow at Cannae, in these or such like words:
From Trojane line, O Romane once descended,Flie Canna river, neere to Cannae towne:Least strangers borne, who have thy death intended,Force thee to fight on Diomede his downe.But warning mine, thou wilt not rest upon,Vntill with bloud thou first doe fill the plaine; And then to sea from fruitfull land, anonThy men shall downe the streame by thousands slaine.Thy flesh must bait the fish in Ocean deepe,And lure the soules that flie from high to pray,And feed wild beasts, on earth below that keepe.Marke well my words love thus me taught to say.
And they who had been souldiors, and served in those warres, knew as perfectly Diomedes his plaines, and the river The same that Ausidus.Canna, as they did the very defeiture it selfe, and losse at Cannae. Then was the other prophesie likewise read, which was the darker of the twaine: not onely because future  things are more uncertaine, than those which are past alreadie; but also by reason of the kind of writing, which was more obscure and intricate, in these tearmes:
If enemies yee would expell, if botch and plaguie soreApollo is called in Homer Ilia.^ (...) i. shooting a farre off. Sent from a farre, ye would drive forth, and vexed be no more.To Phaebus (Romanes) I advise, ye vow, from yeare to yeareTo set forth plaies in solemne wise, with mirth and merrie cheare.From publicke stocke, the people must, part of the charge disburse:The rest shall yee, for you and yours, defray with private purse.The soveraine Pretour must precure these games to be perform'd, Who sits in place, mens pleas to beare, and see all wrongs reform'd.Then shall the ten Decemvirs hight, the Greekish rites observe,In slaying beasts for sacrifice, and nothing from them swerve.If all be done accordingly, your ioy shall aye increase,Your State shall daily grow in wealth, and fruits of blessed peace.For god Apollo will you save, he will your foes destroy.Who at their pleasure wast your fields, and worke you much annoy.
For the explanation and expiation both, of this prophesie, they tooke one whole day. And  the morrow after, there passed a decree from the Senate, That the Decemvirs should peruse and looke into the bookes of Sibylla, about the exhibiting of those said games, in the honour of Apollo, and celebrating likewise of the sacrifices. And when all was perused, and relation made before the Senate: the Lords made an Act, and set downe an order, First, to vow and set forth solemne pastimes accordingly, to the honour of Apollo. Item, After the Games were done and finished, to allow the Pretour37 lib. 10 sh. sterl. twelve thousand Asses, toward the expenses of the divine service, and two greater beasts for sacrifice. There passed also another Act of the Senate, That the Decemvirs should celebrate divine service, and sacrifice after the observance and rites of the Grecians; and offer upon the altar these beasts, to wit, an Oxe with guilded hornes, and two white female goats, with guilded hornes likewise, for Don Apollo: and a cow with hornes, in like manner  guilded, for Dame Latona. The Pretour, when hee was to represent the Games within the Circus Maximus, gave commaundement, and made proclamation, That the people, during the time of those solemnities, should contribute money, for an offering to Apollo, every man according to his abilitie, and as he might well spare. This is the beginning of the Apollinare Games and plaies, exhibited for to obteine victorie, and not for to escape some plague or pestilence, as most men

suppose. And when they were celebrated, the people stood to behold and look on, adorned with  garlands upon their heads, and the dames and matrones of the citie went in procession, and made supplications. Every mans dore was set open, and they feasted and made good cheare generally through the citie in the open street; and a high holliday this was, solemnised with all kind of ceremonies that could be devised.
But to returne againe to Anniball, who was about Tarentum; and both Consuls remaining in Samnium, but readie, as it seemed, to besiege Capua: it fell out, that the Campanes alreadie were distressed with hunger and famine, (a calamitie that usually followeth long and continuall siege) and the reason was, because the armies of the Romanes had impeached and hindred their seednesse. Therefore they dispatched Embassadors to Anniball, beseeching him, that he would take order for graine to be brought into Capua, from all parts neere adjoining, before that the  Consuls were come abroad with their legions into their territorie, and all the waies beset, and passages stopped by the guards and companies of the enemies. Whereupon, Anniball gave direction to Hanno, that he should remove out of the countrie of the Brutij, and passe over with his forces into Campania, and endevourso, that the Campanes might bee provided of sufficient store of corne. Then Hanno dislodged anone, and departed with all his power out of the Al^^zza.Brutians countrey, purposing to avoid the leaguer of his enemies, and namely the Consuls, who lay in Samnium: and when he approached neere to (...)Beneventum, hee pitched his tents three miles from the citie it selfe, upon a high ground. After which, he commaunded, that the corne should be brought to him into his campe, out of all the associate and confederate cities thereabout, into which it had been caried in the summer afore, and allowed a good guard for the safe convoy thereof. After this, he sent a messenger to Capua, to give them notice, upon what day they should attend, and be in readinesse to receive their corne; and against the time, provide out of the countrey for the cariage, carts, waines, and draught-beasts, and packehorses of all sorts. But the Campanes, like as they caried themselves in all things else, idlie and negligently, so in this they were very flacke and retchlesse: for they sent little above fortie carres, and some few beasts for cariage besides. For which they had a checke given them, and were rebuked by Hanno, because that hunger, which causeth the very dumbe beast to bestirre it selfe and make hard shifts, was not able to pricke them forward to be more carefull about their owne businesse. So there was a farther day appointed for to fetch their corne, and to come more furnished and better provided for cariage. All this being reported to the men of Beneventum, with the circumstances and particulars, as  it was, they addressed with all speed ten Embassadours to the Romane Consuls, encamped then about Bovianum. Vpon which intelligence given of the affaires at Capua, they tooke order, and agreed betweene themselves, that one of them should conduct an armie into Campania. And Fulvius, who undertooke that charge, marched by night to Beneventum, and put himselfe within the walls of the towne. And there he was advertised by them that dwelt neer hand, That Hanno was gone out with part of his forces, for to purvey corne; that there were 2000 carts come, with a rude and disorderly multitude besides of people, without armor; that all that they did was in hurrie, in hast, and great feare; and finally, that the camp was out of forme and fashion, and all good militarie order cleane gone, by reason of a rable and multitude of countrey clownes, come out of those quarters, and entermingled amongst them. The Consull, I say, being enformed forcertaine  by credible persons, of these things, gave his souldiours warning to make readie against the next night ensuing, nothing but their ensigns and weapons, for that they were to charge upon the campe of the Carthaginians. And so they set forward at the releese of the fourth watch, leaving their packes and trusses with all their bag and baggage behind them at Beneventum: and presenting themselves before the campe, somewhat before day, they put them into such a bodily feare, and so terrified them, that if it had beene pitched upon a plaine ground, no doubt, it had been woon at the first assault. But the height of the place, and their rampiers and fortifications besides, which could not possiblie bee entered upon, without climing upon the steepe hill with much difficultie, were a defence unto it. By day light there was a lustie assault given, and a hot skirmish begun, but the Carthaginians not onely defended and kept their rampier, but also  (as having the vauntage of the ground) they chased and thrust the enemies backe, as they mounted up the hill. Howbeit, resolute hardinesse overcame all hardnesse and difficulties whatsoever. For in diverse places at once they advaunced as farre as the banckes and trenches; but it cost bloudie blowes first, and the death of many a souldiour. The Consull therefore

 calling the Coronels and Marshals together, said, it were not amisse to give over that rash and headie attempt, and, as he thought, it were the safer course, for that day to retire the armie to Beneventum, and on the morrow to encampe themselves afront the enemie, to the end, that neither the Campanes might get foorth, nor Hanno returne and enter into the towne againe. And that this might bee the sooner effected, and with a great deale more ease, hee would send for his Colleague also with his armie, and both of them jointly bend their forces that way. But these devises of the captaine generall were soone dasht. For as he was about to found the retreat, the souldiers with a loud voyce cryed out, that they could not away with such faint captaines; they skorned to be commaunded in so cold and slothfull service; they would none of that: and so put the Consull out of his hent. It hapned, that next unto the gate entring into  the enemies campe, there served a cohort or companie ofthe Peligni, led by Captaine Vibius, who caught the banner out of the bearer his hand, and flung it over the rampier, and with that, fell to cursing himselfe and his companie both, wishing a plague light upon him and them to, if the enemies went away with that banner: and therewith led himselfe the way, and brake first through the trench, and over the pallaisado into their campe. Now by this time the Peligni fought within the rampier: and then Valerius Flaccus a Coronell of the third legion, from another side fell to upbraid the Romanes, and hit him in the teeth with their beastly cowardise, for suffering their allies to have the honor of entring and taking the camp. Whereupon T. Pedanius (a centurion of the regiment called Principes, and serving in the first place thereof) took likewise an ensigne from him that caried it, and withall, Now shall, quoth he, this ensigne, and this Centinere (meaning himselfe) presently be within the rampier of the enemies: let me see who dare  follow, and save it from being taken by the enemie. At first, his owne band and companie followed him hard at heeles, as he clambred to get over the rampier, and then the whole legion came after likewise. By this time, the Consull also seeing his souldiers climbing over the rampier, changed his purpose, and was of a cleane other mind: and from calling and reclaming his souldiers back, fell to exhort and encourage them, shewing in how great hazard and danger a right hardie and valiant cohort of allies were, and the whole legion of citizens besides. They all therefore set to, and every man did his best: and notwithstanding there was many a dart driven and javelin launced, notwithstanding the enemies opposed their armour and bodies full against them, yet they never stinted to assay every place, as well high as low, untill they were broken through, and  gotten in. Many a man was hurt (ye may be sure) but yet even they that bled untill they fainted, and were not able to fight any longer, carried this mind and strove withall, to dye yet within the rampier of their enemies. Thus in the turning of an hand the campe was woon, as easily as if it had bene pitched upon a plaine and even ground, and notfortified at all with trench and rampier. From this time now, there was no more fighting, but killing on all hands in that medly and confusion of pell mell within the camp. Slaine there were of enemies more than sixe thousand, and above seven thousand taken prisoners, together with the Campane purveiors for corne, and all the provision of waines, carts, and labouring beasts. Besides, another huge bootie was taken, which Hanno when he went a foraging all abroad, had raised out of the countrie of the associates of the people of Rome. Then the Consull after he had cast downe all the fortifications of the  campe, returned from thence to Beneventum. And there both the Consuls together (for Ap. Claudius also thither came after a few dayes) made sale of all the prises and pillage, and devided the fame. Vibius the Pelignian, and T. Pedanius a principall centurion of the third legion, by whose forward and singular good service, the campe of the enemies was forced, were rewarded especially above the rest. Hanno then together with some few forragers whom by chance he had with him, returned from Cominium Ceritum (whether the newes came of the losse of the camp) into the Brutians country, more like one that fled in rout, then marched in warlike order.

The Campanes also having heard, as well of their owne losses as of their allies, sent embassadours unto Anniball, to certifie him, That both the Consuls were at Beneventum, that the warre was within a dayes journey of Capua, and but a step from the very gates and walls of the citie:  and unlesse he made good hast to succour and reskew them, Capua would sooner come under the obedience and subjection of the enemies, than Arpi did. And he was not to make such a reckning of all Tarentum (much lesse then of the castle alone) as in regard thereof to leave Capua undefended, and yeeld it to the people of Rome, Capua I say, which he was wont to compare and make equall with the citie of Rome. Anniball promised that he would take care for the

good estate of the Campanes: and for the present he sent two thousand horsemen with the embassadors, as a guard to keepe the country and territorie from invasion and spoile.

The Romanes in this meane time, among other their affaires, neglected not the safetie of the castle of Tarentum, and the garison there besieged. For C. Servilius, Lieutenant, by order and authoritie of the Senate, was sent by P. Cornelius the Pretour into Hetruria, to purvey for come, and to buy store: who with certaine ships laden therewith, arived in the haven of Tarentum, passing even through the guards of the enemies. At whose comming, they that before whiles they had but small hope, were oftentimes by way of parlie moved by the enemies to go to the contrary side, now themselves began to persuade and sollicite the enemies to come unto them. And the garison surely was strong enough, considering that the souldiors which lay at Metapontum, were drawne from thence to the defence and keeping of the castle of Tarentum. And therefore the  Metapontines, so soone as they were delivered of the feare whereby they were kept and held in as with a bit, revolted unto Anniball. Semblably did the Thurines also, who inhabited the same tract by the sea side. They were moved and persuaded thereto, not so much by the rebellion of the Tarentines and Metapontines, with whom they were linked in kindred, and ioyned neere in bloud (over and besides that they were descended as well as they, out of Achaia) as with anger towards the Romanes for the hostages lately by them killed. Their friends therefore and kinsfolke dispatched letters and messengers unto Hanno and Mago (who were in the countrie of the Brutijneere at hand) offering to deliver the citie into their hands, if they brought their power and presented it before their walls. Now was there one M. Atinius, captaine there over a small garison, whom they supposed might bee easily drawne forth of the towne to make some rash  and inconsiderate skirmish, presuming not so much upon his owne souldiours (who were but an handfull) as upon the youth and floure of the Thurians, whom he had of purpose enrolled into bands and companies, and furnished with armour against the like occasions of service. The Carthaginian captains afore named, had divided all their forces between them in two parts, and were entred into the territorie of Thurij: and Hanno with his regiment of footmen, advaunced with banners displaied before the citie: Mago with the horsemen, staied behind close among the hils, over-against the towne, and there lay secretly in ambush. Atinius then, who by his espials was enformed only of the squadrons of footmen, came forth with his forces into the field, ignorant (God wot) both of the falshood and treason of the townsmen, and also of the covert traines and ambushment of the enemies. The skirmish of footmen was exceeding faint and cold, whiles the Romanes being but few, fought in the vantguard: and the Thurines looked rather when the skirmish should end, than made any hast to fight themselves and helpe: and withall, the squadrons of the Carthaginians gave ground for the nonce, to traine the enemie as farre as the side of the hill, under which, on the other side their horsemen lay in wait and were ambushed. And thither they were not so soone come, but the horsemen made hast to shew themselves, with a great outcrie, and presently put to flight the raw and disordered companie and multitude of the Thurines; who were not very fast and found in heart to them on whose side they fought. The Romanes, albeit they were environned round, whiles the footmen lay still at them on the one side, and the horsemen charged them a fresh on the other side, yet they mainteined fight, and held out a long while: but at last, they likewise turned their backe and fled to the cittie. There the traitours  and conspiratours being gathered togither on heapes, so soone as they had let in at the gates standing wide open, the companies of their owne cittizens: when they saw once the Romanes running apace in disaray toward the citie, made a false alarme, crying alowd that the Carthaginians were at hand, and that both enemies and friends togither intermingled, would enter the cittie, unlesse they made better hast to shut the gates. So they excluded the Romanes out, and gave them as a prey to be hewne in peeces by their enemies. Howbeit, Atinius with some few, was received within the towne first. After this, there was some mutinie and dissention betweene the citizens themselves, for a little while. Some were of mind to stand upon their guard and defend the towne: others were of opinion, to yeeld unto fortune of the time, and deliver it up to the victors hands. But in conclusion, fortune and bad counsel togither, (as for the most part it falleth out) prevailed. And so, after they had brough Atinius and his souldiors to the haven side, unto their ships for to be embarked, more upon good will that they bare to him for his mild and just government, and therefore were readie to save him, than for any regard at all they had of the Romanes, they received the Carthaginians into the cittie.
 The Consuls then led the legions from Beneventum into the territorie of Capua, not only to make spoile and mare the corne, that was laid up alreadie in strong townes against winter, but also to assaile Capua: supposing they should make their Consulship renowmed unto posteritie, by the destruction of so rich and wealthie a citie: and besides, do away that great dishonour and shamefull blemish of the Empire of Rome, in suffering a cittie so neere unto them to continue now three yeres in rebellion, without revenge and condign punishment. But to the end that Beneventum should not be without a guard, and that against all suddaine accidents and occurrences of warre, in case Anniball should come to Capua, for to reskue and aid his allies, (which they made no doubt but he would do) there might be horsemen to withstand his violence: they commaunded T. Cracchus to come out of Lucania, with the cavallerie and light armed footmen:  and to take order and leave some other to governe the legions and the standing campe, for the guard and defence of those parts there.
Gracchus before hee dislodged out of the Lucanes countrie, hapned to have a fearefull and prodigious token, as he offred sacrifice. For after the sacrifice was performed and accomplished, two snakes came gliding out of a blind hole, no man knew how, to the entrails of the beast, and fell to eat the liver: and so soon as they were espied, suddainly glid out of sight and were no more seene. Now, when as the bowel-priers had given advise to kill a new sacrifice, and so soone as the inwards were opened and laid foorth, to tend and looke unto them more heedfully; the snakes came againe, as it is reported, the second and third time: and when they had once given as it were an assay, and tasted the liver, they went cleere away without hurt and untouched. And albeit the Soothsayers aforesaid, had given an Item, and foretold, that this prodigious fight perteined properly  unto the chiefe captaine and Generall, and warned him to take heed of some close persons and secret practises: yet his fatall destinie of death that hung over his head, could by no forecast and providence be altered and avoided. Now there was one Flavius a Lucane, the principall head of that bend and side of the Lucanes, which when the other faction revolted unto Anniball, tooke the Romanes part; and having bene by them chosen the Pretour, had continued in that place of magistracie a yeare alreadie: this man all on a suddaine chaunged his mind and affection, and seeking to wind and enter into the favour of Anniball, could not be content to revolt himselfe, and to draw with him the Lucanes to rebellion; unlesse he made a league also and covenant with the enemies, and sealed it with the murder and bloud of his Generall: of him (I  say) who being entereined and lodged in his house, he purposed villanously to betray. He entred therefore into secret speech and conference with Mago, governour over the Brutij, and having capitulated with him, under his faithfull word and promise, That if he delivered the Romane Generall into his hands, the Lucanes might live in freedome under their owne lawes, in league and amitie with the Carthaginians; he told him of a place into which hee would bring Gracchus, with a small companie and guard about him: willing Mago to put his foot and horse in armes, and in such a place aforehand, wherein he might bestow closely and secretly a mightie number of men. When the place was well viewed and considered all about, they agreed upon a day, for putting this plot in practise.
This done, Flavius commeth to the Romane Generall Gracchus, and enformeth him that he had begun an enterprise of great consequence, for the accomplishment and  full perfecting whereof, he needed the helping hand of Gracchus himselfe. Namely, he had persuaded with all the Pretours and Governours, who in that universall and generall trouble of all Italie, had revolted unto Anniball, for to returne againe into the league and friendship of the Romanes; seeing that the Romane state and their dominion, which by the overthrow at Cannae was come in a maner to the lowest ebb, and fallen into extreame despaire, flowed now againe, and grew every day more than other, greater and mightier; whereas contrariwise, the puissance of Anniball decaied much, and was wellneere come to nothing: besides, the Romanes were men that might be appeased and reconciled againe, especially the trespasse being so long ago done and past: for never was there nation vnder the sunne, more tractable, more exorable and readie to pardon a fault: and how often have they (to go no further for examples) forgiven the open  rebellion even of their forefathers and auncestors? These (quoth he) were my words unto them, and in deed, but my words. Mary they had liever heare Gracchus himselfe speake, and heare the same from out of his owne mouth: they would more gladly talke with him in person, and take hold of his right hand, which as the assured pawn of his faithfull promise, he carieth alwaies with him wheresoever he goeth, and they desire no more. I have therefore (faith he) appointed a convenient

place of enterview and conference: lying out of the way and forth of sight, but yet not far  from the Romanes campe. There the matter may be dispatched in few words, and all the name and nation of the Lucanes, reduced under the obedience and alliance of the people of Rome. Gracchus suspecting no fraud nor harme, neither in his words nor deeds, sounding all to a great likelihood of simplicitie and truth in his conceit, departed out of the campe attended upon with his sergeants, and guarded onely with a comet of horsemen: and so by the guidance of his owne host, in whose house he lodged, was plunged headlong within the daunger of the ambush of his enemies. Who suddainly arose: and Flav^us because he would put it out of doubt that hee was a traitour, went to their side and joyned with them. Then they let flie arrowes, and shot darts against Gracchus and his horsemen on every side.
Whereupon Gracchus alight from horseback, and commanded the rest to do the same, exhorting them, that the only thing which fortune now had left  unto them, they would grace and honour with vertue. For what remaineth else for us, (a small handfull unto them) environned as we are with a multitude of them, within a valley compassed about with hills and woods, but present death? This onely we are to resolve upon, Whither in this present amazednesse and hartlesse feare, we will as beasts suffer our throats to be cut without revenge againe; or turning wholly our timorous expectation and suffering of death, into choller and courage, fight adventurously and manfully, and bathing our hands in the bloud of our enemies, loose our lives and fall down dead, upon the weapons and bodies of them, lying gasping themselves under us. Ah that Lucane, that fugitive rogue and rebell, that treacherons and falle traitor, see ye all lay at him. Whose hap it will be, ere he die, to bee his priest, to sacrifice and send him to the devill, hee shall win an honoura^le price, and find no small solace and comfort  in his owne death.
With these words, he wrapped his rich coate of armes about his left arme (for they had not brought forth with them so much as their shields) and charged with exceeding force upon the enemies. The fight was farre greater on their part than for the proportion and number of the men.Gracchus killed by his host, a Lucane. The bodies of the Romanes lay open most unto the shot. And thus overcharged on all sides, from the higher places: as being in the valey subject to the voley of their darts, they were soone perced through. When Gracchus was left naked alone, and his guard dead at his feete, the Carthaginians did what they could to take him alive: but he having espied among the enemies his good host and friend, that Lucane, ran among the thickest prease: where he was so fully bent to mischiefe him, that they could not will nor choose but kill him outright, without they  would have lost the lives of many other. He was not so soone dead, but Mago sent him streightwayes unto Anniball, and commaunded that his bodie together with the knitches of rods (belonging to his Magistracie) should be presented and shewed before the Tribunall feate of the Generall. And this is the true report of the end of Gracchus: to wit, that he let his life in the Lucane land, about the plaines which are called Veteres Campi. There bee some that tell it otherwise, how he being accompanied with his Serjeants, and three serving men his bondslaves, went out from the campe within the territorie of Beneventum, neere unto the river Ca^^re.Calor, for to wash himselfe: where there chaunced his enemies to lurke, and lye in wait among the willowes and falowes that grew by the banke side, and so being unarmed and naked too, he was assaulted, where he defended himself as well as he could with flinging at them pible stones such as the river  afforded and caried downe with the streame, and so was slaine. Others write, that by advise of the Bowell-priers, he went out of the camp halfe a mile off, for to purge and expiate in some pure and cleane place, those prodigious tokens above rehersed: and there was beset and environed round about with two troupes of Numidian horsemen, who hapned there to lye in ambush. See how variable and uncertaine the fame goeth, both in what place, and after what manner, this so noble and famous person came by his death. Nay the very funerall and sepulture also of Gracchus, is diversly delivered. Some say, he was enterred by his owne souldiours within the Romane camp. Others give out and say (and that is the more common report) that by the appointment of Anniball he was buried in the very entrance of the Carthaginian leaguer; that there was a funerall fire made in solemne wise to burne his corps; that the whole armie justed and ran at tilt  and tornement in their complet armor; that the Spanyards leaped and daunced Morrice; and each nation according to their guise and manner, performed sundry motions and exercises as well of their weapons, as of their bodies: yea, and that Anniball himselfe in proper person, with all honor of funerall pompe that might be devised, both in word and deed, solemnized the obsequies

 in the best manner. This say they that affirme the thing to have hapned in the Lucanes countrey. But if a man should beleeve them, who record how hee was slaine at the river Calor, then the enemies gat nothing of him but only his head. Which being presented unto Anniball, he sent Carthalo immediatly with it into the Romane campe, unto Cn. Cornelius the Treasurer or Questor: who there within the very camp performed the funerals of the Generall, and both armie and citizens of Beneventum together solemnized the same right honourably.
The Consuls being entred into the territorie of Campane, as they forraied all abroad, straggling one from another, were by the townesmen of Capua which salied out, and by the horsemen of Mago, put in feare; whereupon in great fright and hast, they rallied the souldiours to their colours, that were raunged over the countrie: but before they could well embattaile them,  and set them in array, they were discomfited, and lost above a thousand and five hundred men. Vpon which good successe, the enemies (as they are a nation by nature prowd) began to be very lustie and exceeding audacious, insomuch, as they offered to skirmish sundrie times with the Romanes, and ever challenged them to fight. But that one battaile, so unadvisedly and inconsiderately atchieved, made the Consuls more circumspect and warie afterward. Howbeit, one small occurrence happened, which, as it encouraged and animated them againe, so it abated the hearts, and daunted the boldnesse of the other. For in warre there is nothing (bee it never so little) but one time or other, it is the occasion of some great consequence and importance. There was in the campe one T. Quintius Crispinus, lincked in special friendship and familiaritie with Badius, a citizen of Capua. Their acquaintance grew and encreased upon this occasion: This Badius upon  a time, before the revolt of Capua, fell sicke at Rome, and lying in Crispinus his house, was liberally and kindly used, yea, and tenderly seene unto by him, during his sicknesse. This Badius having put himselfe forward before the standing guards, that warded at the gate of the Romane campe, willed, that Crispinus should be called out unto him. Which being told unto Crispinus, he supposed no otherwise of it, but that he would talke friendly and familiarly with him. For albeit both nations generally were at enmitie, in regard of the publicke state, yet the private right and band of hospitalitie, remained still in force, and was not forgotten, and therefore hee went out somewhat apart from the rest of his fellowes. Now, when they were come in sight and interview one of the other. I chalenge thee, o Crispine (quoth Badius) to combat: let us mount on horsebacke, and trie it out betweene us two, without any other companion, whether of us is the  better man at armes. To this Crispinus made answere againe and said, Wee want no enemies, neither you nor I, upon whom wee may make proofe of our manhood: as for mee, if I met and encountred you in the very battaile, yet I would decline, avoid, and shift from you, least I should defile and staine my hand in the murder and bloudshed of my guest and friend. And with this hee turned from him, and went his way. But the Campane contrariwise, upon these words, was the more eager with him, railing and rating at him for his effeminat cowardise and dastardlinesse, letting flie at the harmelesse and innocent man, all spightfull tearms and reprochfull language; which himselfe ywis (if he had his due) was well worthie of: calling him a friendly foe, and a kind enemie indeed, and finally charged him, that he made his excuse of sparing him, for friendship sake, whom he knew he was not able to match in manhood and valour. But if (qd.  he) thou thinkest, that by the breach of publicke league and covenant, our private bands of amitie and hospitalitie, are not yet ynough broken in sunder, then here I pronounce openly, in the hearing of two armies, That I Badius a Campane, renounce all hospitalitie with thee T. Quintius Crispinus a Romane, and so farewell all friendship for ever: I will, I say, have no more to doe by way of acquaintance with thee, no societie, no alliance, no hospitalitie will the guest have with that host, who in hostile manner is come to invade his native countrie, and to make assault upon the publicke buildings and private houses thereof. And therefore, if thou bee a man, meet me in the field. Crispinus drew backe a long time, and was loth to enter into the action, but at last his fellow horsemen, serving in the same troup and cornet with him, forced and persuaded him, not to suffer that bragging Campane, thus to insult over him without revenge. Wherupon he made  no more adoe, nor any longer delay, but whiles he went unto the L. Generals, to know their pleasure, whither they would permit and license him, out of his order and ranke, to fight with an enemie that chalenged him, and gave him defiance. And having obtained leave, he buckled his armour about him, tooke his weapon, mounted on horseback, and calling upon Badius by name, bad him come forth if he durst to single fight. The Campane made no stay, and so with speare in

rest, set spurres to, and they ran their horses full cariere one at the other. Crispinus with his lance  pierced Badius above his shield, through the left shoulder, and therewith unhorsed him, and when he was fallen to the earth with the push, he alight himselfe from his horse, minding on foot to fall upon him as he lay along, and so to dispatch him outright. But Badius, before his enemie seised upon him, left his targuet behind and his horse, and by good footmanship recovered his owne fellowes. Crispinus then, all goodly to bee seene with the spoiles of his enemie, made shew of the horse and armour that he had woon, and bearing up withall the bloudie point of his launce, was with much praise and great gratulation of the souldiours, brought honourably to the Consuls, and presented before them. At whose hands hee was both highly commended, and also liberally rewarded.
Anniball having dislodged out of the territorie of Beneventum, and removed into Capua, within three dayes after he was come thither, brought forth his forces into the field, making no doubt at all, but that, considering the Campanes in his absence, had but few dayes before fought fortunatly, the Romanes now would be so much lesse able to abide his royall armie so often used to victorie. And verily when the medley was once begun, the Romane battailons of the Infanterie were much troubled and distressed, especially with the fierce assault of the horsemen, who overcharged and pelted them mightily with their darts and Iavelins, untill the signall was given to their owne Cavallerie also, to set hard to, and charge the enemies with their horse. Now whiles the men of armes were busy in fight on bothsides, it hapned that the regiment of Sempronius [Gracchus lately slaine] were descried marching afar off, under the conduct of Cn. Cornelius the Treasurer, which put both parts in like feare, least they were some new and fresh enemies that  aduanced against them. So they sounded the retreat on either side, as if they had bene agreed so to do, departed out of the field (as a man would say) on even hand, and retired themselves unto their severall holds: howbeit, the greater number was slaine of Romanes, upon the first violent charge given by the horsemen. From thence, the Consuls intending to draw Anniball away from Capua, departed sundry wayes, Fulvius into the territorie of Cumes, and Claudius into the Lucanes country. The next day, when Anniball was advertised, that the Romanes had abandoned their camp, and that they were gone into divers parts with their severall armies, being at first uncertaine whom to pursue, resolved at length to make after Appius, and so began to do. But after he had once trained the enemie about to the place that he desired, he returned himselfe another way to Capua. And Anniball hapned also upon a new occasion presented, to have  a good hand of his enemies in those parts.
There was one M. Centenius, surnamed Penula, one of the chiefe Centurions of the Pilani, a singular good captaine in that kind, as well in regard of his mightie and goodly body, as also of his brave mind, and valiant courage.
This man having served out his ordinary time required by law, was by the meanes of P. Cornelius Sulla the Pretor, brought into the Senate house, and became a petitioner unto the LL. of the Counsell, that he might have the leading of five thousand footemen: promising that within short time, by reason he was so well acquainted with the nature and qualities of the enemie, and withall so much beaten in coasting those quarters, he would do some great deede, and atcheive a peece of notable service: and looke, by what cunning devises and strategemes, both our leaders and our armies had bene untill that day, entrapped and ouerraught , the very same would he use and practise against the enemie. He was not so vaine and unadvised in making this offer, but they were as sottish and foolish again in taking him at his word, and trusting him: as who would say, A good leader and commaunder, and a stout and hardie souldiour were all one. And so where as he demaunded but five thousand, he had the charge given of eight thousand: where of the one halfe were citizens, the other allies and confederates: and besides them, he himselfe also gathered together out of the country as he marched, a good companie of voluntaries: in so much as his power was doubled, by that time he came into the Lucanes country, where Anniball abode, after that he had followed Claudius in vaine, and to no effect. But a man that had but halfe an eye, might see what the sequele and event would be of the conflict betweene Generall Anniball, and Centiner^ Centenius: betweene both armies also, the one of old beaten souldiours used ever to victories, the other of raw novices and young beginners, yea many of them taken up sodainly in hast, and slenderly armed by the halfes. For so soone as both hoasts had confronted one another, and that on neither side they dallied and shifted off, but minded presently to go to it and fight; soone were they on both parts arranged in

 order of battaile. And albeit the Romanes had many disadvantages, yet they mainteined skirmish more than two houres: and that so hotely and couragiously, that they shrunke not one jote, so long as their leader stood on foote. But after that he once was strucken downe and slaine, who not only in regard and remembrance of the former name (that he had woon) of valour and prowesse: but also for feare of future shame and dishonor, in case he should remaine alive after the defeature of his forces, whereof he was the onely cause through his foole-hardie rashnesse, presented himselfe desperately upon the pikes of his enemies, where he might be sure of nothing but present death: and incontinently the Romane battailon was discomfited and put to flight. And so hard bested they were, in seeking waies and meanes to escape (all the avenues were so laid and beset with the horsemen) that of so great a multitude, there were hardly one thousand saved,  all the rest miscaried here and there, and came by their death one way or other.
In this meane time, Capua was streightly beleaguered by the Consuls, and they began to assault it in most forcible manner: great preparation there was of all things needfull unto such an exploit, and with great diligence every thing provided and brought accordingly. Co^e was conveighed to Casilinum, and laid up there for store: at the mouth of the river Vulturnus (where now the citie standeth) was the skonce and castle fortified (which Fabius before had built) and a strong garison therein planted, to the end that both the sea so neere, and the whole river also might be at their commaund. Into these two fortresses standing on the sea side, as well the corne which lately was sent out of Sardinia, as also that which M^tius the Pretor had bought out of Hetruria, was transported from the port of Ostia, whereby the army might be served plentifully  all winter season. Over and besides that losse received in the Lucanes country, the armie likewise of the Volones, i. voluntary souldiours (which during the life of Crassus, had served truly and faithfully) now abandoned their colours; as if by the death of their Captaine they had taken themselves fully discharged from warfare.
Anniball made no small account of Capua: for willing enough he was, that his allies and friends there, should not be forsaken and left in so great perill wherein they stood; and yet upon that fortunate successe which hapned unto him through the rashnesse of one Romane captaine, his fingers itched to be doing with another of them, and hoped to find some good opportunitie and advantage to surprise and overthrow both captaine and armie. Whereas therefore certaine Apulian Embassadors advertised him, that Cn.Fulvius the Pretour, (who at the first in assaulting  of certaine citties in Apulia, which had revolted unto Anniball, bare himselfe like a wise and prudent captaine: now afterwards, upon his good fortune and happie speed in those affairs, wherby himselfe and his souldiours had made up their mouthes and filled their hands well with booties and pillage) both himselfe and his men were growen so idle and so dissolute, that no good gouernment nor militarie discipline remained among them: hereupon Anniball having good experience, (as often heretofore, so in this late instance but few daies past) in how small steed an armie serveth, when it is directed by an unskilfull leader, removed his forces into Apulia. Now lay the Romane legions and F^lvius the Pretour, encamped about Herdonia. And when the newes came thither, that the enemies were on their journey comming toward them, hardly might the souldiours be reclaimed and staied, but they would in all hast plucke up standards and ensignes,  and straightwaies go into the field and bid them battaile, without commission and commaundement of their Pretour. And no one thing more held them backe, than the assured hope they had, to doo it at their pleasure whensoever they would. Anniball the night following, having certeine intelligence, that there was a tumult in the campe, and that most of the souldiours mightily importuned their Generall, to put forth unto them the signall of battaile, and called earnestly unto him for to lead them out into the field, made full account to meet with good opportunitie and occasion, to have a faire day of his enemies: and therefore he bestowed three thousand men lightly appointed, in divers villages thereabout, among the thicke groves and bushes, and within the woods: who at a signe given them, should all at once upon a suddaine, start up and leap forth of their lurking corners: and withall, he gave order to Mago, with two thousand horsemen  or therabout, to keep all the waies wheras he supposed they were most like to flee and make escape. Having thus ordred all things beforehand in the night time: at the breake of day he entred the field with his armie, and embattailed himself in warlike maner. Fulvius for his part, was not behind; not induced so much upon any hope or conceit he had of good speed, as drawne and haled thereto, through the rash enforcement and compulsion of his souldiours. And therfore as they came

forth to battaile upon a head and heat, incosiderately, so they were set in array as disorderly;  even at the pleasure of the souldiours, according as they came forth and tooke up their rankes and files, as they list themselves: and then againe, as the toy tooke them in the head, left the same, either upon wil^ulness^ or fear. The first legion togither with the left wing or cornet of horsemen, were first marshalled: and the squadrons drawne and stretched ou^ in a great length: no^withstanding the Knight-marshals and Coronels cried out, that withinfor^h, there was no s^rength no^ powe^ at all; and that the enemies wheresoever they should happen to charge, would breake in upon them and go through. But no holesome counsell for their owne good, might be taken and considered upon: nay they would not so much as lend their ea^e, and give them the hearing. And by this time Anniball was in place, with another manner of armie (you may bee sure) and otherwise ordred and aranged. And therefore the Romanes were not able to abide so much as  the fir^t shout and shocke of the onset. The cap^aine himselfe (as foolish and headie as Centenius, but in courage and resolution farre short of him) seeing how the world went, the field like to be lost, his souldiours in feare and great perplexitie; recovered his horse in grea^ hast, and with some two hundreth horsemen fled away and escaped: all the armie besides, bea^en backe affront, beset behind, flanked on the sides, and environned round; were so killed and hewen in peeces, that of eighteene thousand, there were not past two thousand saved. And the enemies besides were mai^ters of the campe.
When these losses one in the necke of another were reported at Rome, the ci^ie was set in a great fit of sorrow and feare for the while: but so long as the Consuls, in whom rested the maine chaunce, had hitherto prospered and sped well, they were the lesse ^^oubled at these by-blowes and crosse misfor^unes. Whereupon they addressed C. Lector^us and M. Mi^ilius as messengers  unto the Consuls, willing them to gather togither with good care and diligence, those dispersed reliques and remainders of the two armies; also to have an eye and heedfull regard unto them, that upon feare and desperation they yeelded not themselves ^o the enemie (as it hapned after the Cannian over^hrow;) and last of all, to make diligent search and seeke out those Volones, or voluntarie servitours, that had abandoned their ensignes and cassed themselves. The like charge was laid upon P. Cornelius, who had commission besides to levie more men. And he made proclamation throughout all market townes, faires, and places of frequent resor^, That those Volones should be found out and brought againe to their owne colours, to serve as aforetime. All these directions were executed and accomplished with exceeding great care and diligence.
Appi^s Cl^udius the Consull, after he had made D. ^^nius captaine of the sconce erected uppon the mouth of the river Vulturnus, and M. Aurelius Cot^a Governor of Pu^eoli, with commission, That as any ships [with corne] from out of Hetruria or Sardinia arrived there, they should immedia^ly send the corne to the campe; went backe himselfe to Capua: where hee found Q. Fulv^us his Colleague, transporting thither all provision from Casilinum, and making preparation for the ass^ult of Capua. Then both Coss. jointly togither besieged the citie: and sent unto Cl^ud^us Nero the Pretor, for to come unto them from Suessula, out of the old camp of Claudius. Who likewise leaving a small garrison there to defend the peece, with all his power and forces, descended into the plaines before Capua. So there were three roiall pavillions pitched for three LL. generals about Capua: and three full armies in three sundrie places began to fortifie, erecting  bastilons and forts in places not farre distant: yea and to cast a trench and raise a rampiar round about the cittie, And in divers quarters at once, they skirmished with the men of Capua, whensoeuer they came to hinder their fortifications, with so good successe, that the townsmen were driven at last to keepe within their gates and walls. But before that those rampiars and trenches abovesaid were fully finished, and all ends brought togither, there were Embassadours dispatched unto Anniball, to complaine in the name of the Capuans, as finding themselves grieved, that hee had forsaken Capua, and in a manner delivered it into the Romanes hands: and withall, to beseech him earnestly, that now or never, he would reskue and succor them, being not onely besieged, but also shut up and almost ^renched about, as within a prison. P. Cornelius likewise  the Pretour of the citie of Rome, sent his letters unto the Consuls, advising them before they had fully invested Capua round about, to make offer unto the Capuans of this libertie, That as many as would, might depart with bag and baggage out of Capua: and whosoever went forth before the 15 of March.Ides of March, should enjoy their freedome and all their goods and lands: but as many as after that day, either departed or ^arried there still behind, should be reckoned no better

 than very enemies. These intimations were made known unto the Campanes, but so light t^ey set by them, that they fell a railing, reviling, and menacing the Romanes, with most reproachfull taunts and spightfull tearmes. Anniball was departed from Herdonia with his legions unto Tarentum, hoping either by force or fraud to gaine the castle. And seeing he little prevailed, he turned from thence, and tooke his way to Brundus^um, supposing that towne would bee betraied into his hands. Whiles he lay there also and lost his time in doing nothing, the Embassadours of the Campanes arrived and came unto him, with compla^nts and humble requests both at once. Vnto whom Anniball made this glorious and lordlike aunswere with a majes^ie: Once alreadie have I raised the siege, and never will the Consuls, I ^row, abide my second comming. The Embassadours having received their dispatch, departed with this hope: but much ado  they had, to put themselves within Capua, so enclosed round was it (by this time) with a double trer^ch and a rampiar.
It fortuned at the very same instant, when Capua was thus streightly beleaguerd, that the siege also and assault of Saracose came to an end: helped forward and hastned by intestine treacherie and treason withall, as well as by force of armie and valour of captaine abroad. For M^rcelius in the beginning of the spring, doubtfull in himselfe and hanging in suspence, whither to bend his whole fo^ces toward Agrigentum, against Himileo and Hippocra^es, or still proceed to besiege Saracose: albeit he saw the cittie might not possibly be woon, either by forcible assault, (considering it was by (...) both by sea and land invincible) or pining famine, by reason the pa^sage in manner lay open to and fro betweene it and Carthage, ^or ^a^e transporting of all  sort of victuals: yet because hee would leave no stone unrolled, but trie all waies that could be devised; he commaunded certaine revolts from the Saracosians (for there sided with the Romanes some of the noblest persons of the citie, who at the time of the first backsliding from the Romanes, because they misliked and abhorred all rebellion and change in the state, were driven out and banished the citie) to deale with their bend and faction by way of conference, to sound the harts (I say) of such as were their followers, and to sollicite them to their part: and withall to assure them (upon their warrant) that if by their meanes Saracose were betraied, they should live in freedome, and enjoy their owne lawes as they would themselves. But no opportunitie could they espie for to parlie and talke with them. For by reason that there were many suspected to encline and draw that way, every man had a carefull eye and regard unto them,  that there could be no treachery practised, but soone it would be found out and derected. Yet a bond-servant toward one of the banished persons abovesaid, hapned to be let into the citie, pretending that he was run away from the adversepart unto them: who hapning to meet with some few, began to move and broch such a matter. After which, certaine others lying close hidden under the nets in a fisher bore, came about by water to the camp of the Romanes, and had conference and communication with those former fugitives and exiled men. And thus from time to time, this was practised in the same manner, by divers and sundry persons, untill at length they were a crew of fourescore in all. Now when all things were concluded for the betraying of the citie, neere upon the point of execution, it chanced that one Attalus (a false brother among them, who tooke snuffe that he was not specially trusted in the matter) disclosed the conspiracie  unto Epicides, and appeached the parties: whereupon they were all put to extreame torture, and suffered death every one. When this plot would speed no better, they conceived hope another way, by a new occasion and occurrence that presently offred it selfe. There chanced one Damas^ppus a Lacedemonian, sent from Syracusa, as a messenger to king Philip, for to bee taken prisoner by the Roman armada. Now, both Epicides was very desirous and exceeding carefull how to ransome him, and also Marcellus was not unwilling for his part to graunt the same. For even then, the Romans began to affect the friendship of the Aetolians, with which nation the Lacedemonians were confederate, and in league. So, when there should be commissioners and delegates sent on both sides, to parle and treat about his redemption, the most indifferent place for them to meet in, was at the key or wharfe of Scin^^ino.Trogili, fast by a turret which they call Scala Graca.Galeagra, as being just in  the middest between, and most convenient for both parties. It happened now, that as they had recourse oftentimes thither about this businesse, one of the Romans well viewed the wall neere by, he counted the stones, that appeared in the forefront of the wal, and made estim
ate to himselfe of their quadrature and proportion; and withall, giving a guesse as neere as he could, of what heigth (by his reckoning) and measure, the wall might be: and supposing it was a good deale lower, than

either he himselfe or others, had alwaies before taken it to be, and easie to be skaled with ladders, even of a meane size and middle sort, hee relateth the matter, and his conceit of it to Marcellus. And in his opinion it was a thing not to be neglected, but to bee thought upon. But for as much as, there was no accesse unto that place, by reason, that for the lownesse thereof, it was the more carefully guarded and defended, it was thought good to wait for some opportunitie and advauntage to helpe that difficultie. Which, as good hap was, offered it selfe presently unto them by meanes of a fugitive: who gave them intelligence, that they held a solemne feast of Diana at that time within the cittie, and the same continued three daies together: also hee said, that for want of other things, during this siege to make good cheare withall, they spared for no wine, but made merrie therewith in great plentie and abundance. For why? not only Epicides had bountifully bestowed wine upon the whole Commons, but also the great men of the cittie had in every ward  and parish where they dwelt, allowed a proportion besides, of their owne charges. When Marcelius heard this, he called unto him some few of his Colonels and knight Marshals, and conferred with them: and when they had sorted out certaine choise and elect Centurions and soldiors, fit and sufficient men to adventure and execute so great a peece of service, and withall provided ladders secretly; to all the rest he commaunded a watchword and warning to be given, That they should betimes take their refection of meat and repose of sleepe, for that in the night they were to be emploied in an expedition and action of service. After this, when he thought it was about the time, that they (as having feasted all day long, and well filled their bellies with meat, and their heads with wine) were gone to rest, and newly fallen sound asleepe, he commaunded one ensigne or companie of souldiours, to carie ladders; and besides them, there were upon a thousand well  armed and appointed, marching with silence and in thin ranckes, brought thither to the place. When the formost without any stirre or noise at all, had skaled the top of the wall, others followed in their course. For the forward and resolute boldnesse of the former, was able to animate and encourage the rest, if they had been falsehearted. By this time now, the thousand armed soldiours had seized that part, when the rest of the ladders were set to: and upon more ladders still, they gat up to the wall in diverse places, upon a signall given them from the gate Hexapylos. Vnto which places the Romanes were now come, and found no sturring at all, but exceeding silence and desolation, for as much as a great fort of them had made good cheare within the turrets, and either were fast asleepe with drinking wine alreadie, or else were bibbing still, notwithstanding their eies were heavie, and their hearts asleepe. And yet, some few of them they tooke in  their beds, and killed. Neere unto Hexapylos there is a little wicket, which with great violence they began withall, to breake it open. So as now, both from the wall (as was before appointed) they gave signall by sound of trumpet: and also from all parts they went not to worke any more by stealth, but plainely and openly without dissimulation. For they were come alreadie as far as Epipolae, a place full of watchmen and warders. And the enemies were to be terrified now and strucken into feare, and no longer to be dealt withall by craft and guile. And it fell out so indeed, that they were mightily skared. For they heard not so soone the sounding of the trumpets, and the shouting and outerie of them that were possessed of the walls and one part of the cittie, but the warders, thinking all was gone, some ran along upon the wall, others leapt from the walls, or else were borne downe headlong, with the prease of others that were affrighted. And yet
many there  were, who were not ware at all of this miserie and extremitie, both because generally they were all dead asleepe, and also by reason that the citie was so wide and large, that a thing felt and seene in some remote parts, reached not streightwaies throughout, to all the rest. The gate Hexapylos was broken downe somewhat before day, at which Marcellus with all his power entred the citie. He wakened them all, and set them to their businesse; he made them take weapon in hand, and to helpe (what they could) a citie in a manner wholly surprised and taken. Epicides made hast from the Island (which they themselves call Nasos) with a companie of souldiours about him, making full account to drive them out againe: as supposing, that they were but some few, who through the negligence of the watchmen and warders were gotten over the wall: and ever as he met with any that were skared and in feare, hee said unto them eftsoones, that they themselves made more  adoe, and every thing worse than there was cause, reporting all in greater measure and more fearfull manner than need was in very truth. But when he saw all places about Some male i^ the fifth part of Syracusa.Epipolae full of armed men, after some small voley of shot, and little skirmish with the enemie, (whereby hee provoked them, rather than did any good else) hee turned backe againe with his companies, and retired into

 Acradina, not fearing so much the violence and multitude of the enemies, as least some intestine mischeefe by this occasion might arise, and that he should find in this tumult and hurliburly, the gates of Acradina, and the Island shut against him. Marcellus being entered within the walls, tooke his prospect from the higher places, and when hee beheld under his eies the most goodly and beautifull citie of all others in those daies, (by report) he wept and shed teares abundantly, partly for joy that he had brought his purpose to so good a passe, and partly in compassion and remembrance of the auncient glorie and renowme of that citie. Hee called to mind the navies of the Atheniens by them sunke and drowned: hee thought upon the utter overthrow of two puissant armies, together with the losse of two most noble and famous captaines of theirs: moreover, there came into his memorie so many wars fought against the Carthaginians, with  so great perill and hazard: so many and so mightie Tyrants and kings that raigned and kept their seat and roiall court there: and amongst the rest, he could not chuse but think of king Hiero, of fresh and famous memorie, a prince, who above all other gifts which his owne vertue and fortune had graced and endued him withall, was recommended especially for his many favors and good turnes done unto the people of Rome. When all these things presented themselves to his remembrance, with this cogitation besides, how all that beautie and glorie within one houres space was readie to burne on a light fire, and to be consumed into ashes: before that he advanced his ensignes against Acradina, hee sent before, those Syracusians who had conversed (as is aforesaid) amongst the guards and garrison of the Romans, to persuade the enemies with mild and gentle speech, yet, to yeeld the citie. It so fell out, that the most part of them that warded the gates and  walls both, of Acradina, were certaine fugitive revolts fled from the Romanes, who had no hope atall, upon any condition whatsoever to be pardoned. These would suffer none, either to approch the walls, or to parle and speake with any. And therefore Marcellus, after hee saw that enterprise frustrate and disappointed, commaunded to retire with the ensignes unto Euryalus. This Euryalus is a little mount and fort, situate in the utmost quarter of the citie, remote far from sea, and commanding the high way that leadeth into the fields, and the middle parts and very hart of the whole Island; a place very commodious for the taking up and receipt of all victuals. The captain of this hold was Philodemus an Argive, placed there by Epicides. Vnto whom there was sent from Marcellus, Sosis, one of them that murdred the tyrant: and after long communication, Sosis with craftie words abused by him, and colourably put off until another time, made relation unto Marcellus, that Philodemus had taken a farther day of respite and deliberation. But he put off still from day to day, triflingout the time of purpose, untill Hippocrates and Himilco might come with their forces and legions, making no doubt, but if he mought receive them into his fortresse, the whole armie of the Romans being now enclosed within the walls, should be overthrowne, and utterly defaited. Marcellus seeing that Euryalus was not delivered up, (and forced possibly it could not bee) encamped himselfe betweene Neapolis and Tyche (so are two parts of the citie named, and may for their bignesse go well enough for two entier cities of themselves:) for feare, least if he were once entred into the populous and most inhabited places of the citie, his souldiers greedie of pillage, would not bee kept together, but runne loosely up and downe to rifle. Thither came unto him from Tyche and Neapolis, Embassadours and Oratours, with olive braunches adorned with sacred  veiles and infules, humbly beseeching him to hold his hand from effusion of bloud, and firing the citie. Marcellus calling his counsell about these their petitions, rather than demaunds, after mature deliberation, by generall consent of all, gave expresse and streight commaundement to the souldiours, that no man should offer abuse or violence to the bodie of any freeborne person whatsoever: as for all besides, his will and pleasure was it should bee their bootie. Now was the campe of Marcellus defended on both sides with housing in steed of a wall, and hee bestowed a good corps de guard at the gates thereof, lying open overagainst the streets: least when the souldiours ran to and fro in the citie, the campe in the meane while might be assailed. Then upon the sound of trumpet the souldiours fell to their businesse, ran into all parts, brake open dores, set all on a fearefull hurrey, but spilled no bloud: and they never gave over ransacking and rifling, untill  they had cast out and carried away all the riches and goods, that had beene a gathering a long time, during their wealthie and prosperous estate. Amid these stirres, Philodemus also seeing no hope of succours and rescue, after he had covenanted for his securitie, to return safe and without harme to Epicides, withdrew his garrison away with him out of the fort, and rendred it up to the Romanes.

Now whiles every man was turned another way, and busied in that part of the citie which was  forced, B^m^^car taking the advantage of one night, wherein the Romane fleet by reason of a violent tempest could not ^ide at anchor in the maine sea, gat forth of the haven of Saracose with 35 ships, and having sea-roume, halfed up sailes, and away he went with a mery gale of wind, leaving 55 behind for Epicides and the Saracosians: and after he had informed the Carthaginians in what danger the state of Saracose stood, returned within few dayes with a fleete of a hundred saile, rewarded for his labor (as the report went) by Epicides, with many rich gifts, which the treasure of king Hiero paid for. Marcellus possessed now of the fortresse Euryalus, and having planted there a garison, was well rid of one care yet: for he doubted, least if a new power of enemies had bene received behind his back into that fort, they would greatly have annoyed his men, enclosed now as they were, and encombred within the walls.
After this he besieged Acradina, and invested it round about, and fortified three severall campes (in meet and convenient places) against it, hoping to shut them up into such streights, that they should be driuen to extreame scarcitie and want of all things. Now when as for certaine daies, the guards of the one side and the other had rested quiet; sodainly upon the arivall of Hippocrates and Himilco, they within began from al parts to set freshly upon the Romans. For, first Hippocrates (after he had encamped and well fortified himselfe fast by the great Key, and giuen a signall to them that kept Acradina) assaulted the old campe of the Romanes, where Crispinus lay with his guard for the defence thereof: then Epicides also sallied forth, and brake upon the Corps de guard of Marcellus: and withall, the Carthaginian fleet approched close to the strond that lieth betweene the citie and the Romane camp, to hinder that Crispinus might have no aid sent  unto him from Marcellus. And yet for all this ado, the enemies made a greater stirre and tumultuous alarme, than any skirmish to speake of: for Crispinus not only gave Hippocrates the repulse, and drave him from the defenses of his owne campe, but also followed him in chase, as he fled fearefully in hast away: and Marcellus forced Epicides to take the citie againe, and get it over his head. So as now they seemed very sufficiently provided and appointed against all dangers from thence forth, of their sodaine fallies and irruptions.
(...)Over and besides all these troubles, there hapned a common calamitie unto both, the plague and pestilence: in such manner, as it might soone have withdrawne the minds, as well of the one part as of the other, from thinking any more of warre. For, besides that it fell out to be the Autumne or harvest season of the yeare, the place it selfe by nature unholsome, stinking and corrupt  (but much more without the citie than within) the extreame and intollerable heate of the weather mightily distempered al their bodies generally, in the camps both the one and the other. At the first, by occasion of the distemperature of the season, and corruption of the place, they both fell sick and died: but afterward by visiting and tending one another that were infected, the disease grew catching and contagious, and so spred and increased more and more: in such manner, as either they that were fallen sick perished for want of looking to and diligent attendance; or if any came about them, to keepe them and minister unto them, they were infected and endangered also as deepely as the other: so as every day a man could go no where, but either death, or corses caried forth to their graves, were presented to his eies: night and day in all places there was nothing heard but weeping, wailing, and piteous lamentation. In the end their hearts  were so hardned and made savage againe, by contin^all usage to this miserie, that not only they gave over to weepe over the dead, and to accompanie them unto their sepulchres with due mourning and dolefull plaints, but also to cary them forth and to interre them: so that the breathlesse bodies lay scattred all abroad on the ground in the sight of them, that looked every houre for the like miserable death themselves. The dead killed the sick: the sick infected the sound, partly with feare, and partly with the corruption and pestiferous stench that came from their bodies. And because they would dye rather upon the swords point, than of this maladie, some of them made offer to go alone among the armed guards of their very enemies, to be killed out of hand, and rid out of their miserie. Howbeit, the plague was hotter by farre in the Carthaginian camp, than among the Romanes, by reason of the corrupt water, and much slaughter  committed there, and so long siege about Saracose. For of the enemies armie, the Sicilians at the first, so soone as they saw the sicknesse to spread commonly, and increase by reason of the corruption of the place, got themselves away, and stole every man home to the cities neere adjoyning. But the Carthaginians were faine to stick by it still, as having no place to retire themselves unto,

 and so, they together with their Generals themselves Hippocrates and Himilco, died all of them, and not one escaped. Marcellus when he saw this mortalitie grow thus hote, brought his people into the citie, where the houses and shadowie places yeelded some good refreshing to the sick and weake bodies: howbeit, many also of the Romane armie went of it, and turned up their heeles. Thus when the land-souldiours of the Carthaginians were all gone and consumed of the plague, the Sicilians who had served under Hippocrates, withdrew themselves into certaine townes, which were not great, yet sure and strong, both by naturall situation, and also by strength of walls and other defenses; the one of them three miles from Saracose, the other fifteene miles distant from the haven mouth: and thither they conveighed from out of their own cities adjoyning, all manner of victuals, and sent abroad for aids of men.
 In the meane while Bomilcar set saile once againe with his fleete for Carthage, where he made relation of the state of their confederates in such termes, that still he fed them with some hope, That not only by their help they might be saved, but also that the Romans (notwithstanding they had in some sort forced and taken the citie) might be surprised and taken there themselves: and in conclusion persuaded and prevailed so with them, that they graunted not only to send with him a great number of hulks and caricks, laden with store of all things, but also to furnish him with more ships of warre, to encrease his Armada. Whereupon he departed from Carthage with 130 gallies, and 70 ships of burden, and had forewinds good enough to set him over into Sicilie. But those winds kept him from doubling the point of the cape Pachynus.
The fame and rumor first of Bomilcar his comming, and then his delay above mens expectation,  that checked it againe, wrought diversly in the minds of the Romanes and Syracusians, ministring one while feare, another while joy unto them both. Whereupon Epicides fearing least if the same Easterly winds which then held, and were settled in that corner, should continue many dayes more, the Carthaginian navie would returne againe into Affrick, leaving the guard of Acradina to the captaines of the waged and mercenarie souldiours, failed to Bomilcar, riding still with his fleete in the rode that looketh toward Affrick, and fearing a conflict at sea, not so much because he was inferiour to the enemies either in force or number of ships (for he had many more than the Romanes) but for that the winds stood more favourably to help the Roman Armada than his: howbeit, in the end he persuaded him to try the fortune of a battaile at sea. And Marcellus for his part, seeing both the Sicilian forces gather and assemble togither from  all parts of the Island, and understanding that the Carthaginian fleet was comming with great store of victuals: for feare least at any time whiles hee was shut up within the enemies cittie, hee should be assailed both by sea and land: albeit he was short of them in number of ships, yet determined to hinder Bomilcar for arriving at Saracose. Thus rid two armadaes of enemies affronting one another, about the head of Pachynus, readie to joyne battaile, so soone as the calmenesse of the weather would give them leave to advaunce into the maine and open sea. Therefore when the East wind began to lie, which for certeine daies had blustred and raged, first Bomilcar waighed anchor: and the vantguard of his armada seemed to gather still into the deepe, only because hee might more easilie gaine the Cape and promontarie aforesaid. But so soone as he saw the Romanes ships make way toward him, (I wot not what suddaine accident it was that afrighted  him) he set up all his sailes and fell off, into the maine sea: and after he had sent certain messengers to Heraclea, willing them for to set againe their hulkes home into Affricke, himselfe costed all along Sicilie, and shaped his course for Tarentum. Epicides disappointed thus on a suddaine, of so great hopes that he had, because he would not returne againe to the siege of a cittie, whereof a great part was lost alreadie, saileth to Agrigentum, there to abide and expect the event and finall issue, rather than to stirre himselfe and trie any more, how to helpe them with any succour from thence.
These things being reported in the campe of the Sicilians, to wit, that Epicides had quit Saracose; that the Carthaginians had abandoned the whole Iland of Sicilie, and in manner yeelded it againe into the hands of the Romanes: after they had sounded first their minds who were  besieged, by talke and conference with them, they sent Embassadours unto Marcellus, to treat about condititions of surrendring the cittie. When they were growne in a manner to this point, without any squaring or difference at all, That the Romanes should have the signorie all and wholly which belonged unto the kings: and that, all the rest the Sicilians should enjoy, with libertie and their own proper lawes; the Embassadors aforesaid called forth to a parley, those unto

whom Epicides at his departure had committed the government of the affaires, and declared  unto them, that as they were addressed Oratours unto Marcelius, so they were from him sent unto the armie of the Sicilians: that generally all, as well the besieged, as those who were without the daunger of the siege, should be comprised within the treatie, and abide one and the same fortune: and that neither the one side nor the other, should capitulate or enter into any covenant for themselves apart, without all the rest. Who being received and admitted, for to falure and speake unto their kinsfolke and friends, made them acquainted with the agreement and composition betwene Marcellus and them: and so after they had presented unto them some good hope of their safetie, they persuaded with them so farre forth, as to joyne with them, and all togither, for to set upon and assault the bodies of the captains deputed by Epicides, namely Polycletus, Philistio, and one Epicides surnamed Sydus.
When they were once made away and killed, they called the  multitude togither unto a generall assembly: where they complained greatly of their povertie, and penurie of all things (for which they were woont to murmure secretly among themselves:) And albeit yee are distressed (say they) with so many miseries and calamities, yet are yee not to blame fortune therefore, so long as it was in your owne power and choise, either to be delivered from them, or to endure them longer. As for the Romans (said they) it was not hatred, but meer love and charitie, that moved them to come against Saracose for to assault it. For when they heard that the government of the state was usurped by Hippocrates and Epicides (the ministers first belonging to Anniball, and after to Hicronymus) then they began to lay siege unto it, intending not the overthrow and destruction of the cittie it selfe, but to put downe and depose the cruell tyrant that ruled the state. Seeing then, that now Hippocrates is dead, Epicides excluded  from Saracose, his deputies and captaines killed, and the Carthaginians driven out of all their hold and possession of Sicilie, both by land and sea, what reason have the Romanes, but to
bee willing and well content, that Saracose should continue in safetie now, as well as if Hiero himselfe were living, the onely mainteiner and observant upholder of the Romane amitie? And therefore, if ought but well should happen, either to the cittie, or to the cittizens, yee may thanke your selves, and none else, for letting slip opportunitie now offered, of reconciliation and attonement with the Romanes. Never looke to have the like occasion hereafter, to that, which at this instant is presented: if yee had the grace to see what a doore is opened for you, to be delivered from the yoke of most insolent and proud tyrants. This speech they gave eare unto with exceeding accord and generall applause. But before that any Embassadours were nominated to bee sent unto Marcellus, it was thought good that new Pretors should be created. Out of the number of which Pretours, there were Oratours addressed unto Marcellus.
And the principal man among them, spake in this wise. Neither we Syracusians (quoth hee) o Marcellus, at the first revolted from you Romanes, but Hieronymus, impious and wicked Prince as he was; yet nothing so much hurtfull to you as to us: nor afterwards, when peace was knit again upon the murder of the tyrant, was it any cittizen of Saracose, but Hippocrates and Epicides (the kings right hands and ministers, who oppressed and kept us under, with fear of one side, and with deceivable sleights on another side) that made the brack, and were the troublers and disturbers of this peace. Ne yet can any man come forth and say truly, that ever we were at our owne libertie, and enterteined not peace and amitie with you. And now also I assure you, so soone as by the massacre of these, that held Saracose in such  oppression and bondage, we began againe to be our owne men, and to have the law in our owne hands; the first thing you see that we do, is this, to come and present ourselves unto you, to deliver up our armour and weapons, to yeeld our bodies, our cittie, the walls, and all the strength therof, and to refuse no condition, that it shall please you Romans to impose upon us. As to your self, o noble Marcellus, the gods have given you the honour of conquest, over the most noble and beautifull cittie of all other in Greece. Behold, how, what memorable acts soever that we have at any time atchieved, either by land or sea, all makes to the advancement of the glorious title and dignity of your triumph. See you then, that another day it be not known by bare hear-say and the trump of fame, how great and mightie a cittie you have woon, but rather that it may stand still and remaine for all posteritie, for a marke and worthie spectacle to behold: to the end, that whosoever  hereafter, shall resort thither by land, whosoever shall arrive there by sea, it may present unto them, both our Trophees and worthie victories over the Atheniens and Carthaginians; and also this of yours over us, the bravest conquest of all the rest. See (I say) that you leave for your house and familie, the cittie of Saracose whole and sound, to do homage and fealtie ever hereafter, to

 the name and linage of the Marcelli, and to hold of them as of their soveraigne LL. in chiefe and in villenage. That all the world may see, that the late remembrance of Hieronymus, beareth no greater stroke with the Romanes, than the ancient name of king Hiero, a noble Prince of famous memorie. Much longer was he a friend, than the other an enemie. His good deeds and many favours yee have tasted and felt with great contentment: the follie and madnesse of Hieronymus, hurt none of you, but wrought his owne confusion and overthrow. There was nothing but they might have obteined at the Romanes hands: all was cleere there, and no daunger from thence. But among their owne selves they were at more warre: there was the perill, there was all the mischiefe. For the Romane rebels, who were runne from them, doubting that they should be delivered over into their hands, and not comprised within the termes of the composition and protection,  drave the auxiliaries also that were waged souldiours into the same scruple and feare. They hastilie therefore tooke armes, and first killed the Pretours: and afterwards, ran all about to massacre the Saracosians. Looke whom they hapned to meet, them they murdred in this furious fit of choller. Whatsoever came next to their hands, and lay handsome for them, they rifled. And because forsooth, they would not be without their leaders, they created sixe provosts or captaines, that three should governe Acradina, and other three Nasos. At the last, after the uprore was appeased, the mercenarie souldiours aforesaid, followed the matter throughly by search and diligent inquirie, what were the capitulations in deed agreed upon with the Romans; and then began the very truth to appeare, namely that their condition and the fugitives were far different.
 These Embassadours in very good time returned from Marcellus, and certified them that they were caried away with a wrong surmise and false suspition, and the Romanes had no just cause to punish them. Now there was one of those three Provosts of Acradina, a Spaniard, named Mericus.
Vnto him there was sent for the nones among those of the retinue and traine of the Embassadours aforesaid, one of the Spaniards, who were auxiliarie souldiours, serving under the Romanes: who finding Mericus alone without other companie, gave him to understand especially above all things, in what tearmes he had left Spaine (and from thence he was newly come) namely how the Romanes there were grown mightie, and held a great hand over them with their forces. And that himselfe, in case he had a mind to doe some worthie deed, might soone rise, and be a great man in his countrey: chuse whether he list to serve under the Romanes, or returne againe  into his owne home. Contrariwise, if he went on stil in this course he had begun, and minded still to be besieged, what long abiding place could he have there, shut up as he was from sea and land? Mericus pondered well these reasons: and when it was agreed, that there should bee addressed new Embassadours unto Marcellus, sent his owne brother with them, who by the selfesame Spaniard was brought apart from all the rest unto Marcellus: and after he had a protection granted, he laid the plot, and ordered all the matter how it should be done, and so returned to Acradina. Then Mericus because he would withdraw mens minds from all suspition of treason, and that he intended nothing lesse, than to betray Acradina, gave it out, That he liked not, and would no more of this recourse, ever and a none, of Embassadours betweene; and therefore as he would admit of none to come from Marcellus, so he would send no more to him. And to the end, that all  the guards should bee kept more diligently, hee thought it good to devide conveniently among the Provosts, the quarters of the citie, and assigne to every one his ward by himselfe, and that ech one should be bound to answere for the safe keeping of his own division, and for no more. Then all gave their consent to part accordingly, and to himselfe befell the charge of that quarter which reacheth from the fountain or wel Arethusa, unto the mouth or entrie of the great key or haven. And hereof he gave notice and intelligence to the Romanes. Whereupon Marcellus caused a great hulke, laden with armed souldiours, to be fastened by an haling rope unto a gallie of foure course of oares, and so in the night by strength of oares to bee tewed and drawne up after it into Acradina, and landeth the souldiours over against the gate that is neer to the fountain Arethusa. This being done about the releefe of the fourth watch, Mericus received the souldiours that were  set ashore at the gate, according as before it was agreed. And Marcellus by the dawning of the day, with all his forces gave a Camisado upon the walls of Acradina, in such manner, that not onely he turned thither unto his assault all those that kept Acradina, but also from Nasos there came running whole squadrons and companies of armed men (leaving their owne wards) for to repell and put backe the violence and assault of the Romanes. In this turmoile and trouble, certeine

barges appointed and furnished thereto aforehand, were brought about to Nasos, and there  set other souldiours a land: who comming at unwares upon the corps de guards that were left halfe naked and very weake, by reason of the departure of their fellowes, and finding the gateswide open, at which erewhile the souldiours ran out, with small adoe were maisters of Nasos, left, as it was, forlorne of warders, who in feare made hast to run away and escape. And none of them all had lesse meanes to defend themselves, or smaller mind to tarrie still, than the fugitive rebels, for they durst not well trust their owne fellowes, and so in the hotest of the skirmish made an escape. Marcellus so soone as hee understoood, that Nasos was woon, and likewise that one quarter of Acradina was held and kept for him, and that Mericus with his guard had joined to his souldiors, founded the retreat: for feare, that the kings treasure, which was more in name than in deed, should be rifled and spoiled.
Thus by suppressing the violence of the souldiours, both the rebell fugitives that were in Acradina, had good time and place to shift for themselves and get away, and also the Syracusians delivered now at last from feare, opened the gates of Acradina, and sent Oratours unto Marcellus, craving nothing but life for themselves and their children.
Marcellus called his counsell together, and those Syracusians likewise, who in the time of civile dissention, were driven to forsake their houses, and remained among the garrisons of the Romanes: and then hee made the Embassadours this answere. There have not been (quoth he) more benefites and good turnes for the space of fiftie yeares received at king Hiero his hands by the people of Rome, than detriments and mischeefes intended against them within these few yeares, by them that have seized and possessed the citie of Syracusa. But most of those mischeefes in the end, have lighted upon their heads right justly, who duly deserved the same: and for the breach of league and covenants, they  themselves have suffered at their owne hands more greevous punishment by farre, than the people of Rome would willingly ever have required. As for mee, this is the third yeere that I lie in siege before Syracusa; not, I assure you, with this intent, that the citie should not be reserved safe and found for the naturall people thereof to keepe and inhabite, but that the captaines and ringleaders of fugitives and rebels might not seize of it, and so hold it in captivitie and oppression. How much the Syracusians might have done with me at first, may be easily seen by the example either of those Syracusians who conversed among the guards of the Romanes, or of the Spanish captaine Mericus, who yeelded up his garrison. Yea, and the hardie and resolute course in the end taken (although it were with the latest) by the Syracusians themselves, may sufficiently testifie  the same. Whereby also it may appeare, that for all my travell and paine which I have undergone, for all the perils which I have adventured and passed through, about the walls of Syracusa, both by land and water, thus long; I have gathered no fruit so sweet and pleasant as this, that it may be said, how I was able, yet at last, to win and conquere Syracusa.
Then the Questour was sent, attended with a guard, unto Nasos, for to enter upon the kings treasure there,(...). and to keepe the same in safetie. The pillage of the citie was given to the souldiors: but there were appointed certaine warders over every house of theirs, who were among the garrisons of the Romanes, for to save the same. Amids many cruell, spightfull, and foule examples of anger, mallice, and covetousnesse, which happened to bee committed during the time of this saccage, it is reported, That in so great hurliburly as possiblie might bee, when a citie is newly  taken,Arch^medes killed. and hungrie souldiours runne to rifling, Archimedes was busily occupied, and studying upon certeine Geometricall figures that hee had drawne out in the dust, and happened to be slaine by a souldiour, that knew not who he was. Whereat Marcellus was much offended and displeased: and thereupon gave especiall order, that he should be honorably enterred: yea and caused his kinsfolkes to be sought out: and all they in remembrance of him, and for his name sake, were not onely saved, but also well accounted of, and had in good reputation. Thus you see in what sort, and by what meanes especially, Saracose was woon. A citie wherein was found such store of wealth and riches, as hardly would have bene gotten in Carthage, if it had bene forced then: notwithstanding it was able to hold out with Rome, and mainteine warre with equall force and power.
Some few dayes before the winning of Saracose, T. Octacilius with fourescore Gallies, of five ranks of ores, crossed the seas from Lilybaeum to Vtica, and being entred the gate before day light, chaunced to take by the way certaine Carikes charged with corne. After he was disbarked and set a land, he wasted grievously part of the territorie about Vtica, and returned to the citie

 with bootie and prises of all sorts. And the third day after he went from Lily (...) he returned thither againe with 130 caricks full of corne and other bootie: and that corne he sent forthwith to Saracose: which if it had not come as it did in good time to help the present necessitie, the conquerours as well as the conquered had felt the smart of most extreame and grievous famine.
In the same sommer, the Romane Generals in Spaine (who almost for two yeares had done no memorable act there, but warred by pollicie and stratagemes, more than by force of armes) dislodged from their forts and winter harbours, and joyned their armies together. Then they called a counsell, where they jumped with one generall accord in this opinion, That considering all this while they had effected this much only, as to empeach and stay Asdruball from all meanes of passing over into Italie, it was now high time to make an end at once of the warre in Spaine.  And to effect and bring this to passe, they supposed verily that their strength was well amended and sufficient, by reason that in the winter time they had levied and put in armes thirtie thousand Celtiberians. Now the Carthaginians had in Spaine then, no fewer than three armies. Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, and Mago, were encamped with all their forces together, distant from the Romanes almost five dayes iourney: Asdruball the sonne of Amilcar, an auncient warriour, and an old Captaine in Spaine, was somewhat neerer with his whole power, before a citie named Anitorgis. Him the Romane Generals were desirous to diffeate and vanquish first: and in good hope they were, that they had strength enough and to spare, for to accomplish that: mary, this was their only doubt and feare, least upon the discomfiture of him, the other Asdruball and Mago would for feare retire themselves into the unpassable woods, and take the wilds and mountaines,  and so mainteine a long war. They supposed therefore it was the best course to divide their power betweene them in two parts, and at once to compasse the whole warre of Spaine. And thus they agreed to part their forces, namely, That P. Cornelius should lead two third parts of the armie, consisting of Romanes and allies, against Mago and Asdruball: and that Cn. Cornelius with the other third part of that old armie should joine with the Celtiberians, and warre against Asdruball the Barchine [i. sonne of Amilcar abovesaid.] Both these captains with their hosts set out together in their journie, putting the Celtiberians before in the vantguard, and encamped neere the citie Anatorgis in the sight of their enemies, having but the river running betweene. And there Cn. Scipio staied behind, and made his abode with the power aforesaid: but P. Scipio went onward to performe that part of the warre which he purposed and intended. Asdruball after he perceived  that there lay in camp but a small power of Romanes, and that their whole hope relied upon the aids of the Celtiberians; as one that could well skill of the falshood and trecherie of the barbarous people, but especially of all those nations, among whom he had been so long a souldiour: by reason that both campes, as well his owne as the other of the Romanes, were full of Spaniards, hee used by the meanes of reciprocall commerce of their language, for to have secret speech and conference with the principall heads of the Celtiberians, and so treated with them, that in consideration of a great summe of money, they were persuaded and yeelded in the end to withdraw all their forces from thence, and give the Romanes the slip. And this they supposed was not so heinous and odious a fact. For why? they were not dealt withall to turn their swords upupon the Romanes, and to warre against them: againe, they were to have as good pay and wages  to sit still, and not to serve, as was sufficient to bind them for to beare armes and fight: and last of all, rest it selfe, and sleeping in a whole skin, together with their returne home to their owne, and the joy and pleasure of visiting their friends, and seeing their goods and lands, were plausible and pleasing inducements to every man. And therefore the captaines themselves were no sooner drawne thereto, than the very multitude. Over and besides, to strike it dead sure, they stood in no feare of the Romanes (being so few as they were) that they could possiblie keepe them perforce. And surely, this might well serve, to be a Caveat for Romane captaines ever hereafter, and such precedent examples and instances as this, may stand in steed of good lessons indeed, to teach them how they trust again the aids of foreiners; and never to relie themselves so much upon them, but that they alwaies have in their campe the greater part of their owne forces, and the more  number of their naturall souldiors. All on a suddaine therefore the Celtiberians dislodged, plucked up standerds, and departed from them, and never bad them farwell. And when the Romans demaunded the cause of this change, yea, and besought and importuned them to tarrie, they made them no other answere but this, That they were called and sent for home, by occasion of warres in their owne countrie. Scipio seeing, that these Allies of his were so slipperie, and could neither

be intreated nor ^nforced to stay: and that himselfe alone without them was not able to make  his part good with the enemie: and to joyne againe with his brother, was a thing impossible: for want of all other good meanes, for the present, when he saw no remedie els, determined to retire himselfe as farre backward as he could: having this especiall care above all things, not to encounter and joyne battaile with the enemie in plaine field, without some advantage, who now was passed over the river, and traced him hard at heeles in his dismarch.
About the same time P. Scipio stood in the like termes of feare, but in more danger by the comming of a new enemie, and that was Masanissa the young Prince, who then was a friend and pensionarie souldier of the Carthaginians: but afterwards mightie and renowmed for his amitie with the Romanes. He with his Numidian horsemen first encountred P. Scipio, as he marched on his journey, and afterwards both day and night molested and troubled him very shrewdly: in such sort, that not only he would intercept and catch up those that were gone out wandering and straggling farre from the camp, a fuelling or foraging, and send them short of home; but also ride braving even before the camp. Many a time would he venture, yea and enter upon the thickest of the standing corps de guard, and make foule worke and trouble among them. By night also he used oft to make many starts upon a sodaine, and assaile the gates of the camp and the rampiar, and put them in exceeding great frights. So as the Romanes at no time, nor in no place could be at rest and quiet for him, but ever in feare and doubt of some shrewd turne or other by him: so as they were driven to keepe within their rampier, cut off from the use of all commodities abroad, and in a manner as good as besieged: and more streightly yet were they like to be beleaguered, in case Indibilis, who was comming (as the rumor went) with 7500 Suesseranes, were  once joyned with the Carthaginians. Whereupon Scipio a warie warrior and prudent Captaine otherwise, driven to these hard extremities, and forced to make shifts, entred into a rash and inconsiderate designement, even to go on and meete (forsooth) Indibilis in the night, and in what place soever it should be his hap to encounter him, there to bid him battaile, and fight with him. Leaving therefore a meane guard to keepe the camp, and T. Fonteius his Lieutenant, as Provost and Captaine, he set out at midnight, and meeting with his enemies, joyned battaile with them: but they skirmished rather by loose companies in their march, than with their united forces in set and pight field. Howbeit, the Romanes had the better hand so much as it was, considering what a confused and disorderly medley there might be. But the Numidian Cavallerie, whom Scipio thought he was secured of, and that they were not aware of him, all on a sodaine flanked  the sides of the Romanes, and mightily terrified them. Against these Numidians, whiles Scipio made head againe afresh, behold a third sort of enemies also charged upon his back, even the Carthaginian captaines, who by this time while the other were in fight, had overtaken their allies and were come thither. So as the Romanes were to maintaine battaile on all hands, and were at a stand, and in doubt with themselves against which enemie to turne first, or what way with a close couched squadron to give the venture for to breake through. As the Generall was thus mansully fighting, and encouraging his souldiours, presenting and opposing himselfe forward, where was most need and danger, his chance was to be run through the right side of his bodie with a Launce:P. Scipio slaine. and that massive band of the enemies which had charged upon the thicke battailon, which environed their captaine, seeing Scipio falling from his horse readie to dye, in  great joy and mirth set up a cheerefull shout, and ran all over the armie, and caried glad tidings that the Romane generall was slaine. This voyce being once spread all abroad, caused both the enemies to take themselves undoubtedly for victours, and the Romanes to make no other accoumpt but they were vanquished. Whereupon they having lost their leader, began forthwith to flye out of the field. But as it was no hard matter for them to make a lane and breake through among the Numidians, and other auxiliarie souldiours lightly armed; so to escape and go cleere away from so many horse, and footemen also, who were as swift on foote as the horsemen, it was almost impossible. Thus they were more in maner slain in their flight now, then in their fight before. And there had not one remained alive, but that the day being far spent alreadie, and toward evening, the night came on a pace and overtooke them. The Carthaginian captaines, and those  also of Affrick, taking the full benefit of this their good fortune, slept not their businesse, nor made delay: but presently after the battaile, scarcely allowing their souldiours so much sleepe as would content nature, marched in great hast toward Asdrubal the sonne of Amilcar: making accoumpt assuredly, that when they had joyned their power with his, they should breake the neck

 of this warre, and end it once for all. When they were come to him, great joy and gratulation there was betweene the captaines and the hoasts of both sides, for this fresh victorie newly atcheived: and seeing they had alreadie defaited so brave a warriour and great commaunder, together with his whole armie, they made no doubt but expected certainely to have another hand as good as this.
The newes verily of this so great a soile and overthrow, was not yet come unto the Romanes: but yet they were strucken into a sad dump and deepe silence, and more than that, into a secret presage and fore-deeming of some unluckie tidings: as commonly mens minds use to fore give and tell aforehand, when there is some mischiefe and ill toward them. The Generall himselfe, besides that he saw he was abandoned and forsaken of his associates, and knew the forces of the enemies  so mightely reenforced; by good conjectures and guesses, yea and by very reason, was induced to suspect some losse and calamitie received alreadie, rather than enclined to hope after any good successe and happie speed. For thus he discoursed with himselfe: How is it possible that A^^^^ball and Mago should bring their armies together without conflict, unlesse my brother be slaine in fight, or have forgotten to be a warriour? how commeth it that he withstood them not? or how hapneth it that my brother followed not hard after them fast upon their backs? At leastwise, if he had not bene able to keepe them asunder, but that both captaines and armies must needs meete and joyne in one, yet he himselfe me thinks, at leastwise would have come by this time to his brother, and brought his owne power to his. In this perplexitie and anguish of spirit, he thought yet, for the present time, that the only good course he could take, was to withdraw himselfe backe  from thence as far as he could^ and so all that one night unwares to his enemies (who so long only were quiet) he marched a great way, and woon much ground of them. The next morning, so soone as the enemies perceived that the Romanes were dislodged and gone, they sent out the Numidian light horsemen, and began to follow after them apace, and pursued them as fast as possibly they could: and before night the Numidian Cavallerie had overtaken them, and skirmished one while with the taile of their march, another whiles at their sides and flanks, and gave them no rest: whereat the Romanes made as it were a stand, and began to defend and save their armie as well as they could: yet with great warinesse and regard of securitie, Scipio encouraged them so to fight, as they might march on still and gaine ground, before the Infanterie overtooke them. But as one while the armie was on foote, and another while stood still, in long time they rid  but a little ground. And Scipio seeing the night draw on apace, reclaimed his souldiours from farther skirmishes: and after he had rallied them together, he retired with them up to a little mount, no sufficient place (God wot) of safe retreat for an armie, especially so troubled and affrighted alreadie, yet higher than any other place all about. There the first thing that he did, was to bestow the baggage and cavallerie in the mids withinforth: and at first the infanterie raunged round about in a ring, made no difficult matter of it to put by the violent charge of the Numidian horsemen. But afterwards when the three Generals marching with three full armies approched, their Captaine Scipio perceiving that he was never able to keepe the place without some fortification, began to cast his eye about, and to bethinke with himselfe, by what meanes possible he might empale himselfe round about as it were with a rampier: but the hill was so naked  of wood, and the soile of the ground besides so stonie and craggie, that he could neither finde any underwood fit to cut out stakes for a pallisaid, nor earth meete to make turfes for a banke, or minable for a trench: and in one word, all things untoward and unhandsome for a mound, and to fortifie withall. Neither was there any place there, to speake of, so sleepe and upright, but the enemie might at ease mount up and climbe it. All the hill on every side, had a gentle rising and ascent up to the top. Howbeit, to represent some shew and resemblance yet of a rampiar, they were forced to take their packe saddles, with their packes tied fast unto them, and so round about to pile them and raise them to the usuall height of a mure: And where there wanted packe saddles to make up the worke, there they were saine to heape togither, all sorts of fardels, trusses, and other carriages, and to put them betweene the enemies  and them. The Carthaginian armies when they were come, marched very easily up against the hill. But the new fashion and manner of their defences and fortifications, was very straunge unto them, so as at the first the souldiours marvelled much and were astonied thereat, and stood still. But their captaines on all sides cried out upon them. And why stand yee gaping (say they) so; and do not pull in peeces and plucke away that foolishbable there, good to make sport with?

A very toy, that women and children would scarce stand about thus long? Why? the enemie is taken  alreadie in a pinfold, and lieth lurking and hiding himselfe behind the trusses and other carriages. After this manner (I say) the leaders rated at the souldiours. But it was not so easie a matter, either to get over that barricado of the packes, or to remove and rid them out of the way, as they lay piled close against them; ne yet to unfold and unwrap the packe-saddles, lying overwhelmed as they did, under the packes, and entangled togither with them. Thus they were hindred and staied a long time: and when at length they had put this bag and baggage aside that was set in their way, and made passage and entrance for the armed men, and that in divers places; the campe and tents were soone taken on all sides, ere a man could turne about: and so being few to many, and frighted men to late conquerours, no marvell if they were killed and hewne in peeces in every place. Howbeit, many of the souldiours having fled for refuge into the forrests  neere by, escaped into the camp of P. Scipio, whereof T. Fonteius his lieutenant had the charge. As for Cn. Scipio, some write that he was slaine upon that mount, at the first onset and assault made by the enemies: others report, that with a few others he fled into a towne hard by the campe: and that there was a fire made round about it, and so when the gates therof were burned, which by no violent meanes otherwise they could breake open, the enemies entred and tooke it, and they within were killed every one, captaine and all.
Thus Cis. Scipio came to his end, in the seventh yeare after that he went into Spaine, and on the nine and twentieth day after that his brother lost his life. Their death was bewailed and lamented no lesse over all Spaine, than at Rome. For among the citizens at home, one part of their sorrow they tooke for the losse of the armies, another part went for the distraction and alienation  of the province, and a third againe was spent in the cogitation of the publicke calamitie: but Spaine from one end to the other, mourned onely for their governours and captaines, and had a great misse of them. And Cneus of the twaine, was more bewailed, because he had bene longer time their ruler, and had woon the favour and affection of men, and possessed their hearts before the other: and was the first that ever gave them in those parts a proofe and tast of the Romans just and temperate government.
When the armie was thus defeated and brought to nothing, so as Spain seemed utterly lost, there arose one man yet, that recovered all againe, and brought the decaied state to the former perfection. There was in the armie one L. Martius, the son of Septimius, a gentleman and knight of Rome, a forward young man; for courage and wit, farre above the degree and condition wherein  he was borne. Besides this excellent and most toward disposition of his by nature, he had great helpes by the discipline and instruction of Cn. Scipio: under whom, for so many yeares hee was trained and had learned all militarie knowledge and skill meet for a souldiour. This Martius, what by rallying the dispearsed souldiours who were fled, and what by drawing others out of sundrie garrisons, had raised and assembled togither a reasonable good power, and joyned with T. Fonteius, the Lieutenant aforesaid of P. Scipio. But the Romane knight, above all others, grew to so great credit and reputation among all the souldiours, that when they had fortified their campe within the river Iberus, and were determined among themselves, to chuse one Generall over the armies, in a solemne assembly of souldiours, even by their owne militarie election: they went one by one in course one after another, unto the maine Corps de guard that defended the rampiar, and to the  other wards belonging unto the campe, untill they had all given their voices: and so by generall consent created him their Generall. All the time which they had after, (and that was but small) they employed in fortifying their hold, and conveying thither corne and victuals: and what charge soever was imposed by him upon the souldiours, the same they executed readily and willingly, and without any shew that their hearts were dismaied and cast downe any jot at all. But after that newes was brought, that Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, was comming against them, to dispatch cleane the reliques of the warre; that he had passed over Iberus and approached neere: and the soldiers saw once the signall of battell put forth unto them by this new Generall; calling to mind, what noble warriours they had served under but a while before; what worthie leaders they were wont to have, and with how puissant armies they used heretofore to go to the field; they  fell a weeping every one, shaking and beating their heads: some lift up and stretched out their hands to heaven, blaming and accusing the gods: others lay along upon the ground, calling everie one upon his owne captaine by speciall name. Neither could their pitteous mones and plaints be staied, notwithanding the Centurions encouraged what they could, the souldiours of their

 companies: notwithstanding (I say) that Martius himselfe sometimes spake them faire, sometimes rebuked them, for giving themselves to such foolish and vaine puling, like women: and not rather resolve to raise up their hearts, and with him to quicken and whet their stomackes in defence of themselves and of the common-weale, and not to suffer their former captaines and leaders to lie dead and unrevenged. By this time now all on a suddain, the shout of the enemies was descried, and the sound of the trumpets were within hearing, being come close under the rampiar. Whereupon all at once, turning their sorrow and weeping into anger and indignation, they ranne every man to his armour and weapon: and as if they had bene horne mad, they hastned from all parts to the gates and entries of the campe, and charged upon the enemies as they came carelesly and without order and array. Immediatly this unexpected and suddaine object, stroke an exceeding feare into the Carthaginians: as wondring from whence so many enemies should  start up so soone, considering the armies were so lately cleane in manner destroied; and how it came to passe, that being newly vanquished and put to flight, they should be so stout, so bold and confident of their own selves; who a gods name, should be their Generall, after the two Scipios were slaine; what captaine and governour had they over the campe; and who gave out the signal of battaile: mervelling (I say) at these premisses, and so many particulars, that they once imagined not afore, at first hand they wist not what to doe, but as amazed men, began to give ground and recule; but afterwards, being still fiercely followed upon with a violent charge, they were plainly beaten backe and put to flight. And verily, either there had beene a foule havocke and slaughter of them that fled, or a rash and daungerous enterprise for them who would have folllowed  the chase: but that Martius hastened to sound the retreat, and opposing himselfe against the foremost ensignes of the vantguard, yea and taking hold of some of them himselfe, staid the maine battaile and repressed their violence, who were upon the point alreadie to pursue them with heat. And so he reduced them back againe into the campe, as greedie as they were still of murder, and thirstie of bloudshed. The Carthaginians, who at the first were driven from the rampiar, and for feare hastned away; after that they saw none to follow them, supposed they had bene afraid, and therefore staid still: whereupon they departed to their camp again in rechlesse manner, faire and softly. And as carelesse as they were in their retire thither, so negligent were they in guarding the same: for although their enemies were neere, yet they remembred and thought againe, that they were but the taile and reliques of two armies, vanquished and defeated a few daies  before. Vpon this resolute persuasion of theirs, and base conceit of the enemies, they were very negligent every way within their campe: whereof Martius having by his espiall, certeine intelligence, resolved upon a designment, which at the first sight seemed more like a project of hazard, than an enterprise of hardinesse; and it was no more, but even upon a braverie to set upon the enemie in his owne campe, and give him a camisado. For as he thought it an easier emprese, to force the hold and pavilions of Asdruball, being but one, than to defend and keep his owne, in case three armies and three captaines should joyne againe togither: so hee considered withall, that either if he sped well in this exploit, he should restore and set upright againe unto the Romanes, the decaied and prostrate state of Spaine: or if he were discomfited and put backe, yet by giving the adventure first upon the enemies, he should not be altogither contemned, and of no  reputation. But least this attempt so suddaine, and the terror and error which may fall out in the night-time, should happen to trouble this his designed plot, and the course of his good fortune; he thought it not amisse, to make a speech unto his soldiers, and to exhort and encourage them asore hand. And therefore calling them togither to a generall audience, in this manner hee discoursed unto them of his intent and purpose.
My valourous and loiall souldiours,The Oration of Ma^tius to his souldiors. either the reverence and affectionate love of mine, toward our cheefe captaines during their life, and after their death; or the very present condition and state wherein we all now stand; may be a sufficient testimonie and proofe to any man whosoever, that this charge and government of mine, as it is in regard of your judgement of me right honourable, so it is in truth, and in very deed, to me most weightie, and full of care and trouble.  For at what time as (but that feare tooke away all sence of sorrow) I was not so much maister of myselfe, as to seeke out and find some comfort and sollace for mine owne pensive soule and heavie spirit; I was forced being but one, (which is a most hard matter for a man to doe in time of greefe) to minister consolation unto the common misfortune and calamitie of you all. And surely I have no list at all (the harder is my case) to avert my mind from continuall greefe of heart,

not so much as even then, when as I am to studie and devise, by what meanes I may bee able to  preserve (for the behoofe of my countrie) these small remnants of two armies. For why? the greevous and bitter remembrance of calamities past, is ever before me. The two Scipions trouble mee all the day time with carefull thoughts, they disquiet me in the night season with fearfull dreams, they make mee oftentimes to start out of my sleepe, willing and charging mee, to suffer neither them nor their souldiours (who were your fellowes and companions, and for the space of eight yeeres in those parts where they served, never received foile) ne yet the Commonwealth, to continue unrevenged; warning me withall, to follow their discipline, their precepts, rules, and good instructions. And like as, whiles they lived here among us, there was no man more obedient than my selfe to their directions and commaundements; even so after their decease, whatsoever in my conceit, I judge they would have had especially done in all occurrences, the same my desire is, that you also (my souldiours) would like of and approove for the very best. I would not have you to weepe, waile, and lament still for them, as if they were extinct and gone for ever, (for they live still, and shall, so long as the world endureth, and continue immortall in renowme and fame of their worthie and noble acts) but rather so often as you remember and thinke of them, to go like hardie and valiant men to a field, even as if you heard them speaking unto you, or saw them giving out the signall of battell. Neither was it (I assure you) any other object but that, presented yesterday unto your eies and minds, which effected so memorable a peece of service as it was: by which ye have made good proofe unto your enemies, and given them to understand, that the Romane name died not together with the Scipioes; and that the vigour and vertue of that people which was not extinct and buried, by the overthrow at Cannae, will ever rise againe (ye may bee  sure) out of all adversities, let cruell fortune storme and rage as much as ever she can. And now, since yee have shewed such valour and hardinesse alreadie of your owne accord, I have a mind, and would gladly see, how bravely yee will beare your selves upon the direction and commaundement of your captaine. For yesterday, when I sounded the retreat unto you, at what time as you followed so freely upon the enemie, being troubled and disarraied; my desire and meaning was not, to represse and abate your bold courage, but to deferre and reserve it against some greater opportunitie of advantage, and for a more honourable and glorious exploit: that anon upon the first occasion, you being prepared and provided, might surprise them at unwares, and not standing upon their guard; armed and wel appointed, assaile them disarmed and naked; and that which more is, whiles they are in their beds fast and sound asleepe. And the hope that I conceive of this  good opportunitie and effect thereof (my souldiours) ariseth not upon some fantasticall imagination of mine owne braine, by hap-hazard and upon vain presumption, but grounded upon good reason and present experience. For verily, if a man should demaund even of you your own selves, What the reason was, that being but few in number, and lately discomfited, ye were able to defend your campe, against many more than your selves, and those heartened with fresh victories; yee would make no other answere but this, That you, fearing that which followed, had both fortified you campe in every respect with strong munitions, and were your selves well appointed and furnished, yea, and readie to receive them whensoever they came. And certes, so it is, and we find it true by experience: Men are least sure and secured against that which fortune saith is fearelesse, and need not to bee prevented, because that which wee neglect, is evermore open and exposed to  all daungers. Now the enemies doubt nothing lesse at this time, than that we, who were so lately our selves besieged and assailed by them, will now come to give an assault upon them in their hold. Let us adventure to doe that which no man would beleeve that ever wee durst enterprise, and the selfe same cause which seemeth to make the thing most difficult, shall effect it soonest of all others. At the change of the third watch I will lead you forth without any noise at all in great silence. Well enformed and assured I am, that in their campe the Sentinels are not releeved in due course and order, neither yet the ordinarie corps de guard kept as they ought to be. Your shout and outcrie shall not so soone bee heard at the gates, nor your first charge and assault given, but yee shall surely be maisters of the campe. Then let me see you performe that carnage and execution among them heavie and dead asleepe, affrighted with an unexpected al'arme, and taken on  a suddain unarmed, and in their beds; from which yesterday ye thought much, that ye were called away and reclaimed. I wote well, that this seemeth unto you an audacious enterprise, and full of hazard, but when things go crosse and stand in doubtfull termes, and when other means faile, the hardiest attempts, yea, and the most venterous and desperat courses, are ever safest and speed best.

 For if a man stay never so little at the very instant when a thing is to be done (whereof the opportunitie passeth and flieth away ere one would thinke) immediatly when it is once gone, he may fling his cap after well enough, and complaine thereof and say, had I wist, but never the neerer. One armie they have hard at hand, and two more are not farre off: now if we venture of them here, our opportunitie and advantage is as good as theirs. And once alreadie ye have made triall of their forces and your owne: put we it off another day, contenting ourselves with the bare name of yesterdaies sallie, and give over so, it will be great doubt and danger, least all the Generals with all their armies be rallied and re-united. And shall we then be able to hold our owne against three Generals and three hosts, whom Cn. Scipio having about him his whole puissance, fresh and in good plight, could not withstand nor abide? Our Captaines by dividing  their forces, and dismembring one complete armie, were defeated and overthrowne: semblablie may our enemies, parted while they be, and severed asunder, be discomfited and brought to nought. Lo, this is the only way for us to warre, and none other. And therefore let us wait no longer than the commodious opportunitie of the next night. Goe ye then a gods blessing, make much of your selves, take your repast and repose, that yee may be fresh and lustie, to breake into your enemies hold with the same resolute courage, where with erewhile yee defended your owne. The souldiours, as they gladly gave eare to this new counsell, of their new captain, so, the more audacious and adventurous that it was, the better it pleased them. The rest of the day behind, they spent in frobishing and making readie their harneis and weapons, and in cherishing their bodies, yea, and the better part of the night they slept quietly. And so at the releese of the fourth watch they  set forward.
Now were there other companies also of Carthaginians, beyond this next camp abovesaid, about sixe miles distant from thence. A hollow way and valey there lay betweene, standing thick of trees. In the middest of this wood, for a furlong space well neere, he bestowed closely a cohort of footmen, yea, and certaine horsemen of Romanes: but by his leave, this was but a craftie and slie tricke, borrowed of the Carthaginians. Thus the mid way being intercepted and taken up, the rest of the forces were conducted in a still march toward the enemies in the next campe. And finding no guards before the gates, no Sentinels upon the rampier, they entred in as it had been into their owne hold, and no man made resistance: then they sounded trumpets, and gave the alarme. Some fal to killing of the enemies halfe asleep; others fling drie litter and straw for to kindle  fire, upon their hales and pavillions; othersome again keep the gates, that none should issue forth. So the fire, the outcrie, and massacre all together, put them out of their right wits, and made them, as it were, besides themselves; that neither hear they could, not yet make any shift for themselves. Vnarmed and naked men fell among the bands of armed souldiours. Some run in hast to the gates, others finding the waies and passages beset, run up to the rampier: and looke as any escaped and gat away from thence by that meanes, hee flieth streightwaies directly toward the other campe. Where they were caught up by the cohort of footmen, and the cornet of horsemen, which rose up suddainly out of their Ambuscado: and being enclosed on every side, were killed to the last man. And yet, if it had been any ones good hap to have escaped from thence with life, so swiftly and with so great expedition, the Romans after they had gotten the neerer campe, sped  themselves to the other, that he could not have recovered it before them, to bring newes of the defeiture. And even there likewise, the farther they were off from their enemie, the more negligent they were: and because some also a little before day were slipt away a foraging, fuelling, and boot-haling, the Romanes found every thing more loose and out of order, than in the other campe. Their weapons onely stood reared up in their corps de guard, the souldiours themselves were unarmed, either sitting and lying all along on the ground, or walking up and downe before the gates, and under the rampier. With these souldiours so secure, so retchlesse, so disarmed and disordered (the Romanes being yet in their hote bloud, and not cooled upon their fresh massacre, and more than that, lustie and brag for their new victorie) began to make a fray, and to skirmish. But the Carthaginians were not able to keepe them out of the gates. And so within the campe  there was a hote and cruell fight: for, from all parts thereof, they ran together upon the first alarme that arose in the very beginning of the tumult and skuffling. And long had that skirmish continued, but that the Romanes bucklers and targuets seene all bloudie, were a sample unto the Carthaginians of a former execution; and thereupon drave them into a mightie feare. This fearefull sight, caused them all to turne backe and take their heeles: and thus as many of

them as escaped killing, gat out by heapes wheresoever they could make shift to finde way, and were cleane turned out of their campe and all that they had. So in the compasse of one day and night, by the conduct and direction of L. Martius, there were two encamped houlds forced and woon from the enemies: in which there were 37000 of the enemies slaine, faith Claudius, who translated the Annales of Acilius out of the Greeke tongue into the Latin, and 1830 taken prisoners, besides the gaine of a mightie rich bootie. In which pillage, there was found a shield of silver weighing 138 pound, with the image and portraiture of Asdrubal the Barchine. Valerius Antias recordeth, that the campe only of Mago was taken, and seven thousand men slaine: and that in another battaile with Asdruball upon a sally forth, there died ten thousand, and 4330 were taken prisoners. Piso writeth, that when Mago followed after our men in an hote and disorderly chase (for they seemed to give back and recule) there were  five thousand men killed by the traine of an ambush. But all writers do blazon the great honor and fame of Duke Martius. And besides the very truth of his glorious name, they make mention also and speake of some miracles: namely, that as he made the oration unto his souldiours, there was seene a flaming fire burning from his head, without any sense and feeling of his, to the great wonder and feare of the souldiours that stood about him: and that in memoriall of this brave victorie over the Carthaginians, there remained in the temple of Iup. untill the Capitoll was burned, that foresaid sheeld, with the image of Asdruball, and it was called Martius his sheeld. After this, Spaine was quiet for a long time, whiles both sides after so many overthrowes given and taken betweene them, were loth to hazard the maine chaunce in one battaile.
In the time that these affaires passed in Spaine, Marcellus upon the winning of Syracusa, having  set all other things in order throughout Sicilie, with such faithfulnesse and upright integritie, that not only he greatly augmented his owne glorie, but also enlarged the majestie of the people of Rome, brought over to Rome all the goodly and beautifull ornaments of that citie, their graven and molten images, their pictures and painted tables, where of there was great store in Syracose. These braveries (no doubt) at the first were no more but the spoiles of enemies, and lawfully acquired in right of warre and conquest. But from thence began our great love and liking to the cunning workmanship of Grecian Artisanes: and from hence came afterwards our licentiousnesse and outrage in spoiling and robbing, so commonly and ordinarily, all sacred and profane places, where these things were to be had: which staied not so, but proceeded and turned at length to the spoiling of the Romane gods themselves, and to that very first temple which  by Marcellus was beautified and adorned principally above the rest. For strangers and forein traveilers used in pilgrimage to visit the temples which were dedicated by Marcellus at the gate Capena, in regard only of the most rare and singular workemanship of the ornaments in that kind, of which at this day there is very little or nothing to be seene.
Now from all cities wellneere of Sicilie, there resorted Embassies unto him: as their causes were divers and unlike, so their conditions were not all one. As many as before the winning of Syracuse, had either not rebelled at all, or became reconciled and in favour againe, they were accepted in the qualitie of faithfull allies, and made much of: those who for feare after the losse of Saracose, yelded, were reputed as conquered, and received lawes and conditions at the wil and pleasure of the conquerour. There remained yetno small reliques of warre about Agrigentum  for the Romanes to dispatch, namely Epicides and Hanno, the captaines of the former war: and a third, sent new from Annibal in the roume of Hippocrates, a citizen of Hippon (his countrymen name him Mutines) descended from the Libyphaenices, a man of Action, and one who under Anniball had bene brought up, and taught all feates of armes, and skill of warfare. Vnto his charge were committed by Epicides and Hanno the Numidian Auxiliaries, with whom he overran all the countries belonging to the enemies: he went unto all the confederates, and so wrought with them to continue fast in their allegeance, and to send aides to every one in due time accordingly: in such sort, that within short time he got himselfe a great name throughout all Sicilie, so as the favorites and faction of the Carthaginians had no greater hope in any, than in him. And therefore both Captaines, as well Hanno the Carthaginian, as Epicides the Syracusian, who for a time had bene pent up within the walls of Agrigentum, bearing themselves as well upon the fidelitie as policie of Mutines, boldly adventured to come forth of the walls of Agrigentum, and upon the river Himera encamped themselves. Whereof Marcellus having intelligence, forthwith removed with all his power, and sat him downe encamped, almost foure

 miles from the enimie, minding to wait and expect, what they did or went about. But Mutines gave him neither opportunitie of place to rest him long, nor respite of time to take counsell in, but crossed the river, and with exceeding terror, and tumultuous noyse assailed the standing guards of his enemies: yea and the morrow after gave them battaile as it were in a pight field, and drave them within their holds and fortifications. But being called from thence by occasion of a mutinie of Numidians within the campe (who to the number almost of three hundred, were departed to Heraclea Minoa) he went to appease their moods, and to reclaime them to due obedience: but he gave the rest of the captaines (by report) a great charge and expresse warning, not to fight with the enemie, howsoever they did, in his absence. But both the captaines were greatly offended thereat, and Hanno especially, who was already mal-content,  and repined at his glory: What? saith he, thinketh Mutines,a base Affricane, and not of the right stamp neither, to gage and rule me a Carthaginian Generall, sent with Commission from the Senate and people? He persuaded therefore Epicides effectually to passe over the river, and to strike a battaile: for, quoth he, if we should stay for him, and then happen to have a fortunate day of it and win the victorie, all the honor no doubt shall redound to Mutines.
Be yeesure, Marcellus thought this a great indignitie, that hee who had repulsed at Nola Anniball, even when he bare himselfe so brauely upon his fresh victorie at Cannae, should give one foot to these pettie enemies, vanquished alreadie by him both by sea and land: whereupon hee commaunded his souldiours to arme in all hast, and to bring foorth the standards and ensigns.
But as he was arranging his men in battel aray, there came riding unto him all on the spur,  with bridle on the horse necke, ten Numidians from out of the armie of the enemies, with these tidings and ntelligences, assuring them, That their countriemen, who first were offended and discontented by occasion of that mutinie aforesaid, wherin three hundred of their companie departed and went away to Heraclea: and then afterwards, because they saw their owne head and leader, by the practise of those other captaines, who maligned and envied his glorie, sent farre enough out of the way, even against the very day when the battaile should bee fought; were not disposed at all to fight, but would sit still and not stirre. A kind of people these were, deceitfull otherwise, and used to break promise; howbeit now, they were just and true of their word. Vpon this, as the Romanes tooke better heart unto them, (for there was a speedie pursuivant or courrier sent throughout the battailons, from companie to companie, for to signifie unto them, that the  enemie was disappointed and abandoned of his cavallerie, whom they feared most of all other) so the enemies were mightily dismaied and put in feare: for over and besides, that they had no helpe from them who were the greatest strength of their armie, they were in a deepe feare least their owne horsemen would set upon them. By which occasion, the conflict was not great, for at the first shout and shocke given, well it was seene which way the game would go, and the matter was soone determined. The Numidians, who at the first encounter and during the conflict, had stood quiet in both points of the battaile, seeing their owne fellowes turne backe and flie, bare them onely companie for a whilr as they fled: but after that they perceived them all, to make hast for feare, to Agrigentum: fearing also themselves, there to be besieged among them, slipt away every one to their one citties. Many thousands were there slaine and taken prisoners: and eight elephants besides taken alive. This was the last field fought by Marcellus in Sicilie: upon this  victorie he returned to Syracuse. By this time now, was the yeare almost come about and growing to an end. And therefore at Rome the Senate decreed, that P. Cornelius the Pretour, should send letters to the Consuls, lying before Capua, purporting this tenor: That for as much as Anniball was farre from them, and no great matter of consequence like to bee performed the while at Capua; the one of them (if they thought so good) should repaire to Rome, for to create new magistrates in the roume of the old. The Consuls having received the letters, agreed betweene themselves and tooke order, that Claudius should go to hold and accomplish the solemne election of magistrates: and Fulvius remaine still at Capua. So Claudius created new Coss. Cn. Fulvius Centimalus, and P.Sulpitius Galba the sonne of Servius: a man that had not borne any  curule office of state before. After these, were Pretours chosen, L. Cornelius Lentulus, M. Cornelius Cethegus, C. Sulpitius, C. Calpurnius Piso. Vnto Piso besell the jurisdiction within the citie. Sulpitius had the government of the province Sicilie. Cethegus, of Apulia: and Lentulus, of Sardinia. The Consuls had the government of their provinces prorogued for to continue one yeare longer.



The XXVI. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the sixe and twentith Booke.
ANNIBALL encamped himselfe at three myles end from Rome, fast upon the river Anie. Himselfe in person accompanied with two thousandmen of armes, rode to the gate Capena, for to view the site of the cittie. And not withstanding that for three daics space, the armies of both sides were come into the field readie ^mbattailed, yet they never joyned in conflict, by reason of the tempestious and stormie wether: But ever as they were returned again into their  campe, presently it proved faire. Capua was woon by Q. Fulvius, and Appius Claudius the pro-Consuls. The Nobles and principall citizens of Capus poisoned themselves. When as their Senat^^rs stood bound to stakes (for to be whipped) and then to loose their heads, there came letters from the Senate of Rome unto the pro-Consull Q. Fulvius, with direction to spare their lives: but before that bee would read them, be put them up into his besome, and willed the ministes's or executioners, to let the law have the course, and to do their offce, and so he went through with the execution. It bapned that in a solemne assembly of the people, there was much debate and question, who should governe as L. Deputie the province of Spaine: and when no man was willing to vndertake that charge, P. Scipio, the sonne of that Publius who was slaine in Spaine, made offer to go that voiag^, and by the voices generally of the people, and with one accord of all, he was thither sent. In one day bee assaulted and also forced New-Carthage, being a young man, not fully 24 yeare old. And there went an opinion of him, that hee was des^end^d of some be. evenly race: both for that himselfe, after he was come to seventeene yeares of age, and had put on his mans rob^, conve^s^d within the Capitoll, and also because there was a snake or serpent seene oftentimes in his mothers  bedchamber. This booke conteineth besides the affai^es in Sicilie: the amitie concluded with the Aetolians: and the war against the Acananians and Philip king of the Macedonians.

CNEVS Fulvius Centimalus, and P. Sulpitius Galba the Consuls, when they had entred into their magistracie upon the Ides of March, assembled the Senatours into the Capitoll, where they consulted with the LL. about the state of the common-weale, concerning the administration of the warres, and astouching the provinces and the armies. Q. Fulvius and Ap. Claudius, the Consuls of the former yeare, continued still their rule and full command, with the  charge of the same forces which they had before under their hands. And over and besides, they were expresly commanded, not to depart from Capua (before which they lay at siege) until they had forced and woon the cittie. For at that time, the Romanes among all their other affairs, were most amused upon it: not so much for anger and malice, (wherof they had never against any one citie greater and juster cause) as in this regard, that being a state so noble and mightie, like as by revolting first it had drawne and induced certaine other citties to do the same: so if it were recovered and regained, like it was to reduce their affections againe, to looke backe and returne unto their old alleagence and obedience to their wonted signorie of Rome. The Pretours also of the former yeare, M. Iunius in Tuskane, and P. Sempronius in Gaule, continued in their places of regiment, with two legions a peece under their conduct, the same which they had before. And  so M. Marcellus remained as pro-Consull behind in Sicilie, for to finish and dispatch the reliques of the warre there, with the power of that armie which he had alreadie: and had commission (if need were of new supplie) to make up the number of his companies, out of those legions which were commaunded by P. Cornelius the Viz-pretour in Sicilie; provided alwaies, that he chose no

 souldiour out of those bands, unto whom the Senate had flatly denied, either licence to bee discharged, or pasport to returne home into their countrie, before the warre was fully ended. Vnto C. Sulpitius, whose lot it was to governe the province of Sicilie, were assigned those two legions, which P. Cornelius had before: with a fresh supplie out of the armie of Cneus Fulvius, which the last yeare was shamefully defeated, beaten, and put to flight in Apulia. These souldiours, all the sort of them, had the same limitation of service and no other, appointed and set downe by the Senate, as those former who remained after the overthrow at Cannae. And this disgrace they had besides, as well the one companie as the other, That they might not winter within any towne, nor build them any standing campe for wintering harbours, within tenne miles of a citie. L. Cornelius the lord Deputie in Sardinia, was allowed to have the conduct of  those two legions, which were under the leading of Q. Mutius. And order was given unto the Consuls, to levie and enroll a new supplie thereto, if need required. T. Octacilius and M. Valerius were appointed to guard and defend all the sea coasts of Sicilie and Greece, with the helpe of those Legions and Armadoes which they had alreadie. The Greekes had fiftie saile in their fleet, and were manned with one Legion. The Sicilians had one hundred ships, and two legions to furnish them. So that in this yeere the Romanes mainteined three and twentie legions, to wage war both by sea and land.
In the beginning of the yeere, when the letters of L. Martius were read and scanned in the Senat house, the LL. there assembled, liked well of the contents, and spake highly in the praise of his worthie acts: but many of them were offended at the superscription, because hee tooke upon  him the honourable title of a Propretour in his stile, and wrote thus [L. Martius the Propretour, to the Senat] considering, that his command was neither graunted by the people, nor allowed and confirmed by the Senate.
An ill precedent (say they) it is, and of bad consequence, that Generals of the field should be chosen by armies, and that the solemnitie of Elections, so devoutly begun in the name of the gods, and with the religious observation of the Bird-flight, should now be transferred into the campes and provinces farre from lawes and magistrates, and committed to the inconsiderate wils of rash affectionate souldiours. And when some there in place, were of opinion, that the matter should be put in question at the counsell table, it was thought better to deferre that consultation, untill those gentlemen of service, that brought the letters from Martius, were gone and departed. As concerning come and apparrell for the armie, they agreed to  write backe unto him, that the Senat would take order and provide for both: but they would not allow in any cause to give him this addition, and to write [To Martius the Propretour] least that they might seeme to approve the very same thing by their prejudice and dome aforehand, which they had left for to be decided and determined afterwards. When the Gentlemen aforesaid had their dispatch, and were dismissed, the first thing that the Consuls propounded, was it, and no other: and generally they jumped in this one point, for to deale with the Tribunes of the people, that with all speed possible they would move the Commons, and propound unto them, for to know, who their will and pleasure was, should be sent L. Deputie into Spaine, for to have the government of that armie, whereof Cn. Scipio, L. Generall, had the conduct.
This matter, I say, was treated of with the Tribunes, and a bill preferred thereof unto the Commons:  but there was another greater contention in tearmes, that had possessed their minds alreadie.
For C. Sempronius Blasus, had commensed a criminall action against Cn. Fulvius, accusing him for the losse of the armie in Apulia, and ceased not in all the assemblies of the people,The Oration of T. Sempi^^ius Bl^sus against Cn. Fulzius. to make invectives against him, charging him, That being captain General, through his much follie, ignorance and rashnes, he had brought his armie into a place of danger: reproving him moreover, and saying, That never any captaine but Cn. Fulvius, had corrupted, marred, and infected his legions with all kind of vices, before that he betraied them to the enemies: in such wise, that it might be well and truly said, that they were altogether spoiled and defaited, before they had a sight of their enemies: and were not vanquished by Anniball, but by their owne Colonell and Commaunder. See (quoth he) the disorder that is in Elections, and how no man, when hee is to  give his voice, doth wel weigh and consider, who it is that he chuseth a Generall, and unto whom hee committeth the charge of an armie. Behold the difference betweene Cneus Fulvius, and T. Sempronius. This man having the leading of an armie of bondslaves, by discipline, good order and government, within short time brought his souldiors to that good paste, that there was not one of them all throughout the armie, remembred and regarded how basely he was borne,

and of what parentage descended, but all in generall bare themselves so, that they were to their  friends a sure defence, and to their enemies a fearefull terror: and after that he had recovered them at Beneventum, and other cities, (as it were, out of the chaws of Annibali) he restored and delivered them safe and sound to the people of Rome. Whereas contrariwise, Cn. Fulvius having received an armie of Roman citizens, well and worshipfully borne, liberally and honestly brought up, had taught them servile vices fit for slaves, and so trained them, that with their friends and allies they were stout, proud, and unruly; and among their enemies were cowards and very dastards: and so far short they were to bear off the violence of the Carthaginians, that they were not able to abide so much as their first crie and shout. And no mervaile I assure you, that the soldiers could not stick to it in the battaile, and hold out manfully; when the Generall himselfe was the first that ran away beastly. I rather wonder at it, that any of them stood to it and died in the field, and were not all of  them as fearfull as Cn. Fulvius, and tooke not his heeles with him for companie. Yet, C. Flaminius, L. Paulus, L. Posthumius, both Scipions, as well Cn.as Pub. chose rather to loose their lives in battaile, than to forsake their armies when they were environned round with enemies. But Cn. Fulvius, hee was in manner the onely man that returned to Rome with newes of the armie defeated and overthrown. Now verily, a great indignitie it is, and a shamefull maner of proceeding, that the residue of the armie, after the overthrow at Cannae, because they fled out of the field, were confined and transported over into Sicilie, with expresse condition, not to returne againe from thence, before that the enemie were clean gone and departed out of Italie; and that the very same rigorous and heavie decree passed likewise, and was executed against the Legions of Cn. Fulvius; and Cn. Fulvius himselfe, who fled out of that battell, which was through his owne folly and rashnesse  begun, should goe away cleare, and escape without all punishment: that himselfe, I say, should lead his old age in taverns, stewes, and brothel-houses, wher alredie he hath spent his youthfull daies; while his poore souldiours (who have faulted in nothing, but that they were like unto their captaine) be sent far ynough off, and packed away (as it were) into exile, and endure shamefull and ignominious souldierie. Lo, how unequally at Rome the freedome of the cittie is parted betweene the rich and the poore; betweene men of nobilitie and high calling, and those that are of mean parentage and low decree.
Thus much spake the plaintife C. Sempronius Blasus.These sorte of Cn. (...).
The defendant on the other side, shifted all the blame from himselfe, and laid the whole fault upon his souldiours, alleadging and pleading and thus, That when they called upon him hastily, and with great wilfulnesse for to give battaile, hee  brought them forth into the field, not on that day which they would themselves (for it was late in the evening) but the morrow after, when both time and place were meet and convenient for the purpose: and notwithstanding they were well appointed and orderly embattailed, yet were they not able to sustaine, either the same, or the furie of the enemies, I know not whether. And when they all fled away amaine, he also was carried away in the throng of the rour: like as Varro the Consul, at the battell before Cannae, and as many other Generals elswhere. And what good could hee have done to the Commonweale, in case hee had staied behind alone? unlesse peradventure his death might have cured and remedied the publicke sores and maladies, or made amends for the common losses. Neither was it for want of victuals, nor for that hee light at unwares upon places of disadvantage and daunger; ne yet, because hee was entrapped within the  traines of an ambush, marching on end forward, without sending his espials before, that hee was overcome; but even by fine force, by dint of sword, in open field, and in a pight battel. And it was not he could doe withall, if his owne men were fearfull and timorous, and the enemies hardie and venturous, he had not the rule of their hearts. It is long of every one his owne nature to be either bold or heartlesse.
Two severall daies was he judicially accused, and at both times a fine of monie only set upon his head, in case the matter should go against him. At the third Session the witnesses were produced forth, to be deposed and give evidence: and after that he had bene shamefully reviled, and charged with all manner of reproches, there were very many upon their oth testified, That the first beginning of the fright and flight both, was occasioned by the Pretour himselfe: and that  the souldiers seeing themselves forsaken by him, and supposing verily that their captaine and leader was not afraid of his owne shadow, but had great reason to feare, they likewise turned their backs and fled. Vpon which evidence, the whole Court was so incensed against him with anger, that they cried all with one voice, to commense a capitall action, for that he was worthie to dye.

 Whereupon arose a new debate and controversie: for whereas the Tribune had twise before laid a penall action upon him of monie, and now at the third time said that he would have a jurie of life and death go upon him: then he called upon the other Tribunes for their helping hand to mitigate this rigor of the Tribune. But when those his colleagues made answere againe and said, that they would not oppose themselves nor hinder his course, but that hee might proceed in the suite at his owne good pleasure, more maiorum. i. [according to the auncient manner used by their forefathers,] either by order of law, or rule of custome, and bring him being but a private person, to the triall either of a capitall crime, or penall trespasse: then Sempronius spake and said flatly, that he laid upon him a criminall action of treason against the State; and requested of C. Calpurnius the L. chiefe Iustice of the citie, for to have a day of hearing and judiciall triall by  the people. Then thedefendant cast about to help himselfe by another remedie, namely, in case he could compasse that Q. Fulvius his brother, might possibly be present at the Session when he should be judged: who at that time was a man of great credit and reputation, in regard both of the name that went on him for his noble acts, and of that great hope which men had of him, that he was like presently to be maister of Capua. But when this said Q. Fulvius had requested so much by his letters, endited to that purpose as effectually as he could devise, and to move commiseration and pitie in behalfe of the life of his brother, the LL. of the Senate returned this answere unto him againe, That it was not for the good of the State that he should depart from Capua: thereupon, before the Sessions day was come, Cn.Fulvius departed of his owne accord into exile to Tarquinij, and the Commons made an act and confirmed that banishment of his  to be a just, due, and sufficient punishment for his offence.
During these businesses at Rome, the whole strength and force of warre was bent against Capua, and yet the citie was rather streightly beleaguered, than forcibly assaulted; in so much as neither the servants or bondmen, nor the common people were able to endure the famine any longer: and send unto Annibal any messengers, they possibly could not, by reason of the streight watch and ward that the Romanes kept, so ne^re one unto the other. At length there was a certaine Numidian offred to go and to escape cleere away, who having taken letters unto Anniball to put him in mind to be as good as his promise, departed in the night, and passed through the mids of the Romane camp, and put the Campanes in very good hope, to issue forth at all the gates, and to make a sally upon the enemie, whiles their power and strength served them. And  verily in many scufflings and skirmishes which they made, they got the better for the most part in horsesight: but lightly their footmen had ever the worse. The Romans for their parts were nothing so much pleased when they had the upperhand at any time, as they were discontented and ill apai^d, to receive a soile in any kind of service of them, who were not onely besieged, but in manner overcome alreadie and conquered. So they devised a means in the end, to make up and supplie by industrie and policie the defect they had in strength and force. They chose out of all the Legions certaine lustie young men, such as for cleane strength of bodie, and lightnes withall, were most nimble and swist. These had every one of them, a light buckler or target, shorter than commonly horsemen have, and seven javelins or darts apeece, foure foot long, with yron heads at one end, like as those javelins have, which they use to launce that are lightly armed, and  begin skirmishes. And every horseman took up one of these behind him on horsebacke, and used them, both to sit the horse and ride, and also to leape downe on foot, with great delivernesse and agilitie, at the signall and token given them. Now, when as, after daily practise and exercise, they were able to doe it nimblie ynough, and without feare, they advaunced forth into the plaine, lying betweene their campe, and the wall of the citie, and affronted the horsemen of the Campanes as they stood arraunged in battell array: and so soone as they were come within a darts cast, the light javelottiers aforesaid, dismounted from their horses, at a signe given them: and behold, all of a suddaine, out of the Cavallerie there was a battaillon of footmen arraunged, who charged the men of armes of the enemies, and let flie their shot with greatforce, datt after dart, which they launced so thicke, that they gauled many a horse, and wounded also many horsemen. Howbeit,  their feare was much greater, by reason of the strange and unexpected manner of fight. The Romane horsemen seeing their enemies thus affrighted, set too hard, and charged upon them lustily, chased them and beat them downe even to the citie gates. After this, the Romans were the better in horse-service also. And hereupon began the manner from thenceforth, to entertaine such light armed javelottiers called Velites, even among the Legions. The first deviser of this

mingling of footemen among the horsemen they say was one Q. Navius a Centurion, and that  he was highly honored by the Generall for his invention.
Whiles things stood thus at Capua, Anniball was greatly distracted in mind, and possessed with two contrary cogitations, whether he should go to gaine the Castle of Tarentum, or to reskue and save the citie of Capua. At last the regard of Capua prevailed with him: for he saw that as well friends as enemies depended thereupon, and had their mind and eye wholy bent that way; as being a citie like to give the very triall and proofe, what would the issue be generally of all the revolt and rebellion from the Romanes. Leaving therefore behind him a great part of his cariage in the Brutians country, and all his souldiours heavily armed, he made hast into Campania, with an elect power of foote and horse, such as he supposed most meet and best appointed for expedition and riddance of way: yet as fast as he marched, there followed after him three  and thirtie Elephants, and so he sat him downe closely in a secret valley behind the mountaine Tiffata, which overlooketh the citie Capua. At his first comming he forced the fort called Galatia, and compelled the garison there to quit the place, and then he turned and opposed himselfe against the enemies who besieged Capua. But he dispatched certaine courriers afore unto Capua, to signifie unto them, at what time he minded to set upon the camp of the Romanes: that they also at the very instant might be readie to issue forth at every gate of the citie to do the like. The Romanes having no foreknowledge by their espials of this occurrence, were mightily terrified: for Anniball himselfe assailed them one way, and all the Campanes as well foote as horsemen (together with the garison souldiours of the Carthaginians under the leading of Bostar and Hanno their captaines) sallied out another way. The Romanes therefore being driven to their  shifts, as well as they might in so sodain and fearefull a case, had an eye to this, not to make head all together one way, and so to leave the rest quite without defence; therefore they devided their forces in this manner among themselves: Appius Claudius opposed himselfe against the Campanes: and Fulvius against Anniball. Claudius N^ro the Viz-Pretour, with the horsemen belonging to the sixt legion, quartered upon the way that leadeth to Suessula: and C. Fulvius Flaccus the Lieutenant, with the horsemen of Allies, tooke up his standing, and planted himselfe overagainst the river Vultumus. The battaile began not after the usuall manner, only with shouts and outcryes, but besides all other clamours of men, neighing of horses, and rustling of armour, there was a multitude of Campanes good for no other service of war, placed upon the walls, who together with ringing and sounding of basons and vessels of brasse (as the manner is in  the still dead time of the night, when the moone is in the eclipse) made such an hideous noyse, that it caused even them that were in fight to be amused thereupon, and to listen after it. Appius with small ado repulsed the Campanes from the trench and rampiar. But Fulvius on the other part had more trouble to deale with Anniball and the Carthaginians, who charged so fiercely upon him, that the sixt legion there, gave ground and reculed: which being once beaten back, a squadron of Spaniards and three Elephants passed forwards as far as to the rampiar, and had alreadie broken through the maine battaile of the Romanes: but they were in suspense betweene doubtfull hope and present danger, thinking one while to breake through and passe into the camp; and doubting another while to be excluded from the rest of their companies. Fulvius seeing this feare of the legion, and perill wherein the camp stood, encourageth  and exhorteth Q. Navius and other principall Centurions, to assaile valiantly, to kill and hew in peeces that one companie of the enemies which were fighting under the counterscarp.
For all now lieth a bleeding, quoth he, and in extreame hazard: for either you must give the enemies way, and then wil they more easily enter into the camp, then they had already perced through the thick squadrons of the battaile; or els ye must diffeate and slay them in the place, even under the trench. And that (quoth he) were no difficult peece of service, considering they are but few in number, severed and shut out cleane from the succour of their fellowes: and the same Romane battailon which seemeth now disbanded and open, whiles it is affrighted, if so be it would make head and turne both sides upon the enemie, were able to compasse round and environ them, and put them to a doubtfull hazard, yea and cut them in peeces within the mids. Navius had no sooner heard the Generall speake these words, but he caught the ensigne of the second band of Hastati from the ensigne-bearer, and desplaied it in the faces of the enemies, threatning to fling it among the mids of them, unlesse his souldiers made the better hast to follow him, and settle themselves to fight. He was a goodly tall and personable man of bodie, his

 brave armour besides set him out and beautified his person: and withall, the advauncing of his ensigne on high, drew every mans eyes upon him, as well enemies as friends. But when he was approched once to the banners of the Spaniards,The (...) valour of Navius. then from all hands they spared him not, but launced at him their barbed javelins, and the whole battaile in manner was bent only against him. But neither the multitude of enemies, nor the voley of their shot, was able to represse and rebutt the violence of that one man. Likewise M. Attilius a Lieutenant, caused the ensigne-bearer of the first band of the Principes belonging to the same legion, to enter with his ensigne upon the cohort and troupe of the Spaniards. The Lieutenants also L. Porcius Licinius and T. Popilius, who had the garding of the camp, sought valiantly upon the rampier in defence thereof, and killed the Eliphants upon the very countrescarp, as they were passing over and entring the camp.  And by occasion that their bodies filled up the ditch, the enemies had a passage made them into the camp, as it were over a causey or bridge raised of purpose to give them way: and there, over the very carcases of the slaine Elephants, there was a cruell carnage committed. But on the other side of the camp, the Campanes and the garison of the Carthaginians had the repulse alreadie: and under the very gate of Capua which openeth upon the river Vulturnus, there was another skirmish, where the Romanes striving to enter the towne, were not so much put back and withstood by force of armed men, as by brakes, scorpions, and other engins of ordinance, which being mounted and planted upon the very gate, discharged shot so violently, that they drave the enemies farther off. Over and besides, the forcible and furious assault of the Romanes was daunted and suppressed, by reason that their Generall himselfe Ap.Claudius, was hurt; who as  he was encouraging his men to fight in the very forefront of the vaward, hapned to be wounded with a dart above in his brest under the left shoulder: yet there were an exceeding number of enemies there slaine before the gate, and the rest were driven for feare to make hast and get the citie over their heads. Anniball also perceiving the Cohort of the Spaniards lying along dead, and the camp of the enemies so manfully defended even to the utterance: gave over farther assault, and began to retire his ensignes, and to turne backward all his footemen, interposing his horsemen behinde them, for feare the enemie should charge them on the taile. The legions were exceeding egre to pursue after the enemies: but Flaccus commaunded to sound the retreat, supposing they had done well enough alreadie, and effectuated two things, to wit, that both the Campanes saw in how little steed Anniball served them; and also Anniball himselfe knew and  perceived no lesse. Some writers that have recorded this battaile, set downe, that of Anniball his armie there were slaine that day eight thousand men, and of Campanes three thousand: that the Carthaginians lost fifteene ensignes, and the Campanes eighteene. But in others, I find that the conflict was not so great, and that the fright was much more than the skirmish: for when as the Numidians and Spaniards together with the Elephants brake at unwares into the Romanes camp, those Elephants as they passed through the mids thereof, overthrew and laid along many of the tents and pavilions; and the Sumpter-horses and other beasts there for cariage, with great noyse brake their halters, and collars, fled for feare, and bare downe all a^ore them as they went. And that besides this tumultuous fright and confusion, Anniball dealt fraudulently, by sending in among the rest certaine that could speake the Latin tongue (for some such he had about him) who in the Consuls name gave commaundement (since that the camp  was lost) that every souldier should make shift for himselfe, and flye to the next mountaines. But this deceipt was soone espied and prevented with the losse and slaughter of a number of enemies: and the Elephants were coursed out of the camp with fire. But howsoever this battaile was either begun or ended, the last it was fought there, before that Capua was yeelded up and surrendred.
The Mediastuticus (for so they call the head magistrate and governour of the citie of Capua) for that year, was one Seppius Lesius, a man of base parentage and mean calling. The report goeth, that his mother upon a time as she made satisfaction in the name of him (being then fatherlesse and under age) by a purgatorie sacrifice, for a prodigious domestical portent, that hapned in her  house, was told by the Soothsaier out of his learning, that one day the chiefe government of Capua should be fall to that child: whereat, she seeing no likelyhood nor hope at all of any such matter, said thus a gaine, You talke of a poore cittie of Capua, when that day comes; and God save all, when my sonne shall he advanced to the highest place and government thereof. But these words spoken at randon and in jest, proved afterwards good earnest, and true in deed. For

when as the cittizens were driven to great streights, through sword and famine, and were past all  hope of recoverie: in such sort, as they that were of qualitie and borne for honour, refused to be in place of authoritie, this Lesius complaining that Capua was forlome, betraied, and abandoned by her owne nobilitie, tooke upon him the chiefe magistracie, and was the last of all the Campanes that bare soveraigne rule in that cittie.
Anniball perceiving, that neither his enemies would be drawne forth any more to fight: nor possibly hee could breake through their campe for to come unto Capua: for feare least that the new Consuls should stop all the passages, and intercept his purveiance of victuals, determined to dislodge without effecting his purpose, and to remove from Capua. And as he cast and tossed too and fro in his mind, what course to take, and whither to go; it came into his head to make no more ado, but to march directly to Rome, the very head and seat-cittie of the whole warre. This  was the upshot of all, and the emprese that he most desired. Howbeit as all others much grieved and greatly blamed him, that he had over-slipt the opportunitie when it was, even presently upon the battaile at Cannae: so himselfe acknowledged no lesse, that he was mightily overseene. And yet the thing was not so farre past (he thought) that he should despaire, but upon some suddaine fright and unexpected tumult, he might seize of some quarter of the cittie or other. And if Rome were once in that hazard, then either both the Romane Generals, or one at the least, would immediatly leave the siege of Capua. Who, if they had once divided their forces, both of them would be the weaker, and minister either unto him, or to the Campanes, some occasion of good fortune. The onely thing that troubled his mind was this, for feare least that as soone as his back were turned, the Campanes would yeeld themselves unto the Romanes. He therefore with large  and liberall rewards, induceth a certaine Numidian (an audacious and adventurous fellow, one that cared not what dangers he undertooke) to be the carrier of certeine letters, and to enter into the campe of the Romanes, counterfeiting himselfe, to be a fugitive, from the adverse part unto them: and so when he espied his time, to slip secretly from the other side of the campe, to Capua.
The letters were very comfortable, importing unto them, That his remove and departure from thence, was for their good and safetie, wherby he meant to withdraw the Romane captains and their forces from Capua, to the defence of their owne cittie of Rome: willing them not to let fall their hearts and be discouraged; for by patient abiding some few daies, they should bee wholly freed and delivered of the siege. Then he made stay of all the shipping and vessels that he could find upon the river Vulturnus, and commanded them to be brought to Casilinum, which  he had fortified aforetime with a pile or castle to guard and keep the place with a garison. And having intelligence that there was such store of barges and botomes upon the river, as would serve to transport in one night his whole armie: he made provision of victuals for ten daies, brought downe his armie by night to the river side, and crossed the water with all his power, before the next day light. But this was not carried so secretly, but before that it was effected, intelligence was given there of by certaine rennegate fugitives: whereupon Fulvius Flaccus addressed his letters unto the Senate of Rome, and gave notice thereof. At which tidings, men according to their sundrie fansies and humours, were diversly affected: and as so fearfull an occurrence required, incontinently the Senate assembled.
P. Cornelius surnamed Asina, was of opinion, that all the captaines and armies whatsoever, should be called home out of all parts of Italie, without regard of Capua or any other exploit besides, save onely the defence of the cittie. Fabius Maximus thought it was a dishonest, lewd, and shamefull part, to depart from the siege of Capua, and to be skared to turne here and there, and to be carried away with every copie of Anniball his countenance, and with his valne threats and menaces. Hee that woon a victorie at Cannae, and durst not then go forward to the cittie, hath hee conceived any hope now to win Rome, being also lately repulsed from Capua? No, he marcheth toward Rome, not minding to besiege it, but hoping to raise the siege from Capua. And how ever it be, I am assured (quoth hee) that Iupiter (the witnesse of covenants broken by Anniball) and other gods besides, will defend us with the helpe of that armie which we shall find at home in the cittie. Betweene these two opinions, P. Valerius Flaccus held the mean, and preuailed: for he having a regard and due consideration, both of the one and the other; thought good to write unto the Colonels that lay before Capua, and to certifie them, what strength they had of able men to defend the cittie: as for the forces of Anniball, and what power was needfull to mainteine the siege at Capua, they themselves knew best. Therefore in case that one of the

 pro-Consuls there, and part of the armie might be spared from thence and sent to Rome, and neverthelesse, the siege continue with the conduct of the other pro-Consull, and the rest of the armie: then Claudius and Fulvius should so order the matter betweene themselves, that the one of them might remaine still before Capua at siege, and the other repaire to Rome, for to defend and keepe their native countrie from the same danger. Hereupon the Senate agreed, and made an Act: which being brought unto Capua, Q. Fulvius the Viz-Consull who was to go to Rome, by reason that his colleague was sicke of his hurt, chose out of the three armies certaine companies of souldiours, and so with fifteene thousand footmen, and one thousand horsemen, passed over the river Vulturnus. Then having certeine intelligence, that Anniball minded to march along the Latin street way: he tooke his journey through the townes and burroughs situate uppon  the way Appia, and sent his courriers before unto Setia, Sora, and Lavinium, which are seated neere unto it, not only for to lay provision of victuals redie for him in their citties and towns, but also from the countrie villages farther out of the way, to bring their provision to that port through-fare: and to draw forces into their townes for their own defence, and every one to stand upon their good guard, and to looke unto their state, as well publike as private.
Anniball the same day that he had crossed Vulturnus, encamped not farre from the river. And the morrow after, entred into the territorie of the Sidicines, and led his host neere unto Cales. There, after he had staied one day, forraying and spoiling the countrie, he marched by Suessula, into the territories of Allifas and Casinum, by the way of the Latine street. Vnder the town Casinum he abode in campe two daies, and raised booties here and there in every place. From thence  leaving Interramna and Aquinum, he came into the countrie about Fregellae, as farre as to the river Liris: where he found the bridge cut downe by the Fregellanes, for to impeach and let his journey. Fulvius likewise was staied at the river Vulturnus, by reason that the barges and botoms were burnt by Annibal: and much ado he had, for the great scarcitie of timber and wood, to make punts and boats for to set over his armie. But Fulvius, after hee had once transported his men in such boats and planks as hee made shift withall, had afterwards no hinderance in his journey; but found not onely store of victuals in the townes and cities as hee travailed, but also plentie thereof brought readie for him to the waies side right courteously. Then the souldiours as they marched on foote cheered and encouraged one another to mend their pace and make speede, considering they went to the defence of their naturall countrie.  Now there was a post sent from Fregellae, who rode night and day and never made stay, and he put the citie in exceeding feare. The running together besides of the people, that ceased not to make every thing more than it was, and to invent somewhat of their owne fingers ends, and put it to the newes that they heard, made a greater hurrey than the messenger himselfe, and set the citie in an uprore. And not onely the women were heard to weepe and waile in their owne private houses: but also from all parts, the Dames of the cittie came flocking into the streets, running about to all the churches and chappels of their gods and goddesses, sweeping the altars with the tresses of their haire hanging downe, kneeling upon the bare ground, and stretching out their hands up toward heaven unto the gods, pouring out their praiers and supplications, That they would vouchsafe to preserve the cittie of Rome out of the hands of the enemies, and to save the Romane wives and their little children from harme and all abuse. The bodie of  the Senate gave attendance upon the magistrates in the common place, readie to give them their advise and counsell. Some receive of them direction, and departed every man to execute his charge: others offer themselves to the magistrates, to bee employed in any service whatsoever. Sundrie guards were bestowed in the castle, in the Capitoll, and upon the walles: all places about the citie were wel manned. The Albane mountain also and the castle of Thusculum were furnished with good garrisons. Amids this alarme tidings came, that Q. Fulvius the pro-Consull, was departed from Capua, and onward on his journey to Rome with an armie. And because he should not be abridged of his power and authoritie, after he was come into the cittie, there was a decree graunted out of the Senatehouse, that Q. Fulvius should have as large a commission of  rule and commaund as the Consuls themselves. Anniball, after he had made fouler worke and havocke in the territorie of Fregellae, than in other places, for anger that they had cut downe the bridges against his comming, led his armie through the Frusinate, Ferentinate, and Anagnine countries, and camesorwards into the territorie of Lavicos: and so by Algidum hee marched toward Thusculum. And when he could not be let in there within the wals, he descended beneath

Tusculum, on the right hand to Gabii: from whence he conducted his armie into Pupinia, and  eight miles from Rome encamped. The neerer the enemie approched to the citie, the greater slaughter was made of the paisants that fled from him, by his vauntcurriers, the Numidian light horsemen, whom he sent asore to make riddance. And many there were of all conditions and ages that were taken captive.
In this tumultuous trouble, Fulvius Flaccus with his armie, entred Rome at the gate Capena: from whence he went through the middest of the citie, along the street Carinae into the Exquiliae, and from thence hee went forth, and betweene the gates Exquilina and Collina pitched his tents. Thither the Aediles of the Commons brought victuals: the Consull and the Senate resorted to him into the campe, where they sat in counsell about the State of the Commonweale. And agreed it was, That the Consuls should lie encamped likewise about the gates Collina and Exquillina: that C. Calpurnius Pretour of the cittie, should have the keeping of the Capitoll and the castle with a guard, and that the Senatours keepe residence continually in good number within the compasse of the Forum, what need so ever there should be of their counsell and advise, against all suddaine accidents. By this time Anniball was come forward, as farre as to the river Anio, and within three miles of the citie lay encamped, where he kept a standing leaguer. But himselfe in person with 2000 horsemen, advaunced forward toward the gate Collina, even as farre as to Hercules his temple, and rode all about as neere as he well could, to veiw the walls, and the situation of the citie. Flacus tooke foule disdaine thereat, and thought it a shame full indignitie, that he should brave it at his pleasure so scornefully without revenge, whereupon hee sent out certaine of his owne Cavallerie, and gave commaundement, That they should set the enemies  horsemen farther off, and chase them backe into their campe. Whiles they were in skirmish together, the Consuls gave order, that the Numidian horsemen, such as were fled from the enemie, and turned to the Romanes (who were at that time to the number of twelve hundred upon the Aventine hill) should passe through the middest of the cittie to the Exquiliae: supposing that there were none more meet than they, for to sight among the valleyes, the garden houses, the sepulchres and hollow waies on every side. Whom, when some from the castle and the Capitoll, espied riding downe the descent of the hill, called Clivus Publicus, they ran crying about the citie, The Aventine is taken. The Aventine is taken. Which alarme caused a tumult, and gave such an occasion of fear, and running away, that if the campe of Anniball had not been without the walls, fearefull multitude doubtlesse would have abandoned and quit the cittie. But they  tooke their houses, and gat every man up to the terrasses and leads thereof: from whence they pelted with stones and others shot, their own friends in steed of enemies, as they rode scattering one from another in the streets. This tumult could not be repressed, nor the errour appeare, by reason that the waies were so pestered with a number of the countrie peasants, and of cattell besides, whom suddaine feare had driven into the citie. Howbeit, the horsemen fought fortunately, and the enemies were removed and set backe. And because it was necessarie to stay all disorders and uprores that chaunced upon small occasions to arise, it was thought good and agreed upon, that all those who had been either Dictatours, or borne the office of Censors, should have their full power and authoritie, untill such time as the enemie was clean departed from about the walls. And that was to good purpose: for all the rest of that day, and the night following, there were divers  and sundrie garboiles, without any cause or occasion raised, and the same stilled and appeased by that meanes.
The next day Anniball passed over Anio, and brought forth all his whole power into the field. Neither were Flaccus and the Consuls behind hand for their parts, but readie for battell. When both armies stood arraunged in order on both sides, amused upon the issue and event of that one sight, which was for no lesse a prize and reward to the victorious part, than the very cittie of Rome; there sell such a mightie storme of raine and haile together, and so troubled both hoasts, that they could scarce hold their weapons in hand, but were driven to retire themselves for safetie into their severall campes, fearing nothing lesse than their own enemies. The morrow after likewise, when they stood in the same place in battel array, the like tempest parted them asunder. And  they were not so soone retired into their campe, but the day was wonderfull faire, and the weather calme againe.
The Carthaginians tooke this for an ominous presage to them of ill lucke. And Anniball was heard (by report) to say, That one while his mind, another while his fortune, would not give him

 leave to win the citie of Rome. There were other occurrences besides, as well small as great, that discouraged him and abated his hope. Of more importance was this, that whiles he lay with his hoast in arms before the walls of Rome, he understood, there were certaine companies with banners displaied sent into Spaine for to supplie the armies there. Of lesse reckoning was this, that hee was advertised by a certaine captive, how the very same plot of ground whereon hee was encamped, happened at the same time to be sold: not underfoot, but at the full price, and nothing abated. This he tooke to be so presumptuous a part, and such a scornefull indignitie, namely, that there should bee a chapman found at Rome, to make purchase of that peece of land, which hee was possessed of and held in right of armes, that presently he called for a publicke crier and trumpet, and gave commaundement unto him, to proclaim port sale of all the shops of Bankers and  money chaungers at that time aboutthe Forum in Rome. Neverthelesse, hereupon hee was moved to dislodge, and retired his campe backewards from the citie to the river Turia, sixe myles from Rome. From whence hee tooke his way to the grove of Feronia, where stood a temple, in those daies much renowmed for wealth and richesse. The inhabitants thereabout were certaine Capenates, who used to bring thither the first fruits of their corne and revenues, yea, and many other oblations besides, according to their store: by meanes where of they had adorned and garnished it with much gold and silver. Of all those gifts and offerings was this temple then, robbed and spoiled. But after the departure of Anniball from thence; there were found great heapes of brasse, by reason that the souldiours upon touch and remorse of conscience, had cast in many brasen peeces. The sacking and pillage of this temple, all writers doe agree upon, and make no  doubt thereof. Coelius faith, That Anniball as hee went toward Rome from Eretum, turned thither, and hee setteth downe the beginning of his journey from Reate, Cutiliae, and from Amiternum. And that out of Campania, he came into Samnium, and from thence into the countrie of Peligni, and so passed beside the citie Sulmo, to the Marucines, and then by the territorie of the Albenses into the Marsians land, and from thence hee marched to Amiternum, and so forward to the towne Foruli. Neither is there any error or doubt in all this, because the markes and tokens of the voiage of so great an armie, could not within the memorie and compasse of so small anage, be confounded and worne out. For certaine it is, that he passed that way. The only difference lieth herein, whether hee came to the cittie of Rome, or returned from thence into Campania, by that way aforesaid.
 Now was not Anniball so resolute to defend Capua, but the Romanes were as fully bent, and more eager to continue the siege and assault thereof. For he sped himselfe so fast another way in his voiage back, first out of the Lucanes countrie to the Brutians, and so, on stil to the streight [of Sicilie] and to Rhegium, that with his suddaine comming thither, he surprised them at unwares, even before they heard of his arrivall. As for Capua, albeit in the time of Fulvius his absence, it was no lesse streightly beleaguered, yet it felt the comming againe of Flaccus: and besides, there was much marvell there, why Anniball returned not backe as well as he. Afterwards, they understood, by conference with some that were without, how they were forsaken and forlorne of Anniball, and that the Carthaginians were pastall hope, to keepe and hold Capua still to their owne use. There was an Edict more over of the Pro-consull, passed by order from the Senate, and the  same published and devulged among the enemies, That what citizen soever of Capua, would turne to the Romanes before such a certaine day, hee should have a generall pardon. But there was no comming in, nor raunging to the Romanes side; for feare of punishment at the Romans hands, more than for any regard of their alleageance to the Carthaginians: because their transgression and trespasse in their former revolt was so great, that it might not be pardoned. And as no one man at all, privately on his owne head carrie over to the campe of the Romanes, so there was no good order taken by publicke counsell, for the benefit and safetie of the whole citie. The noblemen had given over managing of state-matters, and could not be brought by any means to assemble in Senate. And in cheese place of government was hee, who had not woon to himselfe any honour thereby, but his unworthinesse was derogatorie to the authoritie and power of  that Magistracie which he bare. For now there was not one of the cheese citizens and noblemen that would be so much as seene in the market place or common hall of assemblies: but shutting themselves within dores in their private houses, they expected every day for the destruction of their countrey, together with their owne undoing and overthrow. The whole charge and care lay upon Boslar and Hanno, captaines of the garrison in the fort there of the Carthaginians, and

more carefull were they of their owne welfare, than fearefull for the jeopardie of their friends and  allies.
These two wrote letters unto Anniball, endited not onely in plaine teannes and franckly, but also sharpely and bitterly: wherein they laid unto his charge, That he had not onely betraied Capua into the hands of the enemies, but also delivered and exposed them and the garison to the cruell clutches of the Romanes to be massacred and executed. That hee was gone his waies, and departed into the country of the Brutij, as one that turned away his face of purpose, because he would not fee with his owne eyes the losse of Capua. But ywis the Romanes contrarywise could not be withdrawen from the siege of Capua, no, not by the assaulting of the citie of Rome: so much more were the Romanes resolute enemies, than the Carthaginians constant friends. But it he would returne againe to Capua, and bend the full force of his warre thither, both they and the citizens also of Capua, would be ready to fally forth and encounter the enemies. For why, they passed not over the Alpes with intent to war with the Rhegines and Tarentines; no, but where the Romane legions were, there ought the armies of the Carthaginians to be. Thus at Cannae, thus at Thrasymenus were the victories atchieved, by affronting and meeting the enemie, by joyning camp to camp, and by hazarding the fortune of battaile. To this effect were the letters penned, and given to certain Numidians; who for a good reward, had offered their service before, for the safe cariage and delivery of them. These fellowes presented themselves before Flaccus in the camp, in habit and qualitie of fugitives, unto his side: hoping to spie out some convenient time when they might give him the slip and be gone. Now by occasion of the famine which had continued long in Capua, there was none but might pretend a good and reasonable cause to depart from thence to the adverse part. But behold, there hapned anon a Capuan  wench to come into the leaguer (a naughtie-pack and an harlot, that one of the supposed counterfet fugitives aforesaid kept.) She enformed the Generall of the Romanes, that those Numidians, fraudulently and by covin, pretended to slye unto his part, and had letters about them unto Anniball. This would she stand to, and be ready to averre to the very face of one of them, who bewrayed and disclosed the plot unto her. At first, when he was brought forth before her, he set a jolly countenance of the matter, and made it very strange, and pretending stoutly that he knew not the woman: but by little and little he was convicted by manifest truthes, and especially when he saw that they called for the rack, and that he was upon the point to be put to torture: and so in the end confessed that all was true, and therewith brought forth the letters. Over and besides, another thing was now revealed, which before was kept close and secret; to wit, that there were other Numidians  besides, who under the colour of fugitives, had gone up and downe in the Romane camp: of these there were apprehended not so few as threescore and ten, and they together with the new, were whipped with rods, had their hands cut off, and sent back againe to Capua. This piteous spectacle and sight of so feareful execution, killed the courage, and brake the very hart of the Campanes. Whereupon, the people ran together unto the Counsell house, and compelled Lesius to assemble a Senat, and openly threatned the Nobles (who a long time had absented themselves from publick consultations) that unlesse they would now repaire into the Senate, they would go home to their very houses, and pluck them out by the eares into the street. For feare hereof, the chiefe magistrate had a frequent and full assembly of Senatours. VVhiles all the rest were of opinion to send embassadors to the Romane Generals, Vibius Virius (who had bene the chief cause  and principall author of their first revolt from the Romanes) being demaunded his advise, spake to the point in this manner.
They that talke of embassadors,The Oration of V^bius Virus in the (...) of Capua. of peace, and of yeelding, little consider and remember either what they would have done, in case the Romanes had bene at their devotion and mercie, or what themselves must endure and suffer.
For what thinke ye wil become (quoth he) of this present surrender of ours, in comparison of that whereby in times past we freely gave unto the Romanes ourselves, and all that we had, for to obteine their aid and succour against the Samnites? And have we so soone forgotten, at what time, and in what condition and state we were when we forsooke and abandoned the people of Rome? Also, after our revolt, how we most cruelly and shamefully killed their garison, whom we might have dismissed and sent away with their lives? Moreover, how often we have issued forth against them lying at siege, and how mischeivously minded we were unto them, yea and how we have sallied upon them in their camp? Over and besides, call ye not to remembrance, how we called for Anniball to surprise and defeat them? and (that which of all other is most fresh in memorie) how we sent him from hence to give the

 assault to Rome? On the contrary side, marke well and call to mind, how maliciously they have attempted and practised all hostilitie against us: by which ye may well know what accoumpt to make of them, and what ye are to trust unto. For when they had a stranger and forain enemie within Italie, nay when they had Anniball their enemie: when the warres were so hote, that all was on a light fire: they passed by all other affaires, yea they let Anniball himselfe alone, and sent both their Consuls with two complet consular armies to besiege and force Capua. This is the second yeare that they keepe us entrenched round about, pinning us up, and pining us with extreame famine and hunger: during which time, they themselves as well as we, have endured the utmost extremities and dangers that are, and susteined most grievous and infinite travailes: oftentimes being killed and cut in peeces about their rampiers, trenches, and ditches, and finally  driven almost out of their camp and hold. But to let passe and speake no more of these ordinary matters, seeing it is an old and usuall case, for them to abide painefull toyle, and incur many perils, who besiege and assault any cities or townes of their enemies: See a manifest signe of their deadly feud, and execrable hatred against vs. Anniball with a puissant power of foote and horsemen both, assailed their camp, yea and in some part was maister of it. Thinke ye that in so great danger of theirs, they were one jote withdrawne from the siege? He passed over the river Vulturnus, and burnt the territorie of Cales: yet for all that calamitie and losse, which their allies received, stirred not they one whit, nor gave over their enterprise. He commaunded to march forward with banner displayed against the very citie of Rome: they made as little accoumpt of that dangerous tempest toward, as of all the rest. After he had passed over the river Anio, he pitched  his tents within three miles of the citie; nay, he approched at length the walls, and made a bravado even under the gates; to be short, he presented unto their eye his resolution, and menaced to make Rome too hote for them unlesse they levied the siege before Capua: and yet they gave not over but beleaguered us still. The very wild and savage beasts be they never so fell, be they madded never so much with blind rage and woodnesse against one, yet if another go to their dennes, and offer to take away their whelps, they will turne again to succour and help their yong ones: but the Romanes, notwithstanding Rome was besieged, their wives and children in danger, whose piteous cryes and lamentable plaints, were heard almost even hither; notwithstandding their alters, their sacred fires, the temples of their gods, the monuments and sepulchres of their Auncestours, were profaned, abused, and polluted, could not be drawne away from Capua.  So eager, so hungrie are they to be revenged of us, so thirsty are they, to drinke our bloud. And good reason, haply, they have so to do. For would not we also have done the semblable, if fortune had given us the opportunitie? But seeing the will of the immortall gods is otherwise: and considering that I owe nature a death; in my power it is (whiles I am at libertie, whiles I am mine owne man, and maister of my selfe) to avoid torments, to shun shamefull ignominies and reproches (where of the enemie hopeth I shall feele the smart) and that by one kind of death, which as it is honest, so it is also easy and gentle? Never will I endure to see Ap. Claudius and Q. Fulvius, proudly and insolently bearing them selves upon their conquest over us: never will I be led and haled bound with cheines, through the citie of Rome, to make a shew, and to serve for a spectacle and gazing stock in their Triumph: and afterwards either in darke prison, or tied openly to a  stake, yeeld my back and side to be tewed, whipped, and mangled: and then lay my neck upon the block, to have my head chopt off with the bloudy axe of the Romanes. Never will I behold my native country sacked, spoyled, and put to fire and sword, nor the chast maried dames of Capua, to be forcibly ravished, the faire and beautifull maidens shamefully desloured, and the welfavoured yong boyes and freeborne, unnaturally abused. They rased Alba in times past from the top to the very foundation, and left neither stick nor stone thereof, Alba I say, from whence they had their offpring, and were first descended: to the end that there might remaine no memorie at all of their stock and first originall. And shal I ever beleeve they will spare Capua, and receive it to mercy, against which they are more hatefully and mortally bent, than against Carthage? Therefore, my maisters and friends, as many of you as are minded and resolved to dye before ye see  these so many miseries and wofull calamities, I have at home a supper this night well furnished and provided for you all: and when ye have eate meate your fill, and drunke wine to it liberally, the same wassaile cup that first will be presented unto me, shall go round about to you all: and that one draught, shall deliver your bodies from torments, preserve your spirits from anguish and contumelious disgrace, keepe your eyes from beholding all cruell acts, your eares from hearing

all shamefull indignities which follow and attend upon conquered persons. There shall be  also in readinesse, certeine servitours of purpose, to make a mightie great fire within the base court-yard of mine house, and to cast our dead bodies thereinto. This is the onely honest way to death, and beseeming us who are freeborne and gentlemen in deed. In which doing, our enemies will wonder at our vertue and valour: yea and Anniball himselfe shall well know, that he hath forsaken and betraied his trustie and magnanimious allies.
This Oration of Virius, there were more men present, that heard with applause and good liking, than could find in their harts to put that in execution which they so well allowed and approved. The greater part of the Senat, not dispairing, but that the clemencie of the people of Rome, which had bene tried and seene oftentimes in many warres, might be gained and extended also unto them; concluded, to send Embassadors with commission to yeeld Capua into the Romans  hands.Vibi ^irius, and divers Sent. to ^ of Capua person themselves. Some seven and twentie Senatours there were, that accompanied Vibius Virius home to his house, and supped with him: and after they had done what they had done what they could to drinke themselves drunke, and to intoxicate their braines with freely taking in their wine, (therby to withdrawtheir minds from the sence and apprehension of their imminent harme and miserie) drunke all of the poisoned cup abovesaid. This done, and the banquet ended, they rose from the table, tooke one another by the hand, embraced each other, taking their last leave, bidding a finall adieu and farewell, and bewailing togither with plenteous teares, their owne misfortune, and the miserable state of their countrie; some staied behind to be burned in one and the same fire for fellowship, others brake companie and departed to their owne houses. Now, by reason that their veines were filled with full feeding and drinking wine so liberally, the poyson was not so quicke of operation, nor  so effectuall as to hasten their death. And therefore most of them languished all night long, yea and continued drawing on a peece of the next day, before they let their last breath: but yet they all had yeelded up their ghost, before that the gates were set open for the enemies.
The day following,Capua delivered to the (...). the gate of Iupiter which stood next over against the Romane campe, was by the commaundement of the pro-Consull opened. Thereat entred one legion and two cornets of horsemen, under the leading of C. Fulvius the Lieutenant: who after he had first above all other things, given expresse order, that all armor of defence, and weapons of offence (which was to be found in Capua) should be brought forth and presented unto him; placed and disposed at all the gates, warders sufficient to see that no person might possibly go forth, or be let out: then he laid hold upon the garison of the Carthaginians, and commaunded the Senators of Capua to repair  into the camp, before the Roman captain Generals themselves. So soon as they were thither come, straightwaies they had yrons clapped upon them, and were commanded to make tender unto the treasurors of all the gold and silver they had. The gold amounted to 70 pound weight: the silver rose to the weight of three thousand and two hundreth pound. Five and twentie of the Senatours were sent to Cales, eight and twentie to Theanum, to be kept safe in ward. Even those who were knowne for certaine, to have principally moved and persuaded the revolt from the Romanes. Concerning the punishment of the Senatours of Capua, Fulvius and Claudius could not agree. Claudius was more tractable and exorable, and might soone have bene intreated for a pardon. Fulvius was more rigorous, and proceeded to a harder course. Whereupon Appius put over the whole deciding and determination thereof unto the Senate of Rome. Alleadging, that it was meet and requisit, that the LL. of the Counsell should have the examination of the cause, and namely upon these points. Imprimus, whither they had complotted and combined in this action, with any of the free boroughes and cities belonging to the state of the Latines. Item, whither they had any help and reliefe fr
om thence in the time of the war, or from any other towns whatsoever? But Fulvius in no case would condescend thereto, not suffer that the minds of faithfull and loyall allies, should be disquieted with doubtfull furmises and suspicions of any crimes; and called in question upon the appeachment and delatorie information of those, that never yet, made reckning or conscience, either what they did, or what they said. And therfore he protested to suppresse that manner of proceeding, and crush that inquisition for ever. After this communication they departed asunder: and Appius made no doubt, but that howsoever his Colleague  fared and tooke on, giving out so shrewd and bitter words, he would yet take pause and stay for the letters from Rome, concerning so weightie a businesse as this was. But Fulvius, because of his designement, brake up his keeping of state in his royall pavilion, and sent his officers and ordinarie traine out of the way, because he would not be hindered and empeached by

 them, in the course of his designement: and commaunded the Colonels and captaines of the allies, to give warning unto two thousand chosen men of armes, for to be in readinesse and present themselves at the third found of the trumpet. With this power of horsemen hee set forward by night, and marched to. Theanum: and by breake of day entred the gate, and kept his way on into the market place. At the first entrance of the horsemen, the people ran togither from all parts: then he caused the chiefe magistrate (a Sidicine) to be called: and charged him to produce his prisoners the Capuans, whom he had in custodie.The Senators of Capua executed. When they were all brought foorth, they were first whipped with rods, and then beheaded. From thence hee rode upon the spurre to Cales: where so soone as he was set on the Tribunall seat, in place of judgement, and the Capuan prisoners likewise presented in place and bound to the stake; there came a horseman in post  from Rome, and when he had delivered letters from C. Calpurnius the Consull, and the people of Rome, unto Fulvius; there ran a rumour from the Tribunall through all the assembly, that the whole processe against the Campanes was to be put off and reserved entire to the censure and doome of the LL. of the Senate. And Fulvius supposing it to be no lesse indeed, after he tooke the letters, never brake them up, but bestowed them in his bosome, and gave commaundement to the Crier, to charge the Lictor or executioner to do his office, according to law. Thus they also that were at Cales were executed and suffered death. Then he read the letters, and the order set downe by the Senate: but it was too late now, to stay that which was done alreadie and past, and which indeed was hastned with all speed that might be, for feare it might have bene crossed and prevented.
 Now as Fulvius was arising from the bench, Taurea Iubellius a Campane, passing amids the throng, called by name alowd upon Fulvius. Whereat Flaccus wondring what the man meant, sat him downe againe upon his seat, and demaunded what he would? Mary (quoth he) command me also to be killed, that thou maist boast and glorie another day, that thou hast done to death, a better man by farre, and much more valiant than thy selfe. Surely (quoth Flaccus) this fellow is lunaticke and not well in his wits: and againe, were I minded to take his life from him, I am inhibited by vertue of the act of the Senate.
Then (quoth Iubellus) since that my countrie is forced and lost, my kinsfolke and friends made away: seeing also that I have with mine own hand murdred my wife and children, because they should suffer no villanous indignitie; and may not my selfe so much as die this death which my countriemen here have suffered before my face, I will seeke  by vertue and manhood to ease my self of this life, so tedious, so irksome, and odious unto me: and with that,Iubellius killeth himselfe. he drew forth the skeine which he had hidden under his garment, and stabbed himselfe in the brest quite through his bodie, and there at the feet of the L. General, fell down redie to die in the place. For as much as both the execution of the Campanes, and also the most part of other matters were performed according to the will of Flaccus alone: some there be, that write how Appius Claudius died about the time that Capua was yeelded. And that this very same Taurea, neither came to Cales of his owne accord, nor killed himselfe: but that as he was a binding to the stake, because the words which hee uttered, could not bee heard for the confused noise of the people, therfore Flaccus comanded silence, and then Taurea spake those words before rehersed, namely, That himselfe a right valiant and hardy man, was put to death by a meaner person than himselfe,  and much inferiour to him in valour and vertue. Whereat by the commandement of the Proconsul, the crier pronounced and said: Go to Ser^ant, let this brave and valiant man have the more store of rods bestowed upon him, let him have good scourging, lay on load, and set the lashes surely on, and let him be the first that you proceed against, let him have the law to the full. Some there be that have written, how the act of the Senat was read before he proceeded to the beheading: but because there was this branch or clause within the act, That if he thought so good, he should reserve the whole deciding of the matter unto the Senate: he construed it thus, that it was put to his discretion, for to weigh and consider what was more profitable to the Common-weale. This don, he returned from Cales to Capua. Atella and Calatia were both surrendred into his hands; where they also who were the chief heads of those states, suffered the like punishment. Thus there  were upon a fourescore of the Senatours put to death: and to the number well neere of three hundred Capuans (borne of noble bloud) committed to prison. Others of them were bestowed in safe custodie within divers citties of the Latines, and came to sundrie unhappie ends. The multitude besides of the Campane cittizens, were sold outright.
It remained now to put to question and debate, what was to bee done with the cittie and the

territorie thereto belonging. And some were of mind, that a citie so exceeding mightie, so neer  a neighbour, and so daungerous to Rome, should be utterly rased and destroyed. But the consideration of a present commoditie and gaine, tooke place and prevailed. For in regard of the territorie and land lying about it (which was well knowne to be the most ferrile soile in all Italie, and yeelded all manne^ of fruit) the cittie was saved: whereinto those husbandmen that tilled the grounds, might retire themselves and dwell. And for the peopling and inhabiting thereof, there was a multitude reserved of the inhabitants which were there alreadie, namely, of libertines and enfranchised bondslaves, merchants factours, retailers, artisanes, and craftsmen, who kept there still and remained. But the whole territorie, and all the publick edifices were seized to the use of the people of Rome. Moreover, order was taken, that Capua should be inhabited only, and replenished with people like a citie; but no forme of Commonweale, no corporation, no  Senate, no assemblie of Commons, nor magistrate of their owne should be allowed there. For without a common counsell of State, without magistracie and government, without intelligences and reciprocall commerce, as in the bodie of a Communaltie, they supposed, that they would never agree together in any complot, but bee farre unmeet to contrive a conspiracie and compasse alteration. As for a Provost or Governour to minister law, and execute justice among them, they purposed to send them one yearely from Rome. Thus were the affaires ordered and composed at Capua, by a good pollicie and commendable course every way. For those that were most in fault and guiltie, were punished with rigour, and that speedily. The number of cittizens were scattered and dispersed sundrie waies, without all hope to returne againe. The bare houses and walls that had not offended, they were spared, and neither burned nor pulled down. And besides  the commoditie and gainthat accrewed unto the Romans by this manner of proceeding, they woon some name of clemencie and mercie among their Confederates and Allies: in that they saved a most noble and wealthie cittie, at the ruines whereof, all Campane, and as many States as bordered about Campane, would have greeved much, and groned againe. By this meanes also the enemie was constrained now to confesse, and could not otherwise chuse, how powerfull and mightie the Romanes were to chastice and punish their faithlesse associates, yea, and how feeble Annibal was, and not able to defend and maintaine those, whom he had received into his protection.
The Romane Pro-consuls, after they had finished and performed their charge at Capua, assigned unto Claudius Nero sixe thousand footmen out of those two legions which he had before  Capua, and three hundred horsemen which he had chosen himselfe: also of Latine Allies as many foot in number, and 800 horse besides. This armie Nero embarked at Puteoli, and transported into Spaine. When he was arrived at Taracon, after he had there landed his souldiours, and laid up his ships in docke, and armed withall his mariners, (to make the greater number) he marched to the river Iberus, where he received the forces of T. Fonteius, and L. Martius, and from thence advaunced toward the enemies.
Asdruball the sonne of Amilcar, lay encamped at a place called the Black-stones, in the Ausetanes countrey: it lieth betweene the townes Illyturgis and Mentissa. Now Nero kept the narrow streights of the forrest there. Asdruball because he would not be pent up in so streight a roume, sent an herauld or messenger of peace to him, who should make promise in his name, that if Nero would permit him to passe peaceably from thence, hee would withdraw all his forces out of Spaine. The Romane captaine tooke this message joifully: and Asdruball requested, That they might emparle the next day, and devise together how the Romanes would set downe conditions and articles in writing, as touching the rendrie and deliverie of the fortresses in every cittie, and likewise of prefixing some day, by which time the garrisons should bee removed and displaced, and the Carthaginians have away all their bag and baggage without fraud and covin. Asdruball having obtained his request, presently commaunded, that in the very evening, and all night long the heaviest and most combersome part of his whole armie, should escape what way soever they could, out of the gullet of the forrest. But hee gave especiall direction, that they should not over many of them, that night goe foorth, because their small number was not onely fitter to deceive  the enemie, and not so soone to bee discovered, but also might more easily passe through those narrow and difficult passages. So the morrow they came to an enterview and parle: where the time was spent of purpose in much needlesse talke, and drawing of bookes, more than cause was: wherupon the day being farre gone, the businesse was put off unto the next day. And the night ensuing

 betweene, ministred Asdruball more time to send others away. And yet could not they make an end that day neither. Thus there passed certaine daies, emploied in open shew about dispute and reasoning of the articles and conditions of agreement, and the nights were bestowed in letting out the Carthaginians closely out of their campe. Now, after that the greater part of his hoast was gone away cleare, then he began to wrangle and frapple, yea, and to go from some offers that he had voluntarilie made, and ever they were further and further off from agreement. For Asdruball, the lesse that he feared, the lesse also was to be trusted. And by this time in manner al his Infanterie were gotten out of the forrest, and the next morning, not onely the forrest, but all the plaines about were overcast, and covered with a thicke and foggie mist. Which Asdrubal perceiving, he sent a messenger to Nero, requesting to deferre their farther conference and communication  to the morrow; pretending, that the present day was a festivall holyday among the Carthaginians, and therfore they made scruple, upon it, to follow any other businesse, but serve God. All this while there was no fraud so much as once suspected. Asdruball had no sooner obtained respite for that day, but forthwith he and all his Cavallerie, together with his Elephants, dislodged, and without any noise or stir recovered without any hanne, a place of securitie. By the fourth houre of the day the sunne had dispatched and scattered the mist, and cleared the skie, and then the Romanes might discover the campe of their enemies emptie, and no creature left therein. Then at length, Claudius perceiving that Asdruball had shewed him a Carthaginian trick, and that he was at length thus over-raught by his falshood and cunning practise, began to make out after him, minding to bid him battaile. But the enemie would none of that, and fell off. Howbeit,  there passed some dribbling skirmishes betweene the rereward of the Carthaginians, and the forlorne hope and vaunt-courriers of the Romanes. Amid these affaires (the States of Spain) neither they, who revolted after the overthrow of the Romanes, returned againe unto them; nor any new fell away, more than before.
At Rome, the Senate and people after the recoverie of Capua, tooke as great care for Spaine now, as for Italie it selfe. And agreed they were in general, that the armie there should be strengthened with new forces, and a Generall thither sent: but who should be the man, was not yet concluded. For as much as, they were to take some extraordinarie care in the chusing of one to bee sent thither, where two singular and renowned warriors were slain within the compasse of thirtie daies, and to succeed in the roume of those twain. Whiles some nominated one, and some another,  at length they grew to this point, that the people should hold a solemne assemblie (as it were, purchased) for election of a Pro-consull to goe over into Spaine. And the Consuls accordingly proclaimed a set day for the said assemblie. At first, there was great expectation, that those persons, who tooke themselves worthie of so great commaund, should put foorth themselves, and preferre their owne names beforehand. But when this expectation failed and came to nothing, every man began afresh to refricate and renue the former greese, and mourne againe for the losses received, and to find the want and misse of so valourous captaines whome they had lost. Whereupon the whole citie being sad and pensive, and in manner destitute of all good counsell, and not resolved what to doe in this hard case, came yet down into Mars field upon the day appointed for the election. Every mans cie was upon the Magistrates, and beheld the countenances  of their great men and rulers, how they looked one upon another, greeving and grumbling, that the State was at so low an ebbe, and the Commonweale growne to so desperat a case, that no man durst be seene to take upon him the government and province of Spaine. Then all of a suddaine, P. Cornelius (his sonee that was slaine in Spaine, a young gentleman, not fullyfoure and twentie yeeres old) shewed himselfe, and said, That hee would undertake th
at charge upon him: and therewith stepped up into an higher place, from whence hee might be seene, and there he stood. Vpon whom, when all men had cast their eies, and avised him wel, in a generall accord and favourable affection unto the man, they ossed unto him streightwaies, a happie and fortunate government. And when the assemblie was willed to give their suffrages, and goe to a scrutinie, there was not one Centurie from the first to the last, nor one person from the highest to  the lowest, but gave their voice with P. Scipio, for to take a voiage as L. Deputie into Spaine. But after the thing was passed, and their passionate heat of affection once allaied, they were on a suddaine driven into a still silence and deepe dumpe, to thinke what a straunge and new deed they had done. And that which they bethought themselves most of, was this, that favour had carried them away in this action, more than the due consideration and regard of his age. Some there

were that had in dred and horror the ominous fortune also of that familie; and the name of him  that out of two mournefull houses was to go into those provinces, where he must fight amongst the Sepulchres both of father and unkle. When Scipio perceived, that presently upon the election passed in so hastie a fit, the people grew to be heavie and pensive; he called them to an open audience, and there before them all, discoursed of his young age, of the government committed unto him, and of the future warre that he was to manage: and that with so noble courage and hautie spirit, that he renewed afresh and kindled againe the former zeale and heate that was so cooled: and possessed mens minds with more assured hope, than usually mans faithfull promise, or reason grounded upon the confidence of precedents past, or any earthly thing is wont to affourd and warrant. For Scipio was a rare and wonderfull man, not only in regard of those true vertues inherent in him: but also for that he had framed himselfe even from his yong  and tender yeares, by artificiall meanes, to the better setting out of those in-bred parts and qualities of his owne: making shew and semblant before the multitude, that the most things which he did, were either represented unto him by night-visions and apparitions, or els suggested, as it were, by revelation from the gods above; were it that he was superstitiously given, and his mind wholly possessed therewith, or that by his pollicie he might effect his designements, and have his commaundements performed with more expedition, as if they were directions delivered from the oracles and the very mouth of the gods. Over and besides that, he made this overture to credit and reputation, and prepared mens minds in this sort from his very first beginning. From the very time that he once put on his mans gowne, ther was no day went over his head, but before he began his owne private businesse, or enterprised any publick affaires, he would go into  the Capitoll: and so soone as he was entred into the temple, there sit him down, and alone by himselfe bestow a good time in some secret yle and corner thereof. This ordinarie manner of his, which he continued all his life long, (were it of purpose consideratly, or by chance unadvisedly) made divers men beleeve verily, that it was a truth in deede, which was commonly supposed and reported, That the man had a god to his father. Which deepe and settled imagination of the people, resembled and renewed againe the like same (in all the world) to that which went before and was bruited abroad of Alexander the great, and for the vanitie and fabulous speech of folke, was the very same and all one in every respect: namely, that his mother conceived him by a mightie great serpent: for that very often in hir bed-chamber there was seene some such prodigious and wonderfull thing, and ever as any bodie came in, it would wind away  of a sodaine, and vanish out of sight. These strange and miraculous conceits he would never himselfe elevate and discredit as toyes and vanities, but rather cherish and encrease the opinion thereof, by a certain cunning cast of his own, in that he would neither denie and disavowany such matter, nor yet affirme plainely and verifie the same. Many other devises he had of like sort, partly true indeed, partly seigned and counterfet, which caused men beyond all measure to have this yong man in wonderfull admiration. Vpon the strong and grounded presumption whereof, the citie at that time conferred upon him (far unmeet ywis, in regard of his unripe yeares) so great a government, and a world withall of weightie and important affaires.
Besides the forces which remained in Spaine of the old armie, and those which were transported over from Putcoli with Claudius Nero, he had a supplement also of ten thousand foote, and one thousand horsemen: and to assist him in the conduct of his warres, he had as coadjutor appointed unto him M. Iunius Syllanus the Pro-pretor. Thus with a sleete of thirtie ships, (and Galleys they were all of five banks of ores) he tooke theseas and set sayle from the mouth of Tybre, and coasting along the Tuskane seas under the Alps, and through the gulfe of Gallia, he doubled at length the point and cape of Pyrene, and disbarked at Emporiae a citie of Greekes: (for descended they are also from Phocaea) and there he set his people a land. From thence, having taken order that his ships should follow after, he marched by land to Taracon, which he appointed for the Rendez vouz, where all his allies and consederates, (for at the rumor and same of his landing, there slocked embassadors unto him from all parts of the province) should meete together at a generall Diet. There he commaunded that the ships should be bestowed in their  docks, save only three gallies (of three ranks) which came from Massiles, and upon courresie and kindnesse accompanied him from home, and those were sent back againe. Then he gave audience to the embassadors, who hung in doubtfull suspence by reason of the varietie and of sundry changes and chances that lately had hapned, and to them he began to returne answere, and give

 them their severall dispatches: but with such a spirit and boldnesse (upon confidence that he had in his owne rare vertues) that he let not fall in all his speech, one word that might move quarrell, and savored of rigor, and yet whatsoever he spake, it caried an exceeding majestie with it, and a singular credit. Being departed from Taracon, he visited both the States of the Allies, and also the standing wintering camps of the armie: where he highly commended the souldiours, for that notwithstanding they had received two shrewd blowes, upon two so great disfeatures one in the neck of another, yet they held the province still, and kept the field; and not suffering the enemies to reape and tast the fruit of their fortunate victories, had kept them out of all the countries lying within Iberus, and defended faith fully all their consederates according to the trust reposed in them. Martius he had in his train alwaies about him; whom he so highly honored, that it was very  well seene, he feared nothing lesse than that any other man should eclipse or shadow his glorie. Then Syllanus succeeded in place of Nero, and the new souldiers were brought into the standing winter leaguers, and Scipio having revewed all the cities and the States that he was to survey, and performed all other affaires that were then to be done, retired and withdrew himself to Taracon.
The same of Scipio was no lesse bruited among the enemies, than it was rise with his owne citizens and loving allies: and a certaine presage went withall of the future event, which caried (as good hap was) the greater feare and dread with it, as there was lesse reason that could be rendred and given thereof. They had betaken themselves into their wintering harbours far dissire and remote asunder. Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo even as far as to the Ocean sea side unto Gades: Mago into the midland parts, and especially above the forest and chase of Castulo. And Asdruball  the sonne of Amilcar wintered neerest unto Iberus about Saguntum.
In the very end of that summer, when Capua was woon, and Scipio come into Spaine, the Carthaginian Armada which was sent for out of Sicilie to Tarentum, for to intercept the victuals, and empeach the same for comming to the Romane garison that held the castle of Tarentum, had verily stopped all the passages from the sea to the said castle: but by their long abode in those parts, and keeping the seas so straightly, they had caused a greater dearth and scarcitie of victuals among their owne friends than their enemies: for there could not by the help of those Carthaginian ships so much come bee along the river that was possessed by friends, nor from the open ports, for to furnish the townesmen of Tarentum, as the navie it selfe consumed and spent in maintenance of that table of sea-men, sailers, and mariners, mingled of all sorts of  people. So as the garison of the castle being but few in number there, was able to be susteined by the provision they had aforehand, without the help of any new brought in unto them: whereas the Tarentines and the navie, could not have sufficient conveighed unto them: by reason whereof, at length the Armada had leave to depart thence with more thanks of the citie, than they had for their first bien-venu thither. And yet victuals were not much cheaper, because when the help by sea was gone, there could no corne at all be brought from other parts abroad.
At the end of the very same summer, when M. Marcellus was come to the citie out of Sicilie, his owne province, C. Calpurnius the Pretour assembled the Senate for his sake in the temple of Bellona. Where, after he had discoursed of the acts by him atchieved, and complained after a mild and modest sort, laying open his griefes, not so much in the behalfe of him selfe, as of his soldiours:  in that when he had performed and accomplished his charge and commission in his province, hee could not have licence to bring home his armie with him hee demaunded that hee might be allowed to ride in triumph into the cittie: but he could not obteine it. This matter was much canvased and debated, pro and contra, Whither it were lesse meet and convenient, to denie him triumph being now present, in whose name whiles be was absent, for the fortunat successe and good speed of all affaires under his conduct and government, there was asolemne procession decreed, and sacrifices done to the honour of the immortall gods; or to graunt him triumph (as if the warre were fully finished) whom the Senate had commaunded to make over his armie to his successor; which surely they would never have decreed, but that the war remained still within the province: and especially seeing the armie it selfe was away, the best witnesse sunply, whither  he had deserved a triumph or no. At length, a middle and indifferent course between both, was agreed upon, namely that he should enter the cittie ovant in a petie triumph. And the Tribunes of the commons, by the approbation first of the Senat proposed unto the people, that M. Marcellus should the same day that he came ovant into the cittie, reteine still his full authoritie and government. The day before he entred the cittie, he rode in triumph upon the mount Albanus,

and from thence,(...) in ovant wise he sent a rich bootie before him into the cittie. There was carried  in this pompe, the counterfeit of the cittie Syracuse woon, crosbowes, brakes, standing slings, and all other warlike instruments: besides, the ornaments testifying long and continuall peace, and the great wealth and treasure of the kings: as divers vessels of silver and brasse curiously wrought; other houshold furniture also, rich hangings of tapistrie, and garments of great price; many goodly images and right noble statues, wherewith Syracuse was adorned and beautified, even with the best and principall citties of Greece. In token also of a victorie over the Carthaginians, there were eight Elephants brought in a shew. And that which was not the least sight and spectacle to behold, Sosis the Syracusian, and Mericus the Spaniard went afore with crownes of gold upon their heads. The one of them was the guide when Saracose was entred in the night season: and the other betraied Nasos, and the garrison there. Both these were enfranchised citizens of  Rome, and had fiftie akres of land a peece graunted unto them for ever. Sosis had his land set out in the territorie of Syracuse, which either belonged to the kings, or to the enemies of the people of Rome, and a dwelling house (chuse where he would in Syracuse of all those that were seized upon by right of conquest.) As for Mericus and the Spaniards that with him fled from the enemies, and sided unto the Romans, they had assigned unto them, a citie to inhabit, and land to occupie in Sicilie, which somtime belonged to them that had revolted from the people of Rome. And order was given to M. Cornelius, for to appoint them the said cittie and land, wheresoever he thought good. And in the same territorie, there were alotted and set out, foure hundred acres of land unto Belligenes, by whose meanes Mericus was allured and induced to leave the adverse part and turne to the Romanes.
After that Marcellus was departed out of Sicilie, the navie of the Carthaginians disbarked eight thousand footmen, and three thousand Numidian horsemen. Vnto them revolted the Murgentine land, and Hybla, togither with Magella; and other small piles of base account, tooke example by them and followed after. The Numidians with their captaine Mutines, raunged over all Sicilie, and fired the townes and villages belonging to the associates of the people of Rome. Over and besides all this, the Romane armie there, being discontented and angrie, partly for that togither with their Generall, they were not licenced to go out of the province: and partly, for that they were forbidden and debarred, for wintering in any good townes; demeaned themselves slackly and lazily in their militarie service: in such sort, as if there had bene a head to lead them, as they had a heart to move them, they would have mutined and rebelled. Among these troubles  and difficulties, M. Cornelius the Pretour, both appeased and mittigated the stomackes of the souldiours, as well by comfortable words, as by rebukes and checkes: and also brought under his obedience and subjection, all those citties which had revolted. Of which he according to the former act of the Senate, allotted Murgantia to the Spaniards, unto whom both a citie and la^d to it was by order aforesaid due. Both the Consuls who had the government of the province Apulia, seeing there was lesse cause of feare and terror now from the Carthaginians and Anniball, were commaunded to cast lost betweene them, for the provinces of Apulia and Macedonia. So Macedonia befell unto Sulpitius, and he succeeded there in stead of Levinus. Fulvius was sent for home to Rome, about the election of the Consuls. And when he held the solemne assembly of the people, for the choise and creation of the Coss. The Centurie of the younger citizens, which had the prerogative to give their first voice, declared T. Manlius Torquatus, and T. Octacilius for Consuls. Manlius being there present in place, when the multitude came about him, to congratulate, with, God give you joy, etc. (for that there was no doubt, but the whole bodie of the people would approve this choise of the first centurie) came with a great companie about him, to the tribunall seat of estate where the Consull sat: and made request unto him, that hee would give him the hearing of some few words, and commaund that prerogative centurie which had given their voices to be called back again to a new scrutinie. And when every man was attentive, and expected what hee would demaund, hee alleadged for his excuse a paire of ill eies.
For a shamelesse Pilot of a ship is he,The Oration of T. Manlius to the Consull. and as impudent a Generall of an armie (quoth he) who having to doe all by other mens eies, would require to have the goods and lives of other men to bee  put into their hands. And therefore may it please your honour, to commaund this centurie of the younger sort to give their voices a new, and in creating Consuls, to remember the war that is in Italie, to consider of the troublesome state of the Common-weale, and to thinke of this, That scarcely yet, mens eares have had any rest, since they resounded and rung againe, with the

 noises and alarmes, that the enemies raised within these few months, when they lay in siege neer unto the wals of Rome. But after these words, when the said centurie cried with one accord, that they were of the same mind still, and would nominate the same Consuls againe, and none other; then Torquatus, Neither (qd.he) shall I be able, if I were Consull to beare with your fashions and conditions, nor you againe, endure my rule and commaundement. To the scrutinie therefore once againe, and thinke how the Carthaginians warre within Italie, and Anniball is the Generall of the enemies. Then the centurie moved as well by the authoritie and reverence of the mans person, as by the applause and admiration of the people, who wondred at his vertue, besought the Consull, to call forth and cite a centurie of the elder bands: for that they would willingly confer with more auncient men than themselves, and by their sage advise and good direction nominate  the Consuls. When those elders were called to this centurie, there was some time allowed for to commune apart secretly with them, within the place railed in, called Ovile. These auncients said unto them, that they were to consult of three persons, whereof two alreadie were full of honourable dignities, which they had borne, to wit, Q. Fabius and M. Marcellus. But verily, (say they) in case ye would have some new Cos. to bee chosen, for to be opposed against the Carthaginians, ye have M. Valerius Laevinus, a notable man, one who hath performed singular good service, and atchieved many noble deeds, both by sea and land against king Philip. So when they had three propounded unto them, the elder were dismissed, and the younger entered into a second scrutinie; and declared for Consuls, M. Claudius Marcellus (glittering then in the prime of his glorie, for the late subduing and conquest of Sicilie) and M. Valerius, who was absent. This fore-dome and choise  of the prerogative centurie, all the rest followed after, and by their suffrages confirmed.
Let them mocke on now and scoffe hereat, all they, that have nothing in admiration, but antiquitie and things done in alder time. For mine owne part, if there be any such cittie and commonwealth at all, consisting of wise men and Philosophers, as some great Clerks have rather imagined in their fansies, than found in effect; I dare be bold to thinke and say, that in it there could not possibly be, either rulers and magistrates more grave and temperate in their desire of dignitie and government, or a people better mannered, nuttered, and instructed. But that it should bee thought an unlikely matter and scarce credible, that a centurie of younger persons, were willing to consult with the elder, and be advised by them, to whom they should give their voices, for to be created the chiefe magistrates; it is the corruption of this our age, that is the cause: wherin we see how small  reverence and authoritie, even parents themselves have, and of how slender and base account they be amongst their owne naturall children.
After this, followed the Election of Pretours, wherein were created P. Manlius Volso, and L. Manlius Acidinus, C. Lectorius, and L. Cincius Alimentus. When this Election was finished, it fortuned, that newes came, how T. Octacilius (whom the people, as it seemed, would have chosen in his absence, to match T. Manlius in the Consulship, but that the ordinarie course of the election was disturbed and stopped) departed this life in Sicilie. The Apollinare games in the former yeare had been exhibited: and when Calpurnius the Pretour put up a bill, and moved the Senate, that they might be celebrated againe that year also, there passed a decree, That they should be vowed to continue from time to time for ever.
The same yeare certaine prodigious tokens were seene and reported. In the temple of Concordia  the Image of Victorie, which stood upon the lanterne and top thereof, was smitten with lightening, and being shaken and driven from the owne place, tested fast upon those other Images of Victorie, that were fixed in the forefront of the said temple, and fell not downe from thence. Word also was brought, That in Anagnia and Fregellae, the wall and the gates were likewise blasted and strucken with fire from heaven: and that in the market place of Sudertum, there ranne streames of bloud a whole day together: That in Eretum it rained stones: and that in Reate a female mule brought forth a sole. These straunge and wonderfull signes were purged and expiate with greater sacrifices: and a solemne supplication proclaimed; wherein for one day the people should wholly attend their devotions, and pray unto the gods: and likewise a Novendiall sacrifice.  In that yeare died certaine publicke Priests of State, and new were chosen in their steed. Caius L^vius in the roume of M. Pomponius Matho the High priest: and M. Servilius, to supplie the place of Sp. Carvilius Maximus, the Arch-Augur. And for as much as T. Octacilius Maximus, the Prelat or Bishop, died when the yeare was expired, there was none nominated for to succeed him. C. Claudius the Arch-flamine of Iupiter, lost his Flamineship, and was deprived of that Sacerdotall

dignitie, because hee had committed an error in sacrificing, when hee should minister  and distribute the inwards of the beast.
About the same time, M. Aemylius Levinus (after hee had by secret conferences founded aforehand and sollicited the minds of the Aetolian Princes and great LL.) came with a smal fleet of ships lightly appointed, to their generall Diet or councell, summoned before for that purpose onely. In which solemne assemblie, after hee had made declaration, That Syracusa and Capua were woon, and under the protection of the people of Rome, and what good successe they had in the affaires and warres of Italie: and discoursed besides, That the Romanes, according to their auncient custome, received by tradition from their fore fathers, used to respect and make much of their Allies: and namely, That either they received them into the citie of Rome, and endued them with the same franchises that they themselves enjoied, or els dealt so liberally with them  otherwise, that they liked of their condition so wel, as they chose rather to be allies than citizens; he protested and said, That the Aetolians should be much more honoured amongst them, than all others, for that they were the first, that of all forraine nations beyond sea, entertained league and amitie with them. As for king Philip and the Macedonians, their heavie friends, and dangerous neighbors, he had so daunted their courages, abated their forces, and driven them to that passe, that not onely they were forced to abandon those townes, which by violence they had taken wrongfully from the Aetolians, but also had much adoe themselves to keepe Macedonie it selfe quiet, and without perill of hostilitie: promising withall, That he would bring and reduce the Acarnanians (for whom the Aetolians were so discontented and greeved, that they were dismembred from the bodie of their State) under their ancient form of jurisdiction and seignorie againe. These  relations and promises made by the Roman Generall, were confirmed and assured unto them by the authoritie and countenance of Scopas (who for the time was the Pretor or head Magistrat of that State) and of Dorimachus a prince of the Aetolians, who with lesse modestie and greater asseveration and confidencie, extolled and magnified the greatnesse, power, and majestie of the people of Rome. The principall matter that induced and moved them, was the hope of recovering and keeping Acarnania. Whereupon, there were conditions drawne and engrossed, under which they should joine in league and friendship with the people of Rome. And this braunch was added to the rest of the defeazances, That if they were so pleased, and liked well of it, there should be comprised in the same league and priviledges, the Eleans and Lacedemonians, together with Attalus, Pleuratus, and Scerdiletuss of which three, Attalus was king of Asia the lesse, the other were Princes  and Potentates of(...). Illyricum. The articles ran in this forme. Imprimis, That the Aetolians should immediatly make war by land with king Philip. Item, That the Romans at sea should helpe with 20 galiaces at the least, bearing 5 ranks of oares. Item, As touching all the cities that should be conquered (beginning from Aetolia, so far as toCorphu. Corcyra) that the ground whereon the cities were seated, the edifices, the walls, and the lands thereto belonging, should bee seized to the use of the Aetolians: all other goods and chattels els, should be a prize for the people of Rome. Item, That if the Aetolians happened to make peace with Philip, it must passe with this clause and proviso, that the peace should stand good upon this condition, That Philip abstaine to make warre upon the Romanes and their Allies, and all those that lived under their dominions. Item, In case the people of Rome fortuned to peece againe, and be confederate with the king, they should put in  a caveat and proviso, that he might have no libertie to warre upon the Aetolians, or their associates. These were the covenants agreed upon: and being faire engrossed two yeares after into a paire of indentures, the one of them remained for the Aetolians in Olympia, the other for the Romanes in their Capitoll, among other sacred records and monuments, for a perpetuall memoriall to all posteritie. The occasion of so great delay, was because the Embassadours of the Aetolians, were staied and kept very long at Rome. But that was no let nor hinderance at all to the proceedings in the warres. For the Aetolians presently made warre upon Philip: and Levinus conquered (...).Zacynthus (a litle ^and neer to Aetolia, having a citie within it of the same name, which he forced by assault, all save the castle) likewise Dragame^ts.Oeniadae and Nicsia.Naxus, which he woon from the Acarnanians before: and all these hee gave to the Aetolians. And supposing that Philip having  his hands full of the warre upon his owne frontiers, had no time to thinke upon Italie, and the Carthaginians, and to mind the covenants that passed betweene Anniball and him, he retired himselfe into Corcyra.
Philip lying in winter harbor within Pella, was advertised of theIeniza. Sophi^no, or, Zi^chia. Nigro. Aetolians revolt. Therefore

 because he minded at the prime of the Spring to conduct an armie into Greece, to the end that Macedonie and the cities bordering thereupon, should not be molested by the Illyrians, whom he supposed would be at quiet and not stir, if they were once frighted with the harmes of others, he made a sodaine rode and expedition into the marches of the Oricines and Apolloniates: and when the Appolloniates issued forth against him, he repelled them, and with great feare and terror drave them within their walls. After he had wasted the confines next to the Illyrians, he turned his forces with like celeritie and speede into Pelagonia: and then woon by assault a citie of the Dardanians, situate in the frontires of Macedonia, through which the Dardanians ment to have their passage. And when he had performed these exploits in great hast, not forgetting how the Aetolians and Romanes both mainteined war against him jointly, he descended through  Pelagonia, Nympheum, and Bolea, into Thessalie: supposing verily that the people of those countries might be incited to wage war together with him against the Aetolians. And leaving there behind him (at the streight of Thessalie) Perseus foure thousand strong, for to debar the Aetolians entrance that way: himselfe in person, before that he should be occupied in greater affaires, led forth his armie into Macedonie, and from thence into Thracia, and so forward against the Medians. That nation was wont to make incursions, and to invade Macedonie, whensoever they could perceive that the king was either busied in other warres, or his realme disfurnished and slenderly provided of good gard and strong garisons. He began therfore to foray and spoile the territories about Phragandae, and to assault Iamphorina, the principall citie and chiefe strength of that region Medica.
Scopas having intelligence that the king was gone into Thracia, and kept there occupied in the warres, put all the serviceable young men of Aetolia in armes, and prepared warre against Acarnania. The nation of the Acarnanians, albeit they were both in strength unequall, and also saw alreadie, that they had lost the walled citie of the Oniades, and Naxus: and knowing well, that the Romane forces would come upon them besides: rather upon anger, than any good counsell and advisement, made preparation for warre, and resolved to meet them. Their wives and children, and elder persons, such as were above fortie yeares of age, they sent away into Epirus, adjoining neare unto them. Of all that were fifteene yeares old and upward unto three score, they tooke a solemne oth, that they would never returne backe without victorie. They laid also a heavie curse and cruell malediction upon all those of their owne nation: and framed a most humble request,  in as effectuall tearmes as they could devise, unto all their friends, that none of them should entertaine within their cities, their dores and houses, nor admit to their table, any one of them that were vanquished, and fled out of the field: yea, and besought withall the Epirones, to gather togither the dead bodies of as many of them as should chaunce to be slaine in battel, and to enterre them all in one grave, and erect a tombe and monument over them, with an Epitaph and inscription to this effect. Here lie buried and entombed the Acarnanians, who fighting in defence of their countrie, against the violence and iniuries of the Aetolians, lost their lives manfully in the field. By this meanes, when their courages were enkindled and incensed, they encamped themselves in their utmost frontiers, abiding the comming of their enemies. And having dispatched messengers to Philip, to give notice unto him in what jeopardie they stood, they constrained him to give  over that warre which he had in hand, considering, that Iamphornia was surrendred up into his hands, and that he had sped well otherwise in the rest of his affaires. The Aetolians, upon the first fame that was blowne abroad of that solemne oth, taken by the Acarnanians, were well cooled, and not so hastie to set forward: but hearing once of Philip his comming, they were driven to retire againe as farre as possiblie they could within their owne confines. Neither Philip for his part marched on further than to Cline (notwithstanding, that hee made great speed afore, and tooke long journies; for feare that the Acarnanians should bee surprised, before hee could reach unto them) for so soone as hee heard, that the Aetolians were retired, hee himselfe also returned unto Pella.
Levinus in the beginning of the spring, tooke the sea, and losed from Corcyra, and having  doubled the point of Leucates, and sailed as farre as Naupactum, there hee published and gave knowledge, That hee would shape his course from thence for Anticyra: and that Scopas and the Aetolians should there meet him, and be in readinesse. This Anticyra is situate in Locris, on the left hand, as yee enter into the gulfe of Corinth. By land it is a small journey thither from Naupactum, and as short a cut by sea. So within three daies after they began to assaile the cittie on

both sides. The fiercer assault was from the sea side, both because they had in their ships engines  of batterie, and other ordinance and artillerie of all sorts; and also, for that the assailants from that part, were Romanes. So within few daies the citie was yeelded up, and delivered againe unto the Aetolians, the pillage thereof fell to the Romanes share, according to covenant. There Laevinus received letters from Rome, specifying thus much, That he was declared Consull in his absence, and P. Sulpitius was comming to succeede him in the province: but by occasion that he lay there sick of a long disease, he came to Rome later than all men expected.
M. Marcellus entring his Consulship upon the Ides of March, assembled the Senate that day, only for forme and order sake: for he made open profession there, that during the absence of his Colleague, he would treat of no matters, either concerning the state of the citie, or the provinces. But this protestation he uttered withall and said: That he knew full well that there  were many Sicilians in the townes and villages neere unto the citie, backbiters and slaunderers of him, whom for his owne part he was so far off from hindering, but that they might freely for all him, divulgate and publish abroad in Rome, all those crimes which were devised and spoken against him by his adversaries, that were it not that they pretended some feare forsooth, to charge the Consull with any matters, in the absence of his colleague, he would straightwaies give them audience in the Senate: but so soone verily as my brother Consull is come home, I will not quoth he, I assure you, suffer any one matter to be debated here, before that those Sicilians be sent for into the Senate house. And I understand that M. Cornelius hath taken generall search like a muster over all Sicilie, to the end there might come a number to Rome with complaints of me: he also with letters full of untruths, hath buzzed into all mens eares, and  borne the whole citie in hand, that the warre continueth still in Sicilie, and all to diminish and abridge my glory. The Consull having that day woon the commendation and name of one, that knew how to rule and governe his affections, dismissed the Senate: and it seemed that there would be a generall vacation not of law matters only, but of all other things, and as it were holiday still, untill the other Consull came unto the citie. This rest and ydlenesse (as the wonted manner is) set the commons having nothing els to do, a talking: and now their tongues walked apace, ceasing not to spred rumors, That by this long and continuall warre, not only the lands and territorie about the citie of Rome (especially where Anniball had marched with his cruell armie) were wasted, but also Italie was in maner dispeopled and laid desolat, by reason of so many musters and levies: complaining, that whole armies were diffeated and put to the sword at Cannae  in defence of the Common wealth: and that there were two Consuls created, both martiall men, and warriours, over-fierce and eager of fight, such as in time of peace and quietnesse, were able to find occasions of warre: so little was it to be looked for at their hands, that in time of war, they would seeke for peace, and suffer the citie to have any breathing time and intermission. These speeches rumoured among the common people, were interrupted and stayed by occasion of a Scare-fire, that began in sundrie places together about the Forum, in the night of that day, which was immediatly before the festivall daies of Minerva, called Quinquatrus. At one and the selfesame time, the seven merchants shops and ware-houses, which afterwards were turned into five, and the shops of the Bankers and mony changers which now are called Nova (or the new shops) were on fire. Divers private mens houses also the fire caught, for as then there were  no stately halles and palaces of the citie there built. Likewise the fire tooke hold of the common prison called Latumtae, the Fish-marker hall likewise, and the royall gallerie or walking place. Hardly could the chappell of Vesta be saved, and that by the good help and paines taking especially of 13 bondslaves; whose bondage was bought out at the cities charges, and they made freemen. The fire continued one night and a day: and no man made doubt, but it came by mans hand, and was the practise of some lewd persons; for that the fires began in many places at once, and those far distant asunder. Whereupon the Consul by the advise and direction of the Senate, made proclamation in a solemne ass
embly of the people, that whosoever would come forth and give notice, by whose meanes that fire was procured, he should be well rewarded: if he were a free-man with a peece of money; if bond, with freedome. In hope of which recompense, a certaine  slave belonging to the Calavij the Campanes, (his name was Mannus) was induced to bewray the maisters whom he served, and five other yong gentlemen of Capua, whose fathers had lost their heads by the commaundement of Q. Fulvius. Those he appeached to have made the sayd fires: and he gave them a warning besides, that they intended to do more mischiefe

 about the citie, if they were let alone, and not apprehended: so they were attached, and their houshold servants. At the first, these persons made light account both of the informer, and the information they made, and elevated the credit that was given thereto: alledging, that the day before, the partie himselfe being chastised and skourged by his maisters, ran away, and so upon an anger and giddie sit, devised (by occasion of this misfortune which was meere casual) to frame an accusation against his maisters. But when the matter was averred to their teeth in open place, and that they, by whose ministerie the feate was done, were in the mids of the Forum put to the rack, for to utter a truth, then they all made confession of the fact. So as well the maisters that were the setters thereof, as the servants that were privie and accessarie thereto, had their deserts, and suffered for it. The informer who disclosed the villanie, was made free, and had 62 pound. 10 shil. sterl.20000 asses for his labor.
 As the Consull Laevinus passed by Capua in his journey [homeward,] there flocked about him a number of Campanes, and besought him with teares, that they might have leave to go to Rome, and present themselves before the Senate, there to make suite (if happly there were any pitie and commiseration in them) not to destroy them utterly, nor suffer Q. Flaccus to consume the name and generation of the Campanes from off the face of the earth.
Now Flaccus for his part, denied flatly that he bare them any private grudge by malice: but only hated the Campanes as the common enemies to the state, and so he would do ever, so long as he knew them so ill affected as they were to the people of Rome: for there was not a nation upon earth, nor a people under heaven more spightfully and deadly bent against the Romane name than they were. And that  was the cause (saith he) that he penned them up within their walls. For who soever of them chanced any way to make an escape, they ranged about the country like brute and savage beasts, renting, tearing and killing whosoever came in their way. Some of them are fled to the adverse side unto Annibal: other are gone to Rome to set fire on the citie, and there (quoth he) shal the Consull find the market place halfe burned, and the very prints and tokens remaining fresh of the Campanes mischevous practises. There should he see that they minded to have done violence upon the chappell of Vesla, and to have put out those eternall fires, and utterly defaced the fatall pledge of the Romane empire, bestowed and laid up sure in the most secret place of the chappell. Neither thought he it was safe for the citie, to permit the Campanes to come within the walls thereof. Then Laevinus having caused the Capuans to take a corporall oth, and sweare unto Flaccus, that they would make returne to Capua before five dayes were expired, after they had their answere and dispatch from the Senate; commaunded them to come after him to Rome. Attended thus as he was with this companie, he encountred the Sicilians also, who came forth to meete him: and with this multitude he entred the citie, accompanied (I say) with the Campanes and Sicilians, both vanquished and subdued by warre, as accusers of two most famous persons, Marcellus, and Fulvius, who had conquered two most noble and renowmed Cities, Saracose, and Capua.
But both the Coss. treated and consulted first with the Senat, about the state of the commonweale, and the government of the provinces. There Levinus related in what tearmes stood Macedonie and Greece: the Aetolians also, with the Acarnanians and Locrians: likewise what acts  he had atchieved in those parts both by sea and land; and how he had repulsed Philip backe into Macedonia, when hee beganne to make warre upon the Aetolians, who now was retired and gone into the utmost parts of his kingdome: so as the legion might be withdrawne from thence, for that the armada was sufficient to keepe the king forth of Italie. Thus much spake hee of himselfe, and of the province whereof he had bene governour. Then both Consuls in common, proposed unto the Senate, concerning the province. And the LL. decreed that one of the Consuls should take the charge of Italie, and of the war with Anniball: and the other should have under his hand the armada, whereof T. Octacilius was the Admirall; and togither with L. Cincius the Pretour, governe the province of Sicilie. They were allowed the two armies which were in Tuskane and in France, consisting of foure legions: whereof two of the former yeare, that were of citizens,  should be sent into Tuskane, and those two which the Consull Sulpittus had conducted, should be led into France. Moreover, that he should have the government of France, and the leading of the legions there, whom that Cos. would appoint, whose lot it was to have Italie for his province. Into Tuskane was C. Calpurnius sent, with commission after the tearme of the Pretourship expired, to have his full jurisdiction to continue for a yeare. Likewise to Q. Fulvius was assigned

the keeping of Capua, and his rule proroged for another yeare. The armies, as well of citizens  as of allies, were by commandement of the Senat abridged and made lesse: so that for two legions ther should be but one, and that, consisting of five thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen: that they should be discharged of soulderie, who had served longest: that of allies there should be left seven thousand foote; and three hundred horse: with the same respect and consideration of service, in dismissing the old souldiours. As for Cn. Fulvius the Consull of the former year, he ruled the same province of Apulia still, without any alteration of his forces: only his government was continued unto him another yeare. And P. Sulpitius his Colleague, was commaunded to send away all his armie, only the marriners and sailers excepted. Likewise order was given, that so soone as the new Consull was arrived and landed in the province of Sicilie, the armie there, which was commaunded by M.Cornelius, should be sent out of Sicilie. Vnto L. Cincius the Pretour, were assigned the souldiours that remained after the defeature at Cannae, for to keepe Sicilie in order, and those arose to two legions. And as many legions were appointed for P. Manlius V^lso the Pretour, for to go into Sardinia, even those whereof L. Cornelius had the leading in the same province the former yeare. As for the legions of citizens, the Consuls were enjoyned to levie and enroll them so, as they enterteined no souldiour of all those who had served in the armie, either of M. Claudius or M. Valerius, or Fulvius: nor exceeded the number that yeare of one and twentie legions of Romans. When these Acts were passed in the Senate-house, the Consuls cast lots for their serverall provinces. Sicilie and the armada fell to Marcellus: Italie and the warre against Anniball, to Levinus.
This lot that fell to Marcellus, so strucke the Sicilians dead, (who stood in the presence of the  Consuls, looking for the event of the lotterie) as if Saracose had bene lost againe: in such sort, as their pittifull lamentations, and their wofull plaints, for the present turned all mens eyes uppon them, and anone after, ministred cause of much speech and talke.
For they went about to all the Senatours from one to another, in poore and vile aray, protesting that if Marcellus came amongst them againe as L. deputie, they would not onely forsake every man his owne countrie where he was borne, but also abandon the whole Iland of Sicilie: complaining, that without any desert of their parts, heretofore he had bene cruelly bent against them, and his hatred was irreconcileable: and what would hee now do in his choller, and knowing that the Sicilians came to Rome of purpose to make complaints of him? The Iland were better (say they) to bee on a light fire to burne with Aetna; or to be all a very sea, than thus to be exposed as a prey unto a mortall  enemie, for to be devoured. These grievous mones and pitteous complaints of the Sicilians, first carried to the houses of the Nobes and great men of the cittie, and there taken up and much talked of by many, whiles some pittied the Sicilians, others envied Marcellus, spread abroad at lengthso farre, untill they came to the Counsel-table. And the Consuls were dealt withall, to propose unto the Senat, that they might exchange their provinces one for another.
Then Marcellus stood up and said, That in case audience had bene given to the Sicilians alreadie in the Senate house, peradventure hee would deliver his opinion to another purpose: but now least any man might say, that they were bridled for feare, and durst not speake their minds freely, nor complain as they would of him, at whose command, and under whose obedience, they were to be within a while: he was for his part, readie to make change of his province, if his colleague were as well  content, and made no greater scruple of the matter. Only he requested that the Senat would not prejudice his cause. For if at the first (quoth he) it had bene hard and uniust, extraordinarily and without casting lots, to give my colleague the free choise of his owne province, how much greater wrong then should I have, nay what disgrace were offered unto me, if my lot should be taken from me and transferred upon him. So for that time, the Senate having made an overture unto Marcellus, what they would have done, rather than by any decree prejudiced the matter, brake up. And the Consuls betweene themselves privatly made exchange one with the other. See the fortune and fatal destinie of Marcellus, that haled him, as it were, to be matched with Anniball, and to fall into his hands: to the end that the same man, who of all the Romanes, was the first that vanquished Anniball in fight, and wan the honor from him: should now in the mids of prosperitie  and happie successe of warre,The complaints of the Sicilians against Marcellus. be the last Roman Generall that was slaine by Anniball, and yeelded the glorie of giving him the overthrow. After the provinces were thus interchaungeably shifted, the Sicilians were brought into the Senat. Where they made a long speech as touching the perpetual and constant faithfulnes unto the end, of K. Hiero, towards the people of Rome; and all

 to currie favour and gaine thankes unto the whole nation of Sicilie.
Recounting, that Hieronymus first, and after him Hippocrates and Epicides, as, for other things, so especially for their revolting from the Romanes, and turning to Anniball, were odious and hatefull unto them. For which cause and nothing else, Hieronymus was by the hands of the chieftaines of their young gallants, as it were by a publike decree of the state, made away and killed, and the noblest of their young gentlemen, to the number of seventie, conspired to murder Hippocrates and Epicides: who being disappointed and put by the effecting of their designment, through the delay of Marcellus, (who at the time before appointed, came not with his power to Saracose) were appeached, their intended plot revealed, and they all by those tyrants put to death. And yet, to speake a truth, Marcellus himselfe was he that gave the first occasion of the tyrannizing of Hippocrates and Epicides,  in that most cruelly he sacked and rifled the Leontines. But from that time forward, the Nobles of Saracose never ceased to come in unto Marcellus, and promised to deliver the cittie into his hands, whensoever he pleased. But he, forsooth, at first, stood upon these tearms, that he would rather force it by assault: but afterwards, seeing he could not effect that his purpose, notwithstanding he had wroght al the devises he could, both by sea and land, he made choise of one Sosis acopper-smith, and Mericus a Spaniard, to have them to work and contrive the betraying of the citie, rather than of the principal of the Syracusian nobilitie, who had so often offred that service, and never yet wold it be accepted: and al^ywis, because he might pretend some colorable cause of justice, to proceed in al rigor against the most ancient alies of the people of Rome, for to massacre them, and make spoile of all that they had. Set case that Hieronymus had not revolted and gone to Anniball,  but the whole people and Senate of Syracusa: Suppose, that the Syracusians in generall, by publicke consent had shut the gates against Marcellus, and not their Tyrants Hippocrates and Epicides, when they had the Syracusians sure ynough under their owne hands: Say they had warred against the people of Rome with as spightfull and cankred malice as the Carthaginians doe, and ever did: what greater hostilitie could Marcellus possibly, have exercised against them more than he hath, unlesse he would destroy and rase the citie to the very ground? Surely hee hath left nothing in Syracusa but the bare walls, the naked and emptie houses of the citie, the temples and chapples of the gods defaced and broke open, for the gods themselves, with all the rich and gorgeous ornaments are caried away. Many a man is spoiled and robbed of his goods, in such sort, as having nothing left him but the bare soile, they are not able when all is gone, with his leavings to maintein  themselves, and sustaine their wives and children. They were humble petitioners therefore, and suppliant suiters unto the LL. of the Senate, to take order, that restitution might be made unto the rightfull owners, if not of all (for that is unpossible) yet of so much at least, as was to bee found, and might be truly owned againe.
After these and such like complaints, Levinus the Consull commaunded them to goe foorth of the counsell house, to the end, that the LL. might bee consulted with, and deliver their opinions concerning their demands.
Nay marrie (^uoth Marcellus) let them stay still rather, that I may answere to their very faces: seeing, my LL. our case and condition is so hard, who warre and fight for you, that we must have those to enforme against us, and be our accusers, whom wee have conquered and subdued by martiall armes. Let it even bee so, that two cities, to wit, Capua and  Syracusa, woon this yeare, may convent judicially both their conquerours, the one Fulvius, the other Marcellus. When the Embassadours were brought back againe into the Senat house, then began Marcellus the Consull, and spake in this wise.
I am not so farre overseene,Marcellus his defence against the Syracusians. and forgetfull, my Lords, either of the majestie of the people of Rome, or of this place of commaund which I now hold, that I would plead mine owne cause, Consull as I am, against these Grecians, my accusers, in case the question were of any crime or fault of mine owne. But all the controversie to be discussed, standeth not upon these tearmes, to examine what I have done, whom the right of warre will justifie and beare out, howsoever I have proceeded against enemies: but what these men have deserved to suffer. If they were not enemies, nor so to bee reputed, then it mattered not, and it had ben all one, either now or in the life  time of king Hiero, to have forced Syracusa. But if it appeare, that they have revolted, that they have evill intreated our Embassadors, threatened to lay violent hands, and to run upon them with sword and force of armes; that they have manned their walls, and shut their gates upon us; that they have maintained the armie of the Carthaginians against us: who can bee greeved and offended, if they have suffered as enemies, who stucke not first to offer all hostilitie whatsoever?

Rejected I the Nobles of Syracusa when they would have delivered the citie into my hands? And  made I more account of Sosis, and Mericus the Spaniard, and thought them worthie to bee trusted in so important a matter? Yee are not, I am sure, the meanest of the Syracusians, that thus reproch others with basenesse of estate. Who was it of all you here, that promised to open mee the gates? that undertooke to receive my armed souldiours into the citie? Nay, nay, ye hate and curse them in your heart, who have so done; and even in this place cannot forbeare to give them hard tearmes, and revile them: so unlike it is, that you your selves ever meant to have done any such thing. Even this abject condition and base calling of theirs, my LL. which these men twit them with, is a manifest token, and a most evident argument, that I refused none, that was willing to do good service unto our state and Commonweale. At the very first, before I laid siege unto Syracusa, I assaied by all meanes to have peace; one while sending Embassadours unto them, otherwhiles  going in person to parle with them. Afterwards, seeing that without all reverence of Embassadours, they shamed not to offer them abuse; without regard of my selfe, they deigned meno answere when I came to the gates, and conferred with their cheefe Nobilitie: after much travell, toile, and infinite paines, sustained both by land and sea, at length by fine force and hote assault, I became maister and Lord of Syracusa. Now as touching that which hath befallen unto them, since they were overcome, and lost their citie, I would suppose they had more reason, and juster cause to make their mone, and complaine unto Anniball and the Carthaginians, those that are likewise conquered, than before the Senate of the people of Rome their conquerour. For mine owne part, my LL. if I had ever meant to denie and disavow the spoiling and sacking of Syracusa, and not to stand to it when I had done, I would never have ben so ill advised, as to beautifie and  adorn the citie of Rome with the spoils ther^of. And what I have given or forgiven unto any particular person, I am assured that I may well justifie and avow the same, both by the law of war, and also by the desert of every one. Now, my LL. whether yee will approove and ratifie my doings or no, it concerneth and toucheth the Commonweale rather than my selfe. My part I have done, and discharged my dutie faithfully. It much importeth now the State, that by reversing (as it were) and disanulling mine actions, yee make not your other Generals from henceforth, to bee more slacke and backward in the like emploiment. To conclude my LL. since that ye have heard both my selfe and the Sicilians speake our minds face to face, we will all togither goe out of this temple, that in my absence the Senat may more franckely speake to the point, and deliver their opinions. Thus the Sicilians were dismissed, and he himselfe went forth also to the Capitoll, for  to take a levie of souldiours.
The other Consull in the meane time, put to question the demaunds of the Sicilians before the LL. Much canvassing a long while, and discussing there was of the matter, and divers opinions passed.
Many of the Senatours following T. Manlius Torquatus the head and principall man, that maintained a side, were of this mind, That they should have made warre against the tyrants, the common enemies as well to the Syracusians, as to the State of Rome. And as for the citie, it was (say they) rather recovered and received, than woon by force: and being so received, it was to be re-established in her owne auncient lawes and freedome, and not after it was so wearied with miserable servitude, to be scourged and afflicted with warre upon it. But between the warring of the tyrans of the one side, and the Romane Generall of the other, a most beautifull and noble  citie, standing in the middest (as a prise and reward for the winner) is undone by the meanes; even that citie which sometime had been the garnet (as it were) and the treasure-house of the people of Rome: by the munificent liberalitie and bountie whereof, by whose rich presents and goodly gifts our citie many a time and oft, yea and but of late daies in this Punick war, hath ben relieved and adorned. If king Hiero should arise again from the dead and come among us, Hiero (I say) the most faithful mainteiner of the Roman state, with what face could we shew unto him, either Saracose or Rome? When he should see of one side, his own native countrie, halfe rased and wholly spoiled: and on the other side, comming to Rome, in the very entring of the cittie, and hard at the gate, should behold the spoiles of his own citie? Notwithstanding these and such like speeches cast out among them, to procure ill will and hatred to the Consull, and to move pittie and compassion  to the Sicilians, yet the LL. of the Senate in favour of Marcellus, agreed upon a milder decree, and enacted, That whatsoever he had done, either during the warre, or after conquest, should be ratified and allowed for good: Item, for the time to come, the Senate would take order and provide for the good of the Syracusians, and give the Consull Levinus a speciall charge, to have regard

 of the welfare of that cittie, so far forth, as might not be prejudiciall to the state of Rome. Then were two Senatours sent into the capitoll to the Consull, to request him to repaire againe unto the assembly of the Senate: and after the Sicilians also were admitted into the place, their act and decree aforesaid was openly read. The Embassadours had good words given them, and were dismissed: whereupon they fell downe prostrate at the feet of Marcellus the Consull, beseeching him to pardon that which they had spoken, either to bewaile, or to ease their calamitie; and to receive both them in particular, and the citie of Saracose in generall, unto his mercifull protection. After this, the Consull with gracious words licenced them to depart.
When the Sicilians had their dispatch, the Campanes had audience given them in the Senate: and as their speech was more lamentable, so the cause was heavier, and harder to be digested:  for neither could they themselves denie, but that they deserved condign punishment: nor Tyrants had they any, upon whom they might lay the blame. But they thought they had suffred enough for their sinnes already, in that so many of their Senatours died by poison, and so many lost their heads. Some few of their nobilitie and but a few remained yet alive, who as they were not touched in conscience, nor so faultie, as to lay violent hands upon themselves, so the Conquerour in his furious wrath, adjudged them not worthy of death: they therefore made humble suite for themselves, their wives and children, to obteine freedome, and to enjoy some part of their owne goods, being, as they were, meere citizens of Rome, and most of them by affinitie and neere kinred, upon mutuall and crosse mariages, linked in alliance and bloud to the Romanes. After that they also were willed to void out of the Senat house: for a while, there grew some question  and doubt, whether Q. Fulvius should be sent for from Capua (for presently upon the taking of the citie, Claudius the Consull died) that this matter might be argued and discussed in presence of the Generall himselfe, like as the other had bene reasoned of and debated betweene Marcellus and the Sicilians. But afterwards when they saw in the Senate house M. Attilius, and C. Fulvius, the brother of Flaccus, both his Lieutenants: likewise Q. Minutius, and L. Veturius Philo, Lieutenants unto Claudius, who had bene present in all actions, and were eye-witnesses of everything: and besides, were unwilling that either Fulvius should be called away from Capua, or the Campanes longer delaied: M. Attilius Regulus, who of all them that had beene at the service of Capua, was of greatest authoritie and reputation, being demaunded his opinion, spake in this wise.
 I take it (quoth hee) when Capua was newly woon, I was one of counsell with the Consuls there, when question was asked, and enquirie made, Whether any one Campane had deserved well of us and our Commonweale. And found it was, that two women onely, to wit, Vesta Oppia, borne in Atellae, but dwelling then at Capua, and Faucula Cluvia, sometime a common strumpet and curtizane, were well willers unto us. The former of these twain daily sacrificed for the welfare, life, and victorie of the Romanes; the other, secretly sustained the poore and needie Romane captives with food and victuals. As for all other Campanes, from the highest to the lowest, they wee no better affected unto us, than the Carthaginians. And even those, who were beheaded by Quintus Fulvius, suffered death, not because they were more faultie than others, but for that they were of greater marke and calling than the rest. Now, that the Senate should decide the  cause of any Campanes, who are enfranchised denisons of Rome, without a graunt from the people, I see not how it can bee. For in our forefathers time the like case was of the Satricanes that rebelled: and then M. Antistius, a Tribune of the Commons, first put up a bill, and the Commons afterwards passed it, namely, That the Senate might have power and and auctoritie, to give their opinion, and determine of the Satricanes. Therefore I am of mind, that we deale with the Tribunes of the Commons, that one or more of them, preferre a bill unto the Commons, by vertue whereof wee may bee authorised to set downe some order for the Campanes. Then L. Attilius, a Tribune of the Commons, by leave and advise of the Senate, proposed unto the Commons a bill in this forme and manner. WHEREAS THE CAMPANES, ATELLANES, CALATINES, AND SABATINES, VVHO HAVE YEELDED THEMSELVES UNTO FULVIUS  THE PRO-CONSULL, TO BE AT THE PLEASURE AND DEVOTION OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME: ALL THAT ALSO, VVHICH THEY HAVE SURRENDRED
TOGETHER WITH THEMSELVES, AS VVELL THEIR TERRITORIE AS THEIR CITIE, AS ALL UTENSILLS, BOTH SACRED AND PROPHANE, THEIR NECESSARIE IMPLEMENTS, AND AL OTHER THINGS VVHATSOEVER, I DEMAUND YOUR VVIL AND PLEASURE, o QUIRITES, VVHAT SHAL

BE DONE VVITH THE PREMISSES? The Commons after deliberation, gave their voyces to  the said bill in this forme. OUR VVIL AND PLEASURE IS, THAT VVHATSOEVER YE THE SENATOURS, VVHO NOVV ARE SET IN COUNSELL, OR THE MOST PART OF YOU THINKE GOOD AND DETERMINE, SHAL STAND FOR IUST AND LAVVFULL. Vpon this graunt or Act of the Commons, the Senate by a decree awarded unto Oppia and Cluvia, first their owne goods and libertie: and moreover if they were desirous to crave farther reward at the Senates hand, they were best to repaire unto Rome. For every familie and severall house of the Campanes, there were speciall acts and decrees made, all which to repeate and rehearse, would not quit the labour. Some had their goods confiscate: themselves, their children and wives were to be sold, excepting those their daughters which were wedded, before that they came under the subjection of the people of Rome. Others were to be clapt up in prison, untill farther order were taken for them hereafter. Moreover, of some Campanes they made distinction by valuation of their wealth, whether their goods were to be confiscate or no. All their beasts and cattaile which were taken, save horses; all their bondslaves, but males fourteene yeares of age and upward, all moveable goods also which were not annexed and fastned to the soyle, they awarded for to be restored to the true owners. All Campanes, Arellanes, Calatines, Sabellanes, excepting those, who either themselves, or whose parents tooke part and sided with the enemies, they judged to be free: provided alwayes, that none of them were either Free-denizens of Rome, or of Latium. Item it was enacted, that none of all them who had bene at Capua whiles the gates were shut, should remaine either in the citie or territorie of Capua, within a certaine day prefixed: but should have a place set out unto  them for to dwell in, on the farther side of Tyberis, so it were not upon the very banke close unto Tyber. As for those that during the time of warre had bene neither at Capua nor in any other citie of Campane, which revolted from the people of Rome, they should be removed to inhabit on this side the river Lyris betweene it and Rome: but such as were turned and passed to the Romanes side, before that Anniball came unto Capua, they should be transplanted on the hither side of Vulturnus the river: provided, that none of them should possesse either house or land within fifteene miles of the sea. As concerning them who were displaced and confined to inhabit beyond the Tybre, neither they nor their heires and successors for ever, should purchase and hold house or land in any place, but in the territorie either of Veij, Sutrium, or Nepesium: but so, as they exceeded not the stint of five hundred Acres of ground. As touching the goods  and chattels of all the Senatours, or such as had borne Magistracie in Capua, Atella, or Calatia, they awarded that sale should be made thereof in Capua. As for those that were free borne, and whose bodies were to be sould, they should be sent to Rome, and there set a-sale. Finally, the Images and Statues of brasse, which were said to have bene woon and taken from the enemies, whither they were sacred or profane, they referred to the Colledge of the Priests and Prelates, to determine thereof at their discretion. Thus they gave the Campanes their dispatch, and sent them away much worse apaied for these decrees, than they were when they came first to Rome. And now they complained no more of the cruell proceedings of Q. Fulvius against them, but blamed the iniquitie and unjust dealing of the very gods, and their owne cursed fortune together.
After the Sicilians and Campanes were dismissed, there was a muster taken: and when an  armie was levied and enrolled, there began some question and reasoning about the mariners and rowers to furnish the gallies. For the accomplishment whereof, when the Consuls could neither raise men enow, nor yet find monie at that time in the chamber of the citie, for to presse and hire them, and pay their wages with all: they published an edict, that private men according to the rate and proportion in the Subsidie booke, out of all orders, degrees, and companies, should as aforetime find rowers at their owne charges, and mainteine them with meate and money for thirtie dayes.
Vpon which edict and proclamation, all men so grumbled and muttered, and were so highly discontented and angred, that they wanted an head and captaine, rather then matter and occasion of a mutinie and insurrection: geving out, That the Consuls had taken a course, and were in the very traine to plague, undo, and destroy the Commons of  Rome, like as they had alreadie the Sicilians and the Campanes. For thus many yeares they have bene pilled, polled, cleane spent and consumed with exaction of tributes, and had nothing left them but the bare ground, and the same lying wast and untilled. As for their houses upon their lands, the enemies had burned: their servants and hines, such as should husband and all

 their grounds, the commonwealth had bereaved them of: one whiles buying them up to the warre, for some small peece of money: otherwhiles levying and presting them to the seas to be gallie-slaves, for a thing of nothing. A man could not so soone get one brasse farthing, or single silver denere before hand, but it went by and by either for gallie-pay, or for yeerely tribute. And to give that now which they had not, they might never be brought by any force or for any mans commaundement whatsoever. Let them sell and make an hand of their goods, imprison and punish their bodies too, when all is gone besides; seeing there is nothing left them to raunsome and redeeme the same againe. These and such like words were not only muttred in huggermugger, but uttered also and geven out in broad termes even in the market place and before the Consuls, by the multitude that flocked and gathered together in exceeding great numbers:  in such sort, as the Consuls were not able with all thatever they could do, to appease the mutinie, neither by sharp rebukes, nor faire words and comfortable speeches. Then they said, that they would give and allow them three dayes respit for to thinke and consider of these matters: which they themselves bestowed wholly and employed in taking a view and survey of their goods, and making dispatch and riddance thereof out of the way.
The next day the Consuls called the Senate together to consult about the supplie of rowers and gallie-slaves: where, after much debating and arguing, that the Commons had good reason to make deniall; at length the drift of all their speech was this, That whether it were right or wrong, the burden must lye on private mens shoulders, there was no remedie: for seeing there was no monie in the common chest, how should mariners and rowers els be gotten and levied? And without Armadaes, how  possibly should either Sicilie be held still in possession, or Philip be kept out of Italie? or the sea coasts of Italie remaine in safetie and securitie? In these distresses and difficulties the Counsell being perplexed, and to seeke for remedie; and whiles every mans wits were in the waine and so confused,The speech of Levinus the Consull. as if they were benummed and stone cold: Then Laevinus the Consull, As the Magistrate (qd. he) goeth before the Senat in place of honor, and the Senate likewise before the common people in worth and dignitie: so they ought in al difficulties and hard occurrences to undergo the weightiest burdens first, and be the foremen and leaders in all dangerous adventures whatsoever. For if a man would enjoyne his inferiors to beare some grievous and heavie load, let him first take it up himselfe, yea and impose the same upon his owne traine and companie: all the rest then, will be more willing and obedient to follow after, and do the semblable. And never will  they grutch at any cost or charges, when they see their leaders and rulers take more upon themselves, than they are well able to weeld and susteine. To the end therefore that the people of Rome may be provided and furnished of a steere rigged and trimmed, as our desire is, and that private persons may not thinke much, nor refuse to find rowers thereunto; let us first that are heere commaund our owne selves: let us, I say, that be Senatours, bring abroad in common all the gold, all the silver, all the brasen coine that we have, so as every man reserve rings only for himselfe, his wife and children: and a little tablet or Iewell for his sonne, as a pendant to hang about his neck. Also let all them that have wives or daughters, reteine still one ounce weight of3 pound. shil. gold, and3 pound. shil. and two shil. over, if libra be centen^^a one pound of silver: And as many as have borne office of State, and sitten in the yvorie chaire, keepe still the trappings and caparison of their horses,  and two pound weight a peece, the one of gold, the other of silver; for to have a saltsellar, and a little boll or cup, to sacrifice and offer unto the gods withall. As for the rest of the Senators, let us leave them but one pound weight of silver, and no gold at all, and five thousand15 pound, 12 shil. 6 ponce sterl. Asses in coine, to every housholder a peece. All other gold, silver, and brasen money besides, let us foorthwith bring abroad and present unto the Triumvirs or publicke bankers, before that we make or enact any decree of Senate: to the end, that our good example in this voluntarie benevolence and contribution, and our earnest endevour to helpe the Common-weale, may stirre up and provoke the hearts and affections, first of those that are by calling gentlemen and knights of Rome, and then forward the rest of the commons, to imitate and follow us with some emulation. This is the onely meanes which we that are Consuls have thought  upon and divised, after much talke and conference togither. Set to therefore, my masters, in the name of God, and lead the way: God will blesse your good beginnings. So long as the cittie standeth on foot, and holdeth up the head, no man need to feare his private state; but it shall do well enough. Go the weale publike to wrecke once, and decay, let no man ever thinke to save his owne. All the whole house liked so well of these motions, that not onely they gave their

accord and consent thereto, but over and besides, yeelded heartie thankes unto the Consuls for  their good advise and counsell. When the Senate was dismissed, every man for himself brought forth his gold, his silver, and brasse money, and laid all togither in commune; and that with such speed, striving a vie who could go before another, and have his name entred first in the publike rolles and registers: as neither the foresaid Triumvirs were able to receive it fast enough, as it was tendred unto them; nor the ordinarie Clerkes and Notaries to set it downe in writing, and take note there of accordingly. This consent and agreement of the Senatours, the knights and gentlemen of Rome in their place and calling seconded; and the commons for their parts were not behind. So without any constraint of law, without edict, without any exhortation made by the magistrate, the common-weale wanted neither rowers for to furnish the armadaes, nor mony to pay the rowers. And thus when all things were provided necessarie for the warres, the Consuls  went forth to their severall provinces.
Never was there any time of this warre, wherein Carthaginians and Romanes togither, had more triall of the alternative and variable change of fortune: never hung they more in equall ballance, betweene faire hope and fearefull daunger. The Romanes, in their provinces tasted both of sweet and soure. In Spaine on the one side, they sped ill and lost: in Sicilie on the other side, they sped well and woon: so as their sorrow was interlaced still and medled with joy. Also in Italie, the loste of Tarentum turned to their woe and damage: but the keeping of the castle there with the garrison, beyond all their hope and expectation, brought them meed and comfort for their sorrow. Also, their suddaine fright and feare, for the siege and assault of the cittie of Rome, was salved and cured againe within a few daies after, by the forcing and winning of Capua; and  all that heavinesse and mourning turned into mirth and gladnesse. The affaires also beyond sea; were checked with interchaungeable turnes and courses. Philip became their enemie in an ill time, and when they had little need thereof. Contrariwise, the Aetolians and Attalus the king of Asia the lesse, proved to be their new friends and loving allies: whereby even then fortune, seemed to smile on the Romanes, and by that overture, promised as it were, unto them the Empire of the East. Semblably the Carthaginians, as they lost Capua, so they woon Tarentum, and made a saving game of it. In like manner, as they tooke no small pride and glorie, in comming to the wals of Rome without resistance; so they were daunted and dismaied againe, that this their enterprise tooke no better effect in the end: and held themselves much disgraced and dishonoured, that whiles they sat themselves before one gate of Rome, there was an armie of Romanes  led forth at another, and sent into Spaine. And even in Spaine also, the greater hope men had there, that upon the death of two so noble and valiant Generals, and the defeature of two as puissant armies, the war was come to a finall end, and the Romanes driven from thence for ever: the more spight it was, and the greater griefe and vexation they conceived againe, when by the valour of L. Martius a tumultuarie captaine, chosen in hast they knew not how, those former victories turned to vanities, and came to just nothing. Thus fortune was indifferent, and all things doubtfull and wavering in suspence, both on the one side and the other. Their hope all one as it was at first: their feare, the same still, neither more nor lesse: So as betweene hope and fear, they fared, as if the warre at this time were new to begin.
Anniball above all other things, was vexed to the heart, that Capua being more hotely and  eagerly assaulted by the Romanes, than manfully and faithfully defended by him, had diverted and turned away the harts of many States of Italie from him. For neither was he able to hold them all with sufficient garrisons, unlesse he would dismember into many small portions, and mangle by peece-meal his armie; which to do then, was no good pollicie: nor he thoght it safe and good, to withdraw his garrisons from thence, and leave the fidelitie of his allies at libertie, either to depend upon fickle hope, or to sway with suddaine feare. And (as he was by nature covetous and cruelly minded) he resolved at length upon this course, to make spoile of those citties which hee was not able to keepe, and so to leave them wast and emptie for the enemie. This designement was not so dishonest and shamefull in the first enterprise, but it proved as bad and hurtfull to himselfe in the effect and conclusion. For he lost the hearts cleane, not onely of those that were the parties  grieved, and suffered these indignities, but also of all others besides. The present calamitie and losse touched but some few: but the precedent and example reached to many more. Neither was the Romane Consull behind hand for his part, to sollicite and sound those cities, from whence he saw some light appeare, and any hope to gaine them unto him.
 There were in Salapia two noble men above the rest, Dasius and Blasius. Dasius was friend to Anniball, Blasius (so farre as he might with safetie) affected and favoured the Romanes. And by entercourse of secret messengers, had put Marcellus in some good hope of betraing the cittie; but without the helpe of Dasius the plot could not be compassed and effected. Wherefore, after much musing and long deliberation, after many staies and delaies, at length he resolved (for want rather of better counsell, than upon any hope to speed) to addresse himselfe to Dasius, and acquaint him with the matter. But Dasius not onely misliking utterly and abhorring the thing, but also carrying a secret enmitie to the partie himselfe, the onely eye-sore and concurrent that he had, striving to be greater than he, disclosed all to Anniball. Wherupon, both were sent for, and convented peremptorily before him. As Anniball was sitting upon the Tribunall seat, giving audience  and dispatch to certeine other matters; and that hee might anone the better attend unto Blasius and the action intended against him: whiles the plaintife and defendant stood apart by themselves from the rest of the people a good way, Blasius went in hand again with Dasius, and sollicited him for to deliver the citie to the Romans. With that, Dasius (as if the matter had beene too too apparant) cried out and said, That he bashed not to breake unto him and move him, even in the presence and sight of Anniball, for to practise treason and betray the citie. Anniball and all they that were there present, gave little credite unto Dasius: and the more audacious the thing itselfe was, the lesse likelyhood it caried with it of a truth. Every man supposed verily, it was nothing but emulation, envie, and cancred malice, that caused Dasius to charge upon him that crime, which because there was no witnesse to the contrarie, he might untruly devise and more freely enforce  against him. And so for that time, they were both discharged the court. But Blasius never gave over to follow still this bold enterprise, but beat still upon this one point, shewing how good and commodious the thing would bee, both to themselves in private, and to their countrie in common, untill hee had wrought him so, and woon him to graunt, that the Carthaginian garison, (and those were Numidians) togither with the citie Salapia, should be rendred unto Marcellus. But without much bloudshed they could not possibly be thus betraied and delivered: for they were the most hardy and valiant horsemen by farre, of all the Carthaginian armie. Wherefore, albeit they were taken on a suddaine unprovided, and had no use of horses within the cittie, yet with such weapons, as in such a suddaine tumult and uprore they could catch and come by, first they assaied and gave the venture to breake through and escape away: and when they saw that  they could by no meanes save themselves and get forth, they fought it out to the last manfully, even unto death: so as there were not of them above fiftie left alive, and came into the hands of the enemies. And surely, the losse of this cornet of horsemen, was a greater dammage unto Anniball, than the forgoing of Salapia: for never from that day forward, had Anniball the upper hand in cavalerie, which was the onely service whereby ever before he most prevailed.
Much about the same time the castle of Tarentum was streightly distressed for want of victuals, and hardly could endure and hold out any longer. The only hope that the Romane garrison had, which lay there, and the captaine thereof M. Livius the Constable of the castle, was in the provision sent out of Sicilie. For the safe convoy whereof, along the coast of Italie, there rid at anker a fleet welneere of twentie saile before Rhegium. The Admirall of this fleet appointed to  wast these victuals from time to time, was one Decius Quintius, a man of obscure birth and base parentage, howbeit, for many worthie acts and feats of armes, much renowmed in martiall glorie.
At the first he had the charge but of five ships, whereof two of the greatest, which were three banked gallies, were allowed him by Marcellus: afterwards, upon his good service, when hee had born himselfe bravely in many conflicts, he had three more committed unto him, and those were of five banks of oares, untill at last himselfe, by calling upon the confederat cities, as Rhegium, Velia, and Pastum, for the ships due by covenant unto the people of Rome, he had made a pretie Armada, as is abovesaid, of twentie saile. As this fleet had disankered and was gone from Rhegium, Democrates with the like Armada for number of Tarentine ships, encountered almost five  leagues from the citie of Tarentum, at a port called Sacriportus. It fortuned at that time, that the Roman Admirall, little looking for any battell, came forth under saile onely, but about Crotone and Sibaris, he had furnished his shippes with rowers also, and so his fleet for the bignesse and talnesse of the vessels, was well appointed, and sufficiently armed and manned. And even then it happened at one time, that both the boisterous wind lay, and the enemies also were within kenning,

so as they had scarce time ynough to fit their tackling, to make readie their rowers, and to set in  order their fighting men, against a skirmish that was so neere toward. There was not lightly seene a greater conflict, tought more hotely and fiercely betweene two roiall Armadaes that affronted one another, than between these small fleets. For why, the battel was for a greater matter, than all their ships came to. The Tarentines mainteined the fight more eagrely, because they were desirous to recover their castle out of the Romans hands, as they had done their citie, after one 100 yeares almost, during which time, they had been out of the possession thereof: hoping thereby, if they could be maisters of the sea once by some fortunate and victorious battell, to cut off and intercept all hope of victuals from the enemies. The Romanes on the other side bestirred themselves as lustily, that by keeping the possession of the castle, all the world might see, that Tarentum was not lost by force, cleane strength and valour, but betraied by stealth and trecherie. So they sounded the battell from both parts, and ran affront one at another, with the beakes and stemmes of their prows, and neither staied rowing amaine forward, nor suffered their enemie to part or goe aside from them, untill they closed and grappled their ships together, by the meanes of yron hookes like hands. And so neere they buckled, in hote and furious medley, that not only they discharged shot aloofe one against another, but also they coped together (as it were) foot to foot, at hand strokes with sword fight. Their prows and for-ships stucke grappled together, while the poups and hin-deckes were driven about with contrarie oares of the adverse part. So neere and so thicke withall stood the ships, and within so narrow a roume, that scarce one dart light into the water in vaine, and did no harme. With their beake-heads they assailed one another, as it had been on land fight, and so close they were, that the souldiours might passe out of one ship  into another, as they fought. Howbeit, two ships there were above all the rest, that mainteined a notable fight, and in the vauntguard and forefront of the battell, invested one another most furiously. In that of the Romanes was Quintius himselfe in person, and in the other of the Tarentines, was one Nico, surnamed Perco, a man not only odious unto the Romans, for the publick quarrell betweene both states, but also maliciously bent, upon a private spight and rancour, as banding with that faction, which had betraied Tarentum to Anniball. This Nico espying Quintius both fighting and also encouraging his men withall, charged him at unwares; and ran him quite through with a partuisane: who was not so soone fallen forward headlong upon the fore-deck, armour and all, but the Tarentine following the traine of his victorie, and seeing the ship disordered and troubled for the losse of their leader, lustily came forward, and borded her; laid about him manfully, and put by the enemies out of his way, untill the Tarentines were maisters of the prow and forecastle. Whiles the Romanes had much adoe (so thrumbled they were and thrust togither disorderly) to defend and keepe the poupe and hind-decke; with that, another gallie of the enemies appeared on a suddaine, and charged the hind-part. So the Roman ship in the middest between both, was boorded on every side, and taken. Whereupon all the rest were greatly terrified, seeing the Admirall-ship was woon by the enemie: and they fled on all hands. Some were sunck in the deepesea, some made hast with their oares, and skudded to the land, but anon were a prize and prey to the Thurines and Metapontines. But of the hulkes and Carickes, which were fraught with victuall, and followed after, very few there were that fell into the hands of the enemies: the rest shifting and turning their sailes crosse, this waies and that waies, according to
the inconstancie  of the wind, recovered the maine sea.
But about Tarentum at the same time, their fortune was nothing so good. For whereas there went out of the towne, upon a foure thousand men a foraging, for to purvey corne, Livius, Constable of the castle and captaine of the garison, spying his time (as hee waited ever for all opportunities) made out of the said castle 2000 armed souldiours, under the leading of C. Persius a valourous and industrious man: who set upon the Tarentines straggling out of order, and dispersed in wandering wise over the fields; and after he had followed a long time the execution, killing them here and there as he encountred them; the rest, which were but few left of so many, he chased to the towne: for they made hast in great feare thither, and were let in at the gates standing halfe shut, for feare least at the same randon the towne should have been lost. So the Tarentines  and Romans, when they had made the reckoning, put up all on even hand. For the Romans were winners by land, the Tarentines at sea: and both of them disappointed alike of their hope of corn, which was presented to their eies, but they never tasted thereof.
At the same time Levinus the Consull, after a good part of the yeer was gone about, arrived

 in Sicilie, greatly expected and looked for, as well by the old allies as the new: and the first thing of all other and most important, he supposed, was together with this new peace, to settle and compose the State of Syracusa, so much disordered and out of frame. After that, hee led his legions to Agrigentum, where onely there remained the reliques of warre; which cittie was kept by a strong garrison of Carthaginians. There fortune favoured his first dessignes. Hanno chaunced to be the generall over the Carthaginians, but he wholly relied and reposed all his hope in Mutines and the Numidians. This Mutines had raunged all over Sicilie at his pleasure, and raised booties out of the territories and lands of the Romane associates, and by no force or policie could he be intercepted of his passage backe to Agrigentum, nor yet bee pinned within the cittie, but that he would issue foorth whensoever hee listed. This glorie of his, because now it checked (as it  were) the fame and honour of the Generall, turned the man at length to displeasure and danger: so as, what good service soever was atchieved, it was never well taken by Hanno, nor joyously accepted, in regard of the person, who was a pricke alwaies in his eie. Whereupon in the end hee gave away the captainship of Mutines from himselfe, and bestowed it upon his owne son: thinking, that togither with his government and commaund, hee should loose all his authoritie and reputation also among the Numidians. But it fell out farre otherwise. For the more that hee was in disgrace and disfavovr with Hanno, the greater grew the old favor and love of the Numidians toward him. Neither could hee himselfe endure any longer the unworthie wrong and indignitie offered unto him: and therefore in revenge he presently dispatched certain secret messengers unto Levinus, with credence, that hee would betray and deliver Agrigentum into his hands. By the  mediation of these intercourriers, there passed sufficient securitie and assurance between them: and the matter being concluded, the manner also of contriving the plot, was agreed upon. Whereas therefore the Numidians were possessed, and had the guard of that gate that openeth toward the sea: after they had either driven out the old warders from thence, or killed them, they let in the Romans at the same gate into the citie, who were sent of purpose, according to the former agreement. And when they marched up into the midst of the citie, even to the market place, with banner displaied, and with great tumult and noise; Hanno supposing it was nothing els, but a seditious uprising of the Numidians (like as they had done sometimes before) came forth as to appease and stay a mutinie and commotion. But discovering a greater multitude a far off, than the Numidians were: and hearing withall the Romans to shout, with the manner wherof his ears had  ben well acquainted before time, hee tooke him to his heeles ere hee came within the dart-shot. And being let out at a backe posterne gate, taking with him Epicides, hee recovered with some few other the sea side, where, as good hap was, they light upon a small barke or pinnase: and so leaving Sicilie to the enemies, for which there had beene much strife so many yeares together, they passed over into Affrick^. The multitude besides both of Carthaginians and Sicilians, without any skirmish either begun or intended, fled like blind men they wist not whether: and finding all waies made up, and no passage forth, they were miserably slaine and hewen apeeces about the gates. Laevinus being possessed of the towne, caused all the cheefe men and rulers of the citie, to be beaten with rods, and to lose their heads: all the rest together with the pillage he sold in port-sale, and the monie that was reised thereof, he sent to Rome.
 When the newes of this misfortune of the Agrigentines was blowen over Sicilie, all at once turned Romane, and Anniball lost all. For in short space there were 20 townes betraied and yeelded, sixe forced by assault, and to the number of 40 voluntarily surrendred to the devotion and protection of the Romanes. The principall noble men of which States, after that the Consuls had either rewarded or punished according to their severall demerits, and compelled the Sicilians generally to lay by armes and weapons, and to take themselves to the plough, for to eare, till, and sow their grounds; to the end that the Iland might bring forth fruite, not only to susteine and mainteine the naturall inhabitants thereof, but also to ease the price of corne and victuals in the citie of Rome, and throughout all Italie, like as it had done many times before: he transported over with him into Italie a rable and damned crew of unruly people from Agatirna. Some  foure thousand there were of them, a confused multitude of all sorts, a very mish mash and sinke of vile and wretched persons, most of them Outlawes, Bankrupts, and notorious male factors, in danger of death by the lawes of their cities where they lived. And being fled their countries, some for one fact, some for another, they chaunced all upon like fortune to sort themselves (as commonly birds of a feather will flye together.) and at Agatirna, they made choise like outlawes,

to live by robbing and spoiling: and this was their only profession and trade. Laevinus thought it no good pollicie to leave behind him these good fellowes in an Iland, which began but now upon new peace to knit and unite againe; for feare least they would minister matter of innovation and change; and besides, there was some good use of them among the Rhegines, for to foray and rove about the Brutians countrie: for such they stood in need of, and had laid for a companie which were acquainted with theeving and stealing. And so this yeare made an end of the war in Sicilie.
P. Scipio L. Deputie and Generall in Spaine, having in the prime and beginning of Spring put his ships to sea and set them aflote, and by an edict summoned all the aides of the allies to repaire to the Rendez vous at Taracon; gave order and commaundement, that as well the ships of warre as of charge and burden, should from thence set forward, and shew themselves at the  mouth of the river Iberus. And after he had given direction and charge, that the legions from out of their winter harboroughs, should there meere together, himselfe accompanied with five thousand of his allies put himselfe on his journey to his maine armie.
Being thither come, he thought it good to make some speech to the old souldiours especially,(...) as many as remained alive after so great disfeatures and overthrowes, and when he had assembled them all together to an audience, in this wise he spake unto them. Never was there new Generall before myselfe, that could by good right, and in regard of desert, render thanks unto his souldiours, before he had employed them, and made triall of their good service. But as for me, before I ever came within sight of this province, before I entred my goverment and saw the camp, fortune hath obliged me, and made me behoulden unto you. First, for your kindnesse and zealous affection to my  father and to mine unkle, both while they lived, and when they were dead. Secondly, in that when the possession of this province was lost; after so great foyles and overthrowes, ye have by your vertue and valour recovered the same againe, and kept it entire to the behoofe of the people of Rome, and myselfe, the next successor in place of soveraigne rule and commaund. But for as much as our full purpose and present resolution is, by the leave, favour, and power of the gods, not so much to hold the possession ourselves and abide in Spaine, but to dispossesse the Carthaginians that they may have no footing nor abode at al there: and since the thing that we go about, is not to stand keeping the banke of Iberus, for to stop the passage of the enemie; but to geve the attempt to passe over ourselves by force: yea and there withall to transport the warre over with us into his owne country, and to come home unto him. I feare me greatly, least this  will seeme unto some of you a greater designement, and more audacious enterprise of mine, than may either suite and sort with the fresh rememberance of those late defeatures, or stand well with my young and unripe age. The soyles and unfortunate foughten fields in Spaine, can be of no man in the world forgotten later than of myselfe, whose father, whose unkle, were within the space of 30 dayes there slaine, to the end that sorrow upon sorrow, funerall upon funerall, one mournefull death after another, should infortunately be heaped upon our house and familie. But as this desolate estate and defect almost of all my house and name (wherein I onely, in manner, am left alive of my race) woundeth my heart and make it bleed, as often as I thinke of it: so the publike fortune and vertue of the Commonweale, reviveth my spirit againe, and will not suffer me to dispaire totally of the state of this Empire: considering the destinie and providence of  the gods, whereby it is a thing given unto us, and our lucke hath ever bene, that howsoever we have received overthrowes in all great warres and daungerous battailes, yet in the end, wee have gone away with the victorie. I omit to speake of old examples, of Porsena, of the Gaules, and Samnites: and I will begin at the Punicke warres. How many armadaes and fleetes, how many brave captains, how many valiant and puissant armies were there lost and miscarried, during the former? And what should I say of this in our daies? In all the defeatures and overthrowes, I was either present myselfe in person; or if I were not in any of them, yet I am sure, I was hee that felt the smart of them, more than any man else whatsoever. The river Trebia, the mere Thrasymenus, the town Cannae, what are they else, but the very sepulchres and tombes of the Romane armies there hewne in peeces, and of their Consuls slaine. And thereto, the generall revolt of Italie, the rebellion  of Sicilie, the falling away of the greater part of Sardi^ia. Moreover and besides, this last afright and terror, namely the Carthaginians campe pitched betweene Anio and the walles of Rome, and Anniball seene well neere, as conquerour at the very gates of our cittie. In these so great ruines and adverse distresses of our state, yet the vertue alone and valour of the people

 of Rome hath stood upright, sound, and immutable: yea and hath raised up againe and set on foot, all that which lay along on the ground. You onely, my valorous souldiours, were the first, that after the discomfiture of Cannae, under the leading and good fortune of my father, withstood Asdruball in his journey and expedition toward the Alpes, purposing to go downe into Italie; who if hee had joyned with his brother Anniball, certainly by this day, there had remained no memorie of the Romane name. And in very truth, these affaires falling out so prosperously, made a mends and recompence for all the former losses. But now through the goodnes of the gods, all things prosper and go well forward: and the affaires of Italie and Sicilie both, mend daily, and are every day better than other. In Sicilie, Saracose and Agrigentum are woon and wholly ours: the enemies be driven out of all the Iland, and the state is reduced into the forme of a province,  subject to the people of Rome,and under their obeisance. In Italie, the towne of Arpi is recovered by surrender, the citie of Capua is forced by assault. Anniball himselfe, having measured all the way, (but in fearefull hast and in manner of a flight) as long as it is from Rome to the Brutiens countrie (in high Calabria), is there driven up into the furthest angle and corner thereof, nothing more wishing and praying for at gods hands now, than to be able to retire and get away safe out of his enemies land. What thing then were lesse beseeming, my hardie souldiours, than this, If you who have susteined and upheld the decaying and down-falling estate of the Romane Empire in this province, you (I say) togither with my two parents (whom for the reverence that I owe to them, give mee leave to make equall, and to honour with that name) at what time as calamities and losses, happened huddle one in the necke of another, and the gods themselves  seemed to take part and stand with Anniball; should now let fall your courages and be faint hearted, because in those provinces aforesaid, all things go well to our harts desire and great contentment. As for the late misfortunes and adversities which have hapned here, would to God they had passed over without sorrow, as wel of my part, as of yours. But for the present, the immortal gods, protectors and governors of the Romane Empire, who inspired into the minds and hearts of all the Centuries, to wish and chuse me to this place of soveraign honor, even the same gods by auguries and auspices, by all tokens of the birds either by flight or sight, yea and by visions also in the night season, do portend, signifie and promise unto me, all good speed and happie successe: yea and mine owne mind giveth me, (which ever hitherto, hath bene to me the truest prophet, and never deceived me) that all Spaine is ours: and that within short time, the whole Punicke name  and nation, being expelled and driven out from hence, shall fill all seas and lands with their shamefull and dishonorable flight. That which my spirit and soule of it selfe presageth, the same doth reason also conclude by most certaine and infallible demonstration. The allies and subjects here of the Carthaginians, oppressed and wronged by them, have humbly by their embassadors craved our aid and succour. The captaines Generall of their forces, being at difference and oddes all three among themselves, in so much as they had like to have departed and revolted one from the other, have distracted and dismembred their forces into three parts, and bestowed them in three severall countries, most removed and distant asunder. And no doubt, the like fortune is readie to fall upon their heads, which lately was our undoing and overthrow, upon the same occasion. For even as we before were forsaken of the Celtiberians, so are they now abandoned of their allies.  Besides, they parted and divided their armies asunder: which was the only cause, that brought the utter ruine and destruction upon my father and uncle. And be yee sure, that their intestine discord and dissention, will never suffer them to joyne friendly and unite againe in one. And thus singled as they are, they cannot possibly withstand our puissance. Now my souldiours, for your part, do but favour the name of the Scipions: do but affect and love me, the issue and offpring of your noble Generals, budding foorth againe (as it were) out of the old stocke, cut downe to the roots. Go to, old soldiors, and redouted servitors, with bon-courage set over the river Iberus a new armie and a new captaine: passe over with them into those lands, which ye have often conquered, and wherein yee have atchieved, many valiant and memorable acts. And for my selfe, I will so endevour and effect, that as yee now agnize in me, the resemblance of my fathers and uncles visage  and countenance, the same feature, proportion, and lineaments of the bodie: so I will shew and represent unto you, the true patterne and portraicture of their spirit, wit, faithfulnesse, and vertue, even as the expresse and lively image taken and drawen from their owne selves: in such sort, as every man may say, That captaine Scipio is either risen from the dead, or new borne againe. Having by this oration, incensed and inflamed the courages of his souldiours, and left Syllanus

with a guard of three thousand foot, and three hundred horse, for the defence of that coast; hee  transported over the river Iberus, all the rest of his forces, amounting to the number of five and twentie thousand foot, and 25 hundred horsemen. There he was advised by some about him, seeing the Punicke armies were departed into three countries so farre remote and dissue asunder, to set upon and assaile that which was next: but he doubting and fearing least by that means he should draw them altogither, and knowing that he was not able alone, to match and make his part good with so many hosts at once, determined in the mean while, to be doing with new Carthage, and to besiege and assault it. This cittie, as it was rich and wealthie in itselfe, so it was full of all the enemies furniture and provision for warre. There was their armour kept, there was their money laid up, there remained the hostages of all Spaine. Besides, as it was seated commodiously, to crosse over from thence into Affricke: so it stood upon a convenient and large haven, able to receive and harbour the greatest navie at sea, and the onely haven (if I bee not deceived) of all that coast and tract of Spaine, which boundeth next upon our sea. But no man was made privie to his determination, not knew whither they should take their journey, save onely Laelius. Hee being sent about with the armada, had direction so to temporise and guide his course by saile and ore, that at one and the selfe same instant, both Scipio might present his land forces in the view of Carthage, and the fleet enter the haven. So they depated from Iberus, and within seven daies came before the cittie of Carthage, both by sea and land. His campe hee pitched on the north side of the cittie: which he entrenched and fortified on that outward back-part, that stood farthest from the cittie: as for the forefront, it was by naturall situation of the ground, defended surely enough.The firmation of (...) Carthage. For the site of Carthage is in this sort. There is a gulfe or creake of the sea, in  the middle coast and river well neere of Spaine, opposite most to the South-west wind, running and retiring in length within the land halfe a mile, but lying out in breedth somewhat more. In the very mouth of this creeke, there is a little Iland from the open sea; which saveth, sheltereth, and defendeth the haven from all other winds, but onely the Southwest. From the in most nooke of this bay, there beareth out a promontorie like a demie Iland, which is the very hill or cape whereupon the cittie is built. The same on the East side and the South, is compassed with the sea: from the West, it is enclosed with a lake or standing mere, which also spreadeth somewhat toward the North, of an uncerteine depth; which altereth according to the tide, and as the sea either ebbeth or sloweth. Now, there is an elboe or banke of firme ground, somewhat lesse than a quarter of a mile over, that joyneth the cittie with the maine or continent. To that side (notwithstanding it had been no great peece of worke there to fortifie) the Romane Generall cast no trench, nor raised any rampier: either upon a brave and hautie mind, to shew the enemie how confidently he trusted in his owne strength; or because, whensoever he advanced to the walls of the citie (as often times hee tooke occasion so to doe) hee might have open recourse and regresse againe into the campe. But when the utter side, which required fortifications, was finished, he set the ships in order within the haven, making a shew, as if hee would besiege them also on the waterside. And when he had gone through all his armada, and given the captaines of the ships in charge, to looke wel to their centinels and watches in the night (for that commonly enemies at their first besieging, make what attempts and adventures they can in every place) hee returned into his campe. And because hee would not onely yeeld his souldiours good reason of  this his designement, in that he began warre first and principally with the besieging of that citie; but also encourage them, and put them in good hope of the winning and conquest thereof, hee assembled them together, and discoursed before them in this manner.
My valiant souldiours and trustie friends,The Oration of Scipio to his souldiors. If any man here thinketh, that yee are brought hither to assaile a citie onely, and there an end: he rather maketh reckoning of your present pain and travell, than casteth the profit and commoditie thereof ensuing.
For yee shall in very truth give the assault to the walls but of one citie: but in that one citie ye shall be maisters and conquerors of all Spaine. Here liethe hostages of all their Nobles, their Princes, and States. And no sooner shall yee bee lords of them, and have them in your rule and custodie, but presently, all that now is under the hands of the Carthaginians in Spaine, will be surrendered unto you, and  at your devotion. Here is all the money that the enemies have: without which, like as they are not able to maintaine warre, (as who wage and entertaine all their armies for pay) so it will mightily steed us (if we light upon it) in gaining the hearts of the barbarous people. Here are their engines and artillerie, here is their armour, here is their tackling and provision for their navie, and all

 other munition and furniture for warre: wherewith we shal both furnish ourselves, and disfurnish the enemie. Gaine we shall over and besides, not onely right faire and beautifull, but also a most rich and wealthie citie: yea, and more than that, of right great importance and consequence, in regard of a goodly and surpassing commodious haven: by meanes whereof, wee may bee provided both from sea and land, of all things needfull and requisite for the warres. Which, as they will be of great moment to us that shall have them, so they will be the greater losse to the enemie that shall forgoe them. This is their castle for strength, their garner for come, their treasurie for monie, their armourie, their arsenall: and in one word, their very store-house of all things whatsoever. Hither is the direct passage and streight cut out of Affricke, here is the onely port and harborough for shipping, betweene the Islands of Gades, or Gebraltar, and the mountaines Pyrenaei:  from whence all Spaine overlooketh (as it were) and commaundeth Affricke. But knowing that you are well appointed alreadie, and prepared to the service, I wil say no more but this: Now for the honour of the Romanes, let us goe courageously to it, and with all our might and maine assault new Carthage. And when they all with one accord cried unto him, so to doe indeed, and that no other thing was first to be done; then he advaunced before Carthage, then hee gave commaundement to assaile it at once, by land and sea. Mago the captaine of the Carthaginians on the other side, when he saw preparation made by water and land to give the assault; for his part ordered his forces and disposed them in this manner. To make head against the Romans on that side where they lay encamped, hee opposed two thousand townesmen: with a guard of five hundred souldiours he kept the citadell: other five hundred he placed upon a little hill belonging to  the citie which looketh to the East: all the other multitude whatsoever, hee appointed to make resistance in other places, where any outcries, shouts, or suddaine al'armes should be given. Then having set open a gate, he sendeth those forth, whom he had arraunged in that street which leadeth directly to the camp of the enemies. The Romans (according as they were commaunded by their leader himselfe) in the beginning gave ground a little and reculed, to the end, that during the time of skirmish and conflict, they might be neerer to the supplie of succors, which were to be sent to second them from behind. And verily at the first they stood to it stoutly on both parts, and there was no ods perceived. But afterwards, the Romanes being still freshly reenforced from out of the campe, not only discomfited the enemies, and put them to flight, but preassed on them so hard, as they fled disordered and out of aray, that if Scipio had not sounded the retreat, it seemed, that they  would have entermingled themselves pelmell with those that ran away, and rushed into the citie with them. Within the citie throughout there was no lesse feare than in the battell. Many courts of guard and other places were abandoned, the courtein of the wals was left naked, and every man made what shift he could to leape downe and escape. Which when Scipio perceived (who now was turned to a mount which they call Mercurius Teutates) and namely, that the walls were void of all the defendants, he commaunded all his soldiors to issue forth of the camp, to set forward to the assault, and to bring ladders to skale. Himselfe in person, defended with the shields of 3 tall lustie yong men going before him (for by this time they let flie afresh from the walls a mightie voley of shot of all sorts) approched the citie. There he exhorted, encouraged, and commaunded them to do what was requisite in this service. And that which made most to enkindle the courages of the  souldiours, he was there personally as an eye-witnesse a
nd beholder of each mans valour or cowardise. Whereupon, they stuck not to run upon the very shot, and to receive many a wound: and now nothing could keepe them back; neither the strength of the walls, nor the armed men that stood thereupon, but they skaled avie, who could mount upon the walls first. At the same time, that part of the citie also which the sea beat upon, began to be assailed by the ships. But from thence, it should seeme, they made more ado with houting and hurrying, than effected ought by any forcible assault. For whiles they came close to the walls with their ships; whiles they put foorth their ladders and their souldiours; whiles every man laboured to gaine the land, the neerest way he could: what with their striving and hast-making, they hindred one another. And by that time Mago had filled the walls full of armed men, who let flye arrowes, Iavelines,  darts, and all kind of shot, whereof they had gathered together exceeding great store. But neither men, nor arrowes and darts, nor anythings els defended the wall so much as the very wall itselfe. For few ladders they had that could reach up to the top: and the longer any of them were, the more weaker also they were. Whereupon, by reason that they who were climed up to the highest rounds, could not gain the parapet and discharge the ladder, and yet some

or other still clambred up after, the ladders being overcharged with the weight, brake in peeces. Some againe there were, that notwithstanding the ladders under them held still and stood unbroken, yet when they looked downe from on high, their eyes so dazeled, and were overcast with a mist, that they lost their sight, and fell from the top to the ground. Thus when ladders here, and men there, came tumbling down, and the enemies upon their good speed grew to be more hartie and hardie, the retreat was sounded: which gave to the besieged within the towne not hope onely of present rest and intermission of so great labour and toyle, but also assured them in manner, for the time to come, that the citie was tenable against all skalades, although it were invested therewith round about. And as for fabricks and mounts to be raised and planted against it, they were not only difficult and hard to be performed, but also would aske some long time: and minister in the meane while, space sufficient for the other Generals of their owne to come to the  reskue. But scarce was the first assault fully ceased, when Scipio commaunded other fresh and unfoiled souldiours, to take the ladders of them that were weeried alreadie and wounded, and with greater violence to give a new Camisado. Himselfe, so soone as he understood that it was ebb and low water, having bene advertised by certaine fishermen of Taracon (who sometimes with light boates used to rowe, and otherwhiles when their vessels touched the ground, to wade all over the lake upon firme ground) that men might easily passe to the walls on foot: thither to that place he brought all his souldiours to the assault. It was now almost noonetide of the day; and besides that the water of it selfe naturally fell with the ebb into the sea, there was a good round northren wind arose, which drave the water out of the lake (which now was well fallen) after the tide, and discovered such shallowes, that whereas in some places thereof they went up  to the navell, in some againe they waded skarce knee deepe. Which albeit Scipio knew well to be an ordinarie thing in naturall reason, and therefore with good forecast had made provision accordingly to take that advantage, yet he turned it to a miraculous and prodigious accident, attributing all to the immediat handie-worke of the gods: as who to give passage and footing to the Romanes, had turned back the course and current of the sea, discharged lakes of their water, and opened wayes unto them, that never before were troden with the sole of mans foot: and therewith he willed his souldiers to follow Neptune, the guide and leader of the way, and to passe boldly through the mids of the lake close to the very walls. On the land side the assailants had exceeding trouble in standing under the walls: for not only they were hindered by reason that the curtine was so high; but also as they went, they lay open and under their shot, and were  wounded both wayes, so as their flanks and sides were more anoyed as they approched under, than their faces and forefront of their bodies. But on the other part, as they went quietly and easily through the mere to the wall, so they climed forward as securely to the very top thereof. For neither was it strongly fortified with bulwarkes, nor raised to any height by industrie and art of man, as being supposed by naturall situation of the place, and the standing lake besides, strong enough and sufficiently defended: nor any gard of armed men were there in watch and ward, opposed against the assailants: whiles every man was busie, and wholly intended to helpe there, from whence some daunger was seene. The Romanes being thus entred the cittie over the walls without any skirmish, marched from thence with what speed they could, unto that gate, about which all the fight and hote medley was alreadie begun: for there not only all their minds were  bent and amused, but also their eyes and eares were occupied and possessed; whiles some fought, others looked on and encouraged the fighters: in such sort, that there was none of them all once perceived or knew, that the citie was taken and surprised behind them, before the darts flew about their eares and light upon their back parts, and untill they had the enemies both before and behind. Then not onely the walls were taken (when the defendants upon a twofold feare,New Carthage forced by Scipio. were driven to abandon them) but also the gate from withinforth and without, began to be broken downe: and anone, after continuall running and beating against it, the leaves thereof perforce flew apeeces, because there might bee nothing to impeach or let them in their entrance: then the armed souldiours brake in most furiously. Many alreadie had skaled the walls, and gotten over, but they turned and betooke themselves every where to massacre and make havocke of the townesmen. But the maine battell, which entred in at the gate with their captains, orderly by companies and ranckes in their array, marched forward through the middest of the citie to the market place. From whence Sci^io might see the enemies flie two waies, some to the fortresse upon the hill aforesaid, which standeth to the East, and was kept with a guard of five hundred souldiors: others

 into the citadell, into which Mago himselfe, with all the armed men in a maner, who were driven from the walls, had retired and fled for to save himselfe. Whereupon he sent a part of his forces to win the said hill, and himselfe in person led the rest to the castle. And as the fort upon the hill was taken at the first assault and onset given, so Mago, after he had a while made some means to defend the castle, seeing all places full of enemies, swarming every where, and no other hope, yeelded himselfe, the citadel, and the garison. Vntill the castle was surrendred and given up, there was nothing but murdering and killing all over the citie, and not one spared that seemed to be fourteene yeares old and upward, if they came in their way. But then, upon the sound of trumpet the execution ceased, and the Conquerours fell to saccage and pillage, which of all sorts rose to a mightie thing. Of free borne, such as were of male sexe, there were taken prisoners upon 10000.  Then, somany of them as he found to be naturall citizens of Carthage, he dismissed and let goe free, and restored unto them not onely the citie, but also their owne goods, which the fi^^t furie and rage of warriours had left untouched. There were of Artisanes and handicraftsmen, some two thousand: those by an edict he pronounced to be bond, and adjudged them as confiscate, to serve the Commonweale of the people of Rome: yet with some hope, that shortly they might obtaine their freedome againe, in case they performed good service, and shewed themselves diligent in all ministeries and offices of warre. The rest of the multitude of inhabitants, such as were able and young lustie men, as also the stout and sturdie bondmen, he awarded them to the shippes, for to furnish up the number of gally-slaves and rowers, and with the eight shippes of warre, which hee tooke captive in the haven, hee encreased his owne Armada. Besides all this  multitude, there were also the hostages of the Spaniards above written, of whome hee tooke as great care, and as good regard, as if they had beene the children of Allies and associates. A mightie deale of warlicke artillerie and ordinance was there found and seized on^ Of Catapults of the greatest size 120, of a lesser sort 281. Balists some greater, some small; of them 33, of these 52. Of Scorpions and Cros-bowes to shoot quarrels as well great as small, and likewise of defensive armour, and offensive weapons, a huge deale, and a marvellous quantitie. Militarie ensignes 74. Of gold and silver there was a mightie masse brought unto the Generall. Golden cups or bolls there were 276, every one weighing almost one pound. Of silver tried, wrought, and coined, 18300 pound weight: and much plate and vessell of silver. All this C. Flaminius the Treasurer, received either by weight or tall. Of wheat there was 40000 Modij, of barly  270000. Of barkes and shippes of burden, there were in the haven woon by force, and taken, 113. Some were fraught with corne, armour, brasse besides, and yron, saile-cloth, and hempe, or spart for cables and ropes, also with timber for shipwrights. Carthage the towne it selfe, in so great store of wealth and warlicke provision, was the least of all other.
That day Scipio, having committed the charge of guarding and keeping the citie, unto Laelius and the mariners, brought back the legions into the camp, and commanded the soldiors to refresh their bodies with food and rest, wearied as they were, and over-laboured in one day with all manner of toile and work that belongeth to war-service: as who, had both fought a battel in the field, and also taken so great paines, and undergone so much hazard and danger, in assaulting and forcing the citie, yea and after it was woon, had fought with disadvantage of ground, with those that  were fled into the castle.
The next day, after he had called both souldiours and mariners together, first he rendered laud and praise, yea, and thanks unto the immortall gods, who in one day had not only made him lord of the most mightie and wealthie citie in all Spaine, but also had laid up for him there against his comming, all the riches wellneere of Africk and Spaine: whereby as the enemies now had nothing left them, so he and his had all things plentiful. Then he commended the vertue and valour of his souldiours, whom neither the falying out of the enemies could fright, nor the mightie height of the walls skare, nor the blind and untried fourds of the lake could once dismay, nor the situation of the castle seated upon an high cliffe terrifie, ne yet the castle it selfe most strongly built and fortified, was able to daunt and make afraid, but that they would passe  over all and breake through all. And therefore albeit every one of them deserved at his hands all rewards, yet the principall honour of a murall crowne and garland, belonged properly unto him that first skaled and mounted over the wall, Come he forth therefore (quoth hee) and shew himselfe, who taketh himselfe worthie of that gift, and let him claime his due. Wherupon there were two that put in for it, and demaunded the same, Q. Trebellius, a Centurion of the fourth Legion,

and Sext. Digitus, a servitor at the sea. Neither strived these parties them selves so hotely about  the matter, as the love and favour of them set all the whole armie devided into legionarie souldiours, and servitours at sea, in an heat of contention, to labour for him that belonged to their side, and was a member as it were of their bodie. C. Laelius Admirall of the fleete, went with the sailers and sea men. M. Sempronius Tuditanus was altogether for the legionarie land-souldiours. This debate was like to breede a skab, and to raise a very mutinie in the host. Whereupon Scipio pronounced that he would appoint as Delegates three Commissioners, to sit upon the cause who should take the depositions of witnesses, and give their verduict accordingly, whether of these two persons entred over the wall first into the towne. Now because C. Laelius and M. Sempronius were advocates to the one partie and the other, he therefore adjoyned unto them a third person, one P. Cornelius Caudinus, to go as an indifferent mediatour between them two: and gave  order and commaundement, that those other three commissioners abovesaid should sit together, and heare and determine the controversie.
When as the matter grew to a greater heare of contention, by reason that men of such marke and worth, were acquainted with the action, and had their hand in it, who were not so much advocates to plead, but moderatours and judges to beare downe a side; C. Laelius, rising out from the court, came to the tribunall seat unto Scipio: and informed him that the manner of proceeding in this matter in question, was without all good order, modestie and reverence; and so handled, that they were like to go together by the eares, and try it out by knocks. But, be it quoth he, that no blowes be dealt, yet it is a most shameful example and detestable precedent, that the honor and guerdon due to vertue, should be caried by fraudulent coven and ungodly perjurie. For quoth he the legionarie souldiours stand of the  one hand, the sea servitors on the other, and readie they be to sweare on both sides all the othes of God, and to that rather which their will and affection carieth them to, than which in their conscience they know to be true. By which guilt of forswearing and perjurie, they will not only bring a curse and vengeance upon themselves and their owne lives, but also upon the ensignes, standards, and very Aegles, yea and their religious militarie oth and sacrament. Thus much I thought good to give you advertisement of afore-hand, and that by the advise of P. Cornelius, and M. Sempronius. Scipio after he had highly praised Laelius, called the souldiours to an assemblie, and there with a loud voyce pronounced and sayd thus; I am sufficiently enformed upon certaine relation, that Q. Trebellius, and Sex. Digitus skaled the wall both together, and therefore I award as well to the one as to the other a murall garland, in token and testimonie of their  singular vertue. Then he rewarded the rest also, according to every mans desert and valorous service. But above all other, he honoured C. Laelius Admirall of the fleete, not only in matching him equally with himselfe in all commendable parts and qualities, but also in presenting him with a coronet of beaten gold, and thirtie oxen. Then he gave commaundement that the hostages of the cities and States of Spaine should be called forth. What a number were of them, I am abashed and loth to set downe in writing: for as much as I find in some Chronicles, that they were upon some three hundred, in others 725. The like varietie there is of other matters, amongst sundry writers. One writeth that the Punick garison were ten thousand: another 7000: and a third comes with his two thousand, and no more. I meet with one record which reporteth, that there were 10000 taken prisoners: and another, that there were above 25000. Of Scorpions  or Crosbowes, great and small, I should say there were gained some 60, if I would take for mine author Silenus, a greeke writer: but if I follow Valerius Antias and go by him, I should tell you a tale of sixe thousand of the greater sort, and thirteene thousand of the smaller. See how little rule they had of their tongues to over-reach, or stay of their pens to set downe so lowd lyes upon record. Nay, they are not well agreed so much as upon this point, who were the great Captaines and commaunders. Most of them say that Laelius was L. Admirall: there be againe that would have M. Iunius Syllanus to be the man. And Armes was captaine of the Punick garison, and yelded to the Romanes, if ye list to beleeve Valerius Antias: but by the testimonie and credit of others, it was Mago. Moreover, the records accord not about the number of ships that were taken, nor of the weight of gold and silver, ne yet of the summe of money that was raised of the  pillage. To conclude, if we must needs beleeve some one or other, the meane betweene is the best, and carieth most likelihood of the truth.
But to returne againe to Scipio: When he had called forth the hostages into his presence, first he bad them all in generall to be of good cheere: for why they were now in the hands of the

 people of Rome, who ever desired to bind men unto them by favours and good turnes, more than to awe them with feare and dread: and to have forain nations knit and joyned in faithfull amitie, rather than held in subjection by heavie servitude. Then after he had taken the names in writing of their severall cities, he also revewed the number of the prisoners, and counted just how many belonged to every State. Which done, he dispatched messengers home into their countries, willing their parents and friends to come and receive every man their owne. If haply any embassadours of their cities were present, he restored unto them their owne hostages without delay: for all the rest, he gave expresse charge to C. Flaminius the Treasourer, to see unto them in all kind, courteous, and liberall usage. Whiles he was busy in taking this order, there hapned to come from among the hostages, even out of the mids of the companie, an aged gentlewoman,  the wife of Mandonius,brother to Indibilis, a Prince and great lord of the Ilergetes.
Shee shed teares, and fell downe prostrate at the feete of the L. Generall: and withall began to beseech him most instantly, to give a more speciall charge, concerning the custodie of the women-sex: and to recommend them to their keepers, for to be regarded with a carefull eye, and to be kept and attended on more tenderly. Why? quoth Scipio, I warrant thee good woman, they shall want for nothing that is meet for them. Then replieth this Dame again, We stand not so much (qd.she) upon these termes; for a little thing God wot may serve and content them in this poore estate and low condition: my care is for another matter, when I consider and behold the young and tender age of these maidens here. As for my selfe, I am now past date, and without danger of that injurie, which our sexe is subject and exposed unto. Now there stood about her, the daughters  of Indibilis, virgins in the fresh prime and floure of their age, and passing faire and beautifull withall; besides some other ladies as nobly borne as they: who all, honored her as their naturall mother that bare them.
Then Scipio, I would (quoth he) in the ordinarie course as well of mine owne discipline, as of that which is established by the people of Rome, have a respective consideration, that no one thing among us should suffer abuse, which elsewhere in any place of the world is held inviolable: this would I do, I say, for mine own credit, and for the honor of Rome: but to have a more speciall eye that way, your owne vertue also and worthinesse bindeth me: who in the mids of these your calamities and miseries, have not forgotten your womanly cariage and the honour of your sexe. And therupon he delivered them over to the custodie of a man of approved honestie and integritie, commanding him to gard them with no lesse reverence, modestie, and continencie,  than if they were the wives or mothers of their neerest friends that gave them entertainment. After this, there was presented unto him by his soldiors, a damosell and virgin of ripe years, taken also prisoner: but so well favored and surpassing in beautie, that wheresoever she went, every mans eye was upon her, in admiration of so rare and perfect a creature. Scipio having enquired of her countrie where shee was borne, and likewise of what parents shee was descended; among other things learned, that shee was espoused and affianced to a yong Prince of the Celtiberians, whose name was Allucius. Forthwith he sent home to her parents and foresaid spouse, for to repaire unto him: and in the meane time, he understood that her husband that should be, was wonderfully enamoured of her, and readie to die for her love. So soon as the yong gentleman was come, Scipio entred into more familiar speech with him, than he did either with the father or mother of  the maiden, and in these tearmes he entertained him. I am a young man (quoth he) as well as your selfe. The rare continence and courtesie of Scipio. Come on therefore, let us yong men both, devise and common togither more freely, and not be too nice, coy, and bashfull one to the other.
After that your espoused wife taken captive by our souldiours, was brought unto me, and that I heard of the exceeding fansie and affection that you cast unto her, I beleeved it full wel: for her singular beautie deserveth no lesse. Now, for as much as my selfe, if I might be allowed to use the pastimes of youth (I meane no otherwise than in honest and lawful love) and were not called away by the common-weal, and emploied wholly in other affairs of state, I would think to be pardoned and held excused, if I had an extraordinarie liking to a spouse of mine owne, and loved her extreamly. I must therefore needs favour and tender your love, which is the thing I can, considerng that I may not the other in any wise. Your  sweet-heart and best beloved I have entertained, as well, and as respectively, as she should have bene with your father and mother in law, who are her owne kind and naturall parents. Reserved she hath bene and kept for you alone, that you might receive her at my hands, unspotted and untouched, and a present beseeming me and you both. In lieu and recompence therefore, of this boone and gift which I now bestow upon you, I require at your hands againe this onely promise

and faithfull covenant, that you will bee a friend and well-willer to the state of Rome. And if  you take me in deed to bee a good and honest man, such, as these nations and people here, have knowne my father and unckle to have bene before me: know you thus much, that in the cittie of Rome there are many more like unto us: and that there cannot at this day, a nation in the world be named, which you would wish lesse to bee an enemie to you and yours, or desire more to entertaine as your friend. The young gentleman being abashed for very modestie, and yet right glad and joyfull withall, held Scipio by the hand, called upon all the gods, and besought them in his behalfe, to thanke and recompence him therefore, since it lay not in his owne proper power, in any proportion or measure to be thankfull and make requitall, either as himselfe could with, or as Scipio had deserved. Then were the parents and kinsfolke of the maid called for: who seeing the damosell freely rendred and given them againe, for whose raunsome and redemption they had  brought with them a sufficient summe of gold: fell to intreating and requesting Scipio, to vouchsafe for to accept the same at their hands, as a gift and token of their good will: assuring him, that in so doing, they should take themselves no lesse bound and beholden unto him, than for the restoring and delivering of the virgine untouched and undefiled.
Scipio seeing them so earnest and importunate, promised for to receive it, and withall, commaunded that it should be laid downe at his feet: and calling Allucius unto him, Here (quoth he) over and besides all your other dowrie which your father in law must pay you, have from me thus much more money to mend your marriage with, take this gold therefore to your selfe, and keepe it for your owne use. And so after this rich reward given, and great honour done unto him, hee was dismissed, and departed home with much joy and hearts content: where he made report unto his countriemen and people, of  the praise-worthie vertues of Scipio, and the favours from him received. Saying moreover, there was come into Spaine, a young man resembling the immortall gods in all respects; who as well by bountie, liberallitie, and bestowing benefits, as by martiall prowes and force of arms, is in the very way to win and conquer all. So when he had assembled and mustred all his vassails and tennants, he returned within few daies, accompanied with a traine of foureteene hundred of the best and most choise horsemen of his countrie.
Scipio keeping Laelius still with him, untill by his advise and counsell, hee had disposed of the captives, hostages, and other prises and pillage: after hee had setled all in good order, appointed a Galeace of five bankes of ores, wherein he embarked the prisoners, with Mago and some fifteen Senators besides, who togither with him were taken, and sent them to Rome with a messenger, to carrie tidings of this victorie. Himselfe determined to sojourne a few daies in Carthage, which time he spent in training and exercising his souldiours, as well of land service as at sea. The fir^t day, he caused the legions to runne too and fro in their armour, foure mile out in length. The second day, he commaunded them to scoure and furbush their harnesse and weapons before their tents. Vpon the third day, they joined and encountred in battel wise, and practised to fight with blunt wasters and bastons; yea and launced one at another darts and javelens, rounded at the point end with bals, in maner of foiles. The fourth day they rested and reposed themselves. On the fift day, againe they ran at turnement, as before, armed. This order they kept, exercising, laboring, and resting by turnes, so long as they abode at Carthage. And thus much for the Legionarie souldiours. The sea servitours and mariners used in calme water and still weather, to row up into the  sea, and there to make triall of the nimblenesse and agilitie of their ships, representing shewes of sea-fight and skirmish. Thus without the cittie, they enured their bodies, and quickened their spirits and courages, both on land and water. Within the towne, there was nothing heard but preparation of warre furniture. All the publicke shops and worke houses, full of smithes, enginers, and all other artificers for the purpose, plying their worke, and never going from it. The Generall himselfe, as supervisor, with equall and indifferent care oversaw all. One while he would bee with the armada in the harbour: another while, he conversed among the legions, and turnoied with them. A time he would set by, for to visit the workes about the walles, and see how they went forward. Otherwiles he would be in the shops aforesaid, among the multitude of the carpenters and smithes, and other artisanes, viewing what they did there; and in the arsenall and ship-docks, observing and marking how much they went forward, day by day, striving a vie as they did, who could do most and quit himselfe best. Having thus set them aworke, repaired the wals which he had battered and shaken, and placed certaine guards there, for the defence of the cittie; he tooke his journey to Taracon: and all the way he was visited and plied with sundrie embassages. Some

 of them hee aunswered and dispatched as hee was in his journey: others he put off, to give their attendance at Taracon: for thither he had summoned all the allies and confederates, both new and old, to meet him. And in manner, all the citties and States on this side Iberus, and many also of the farther province of Spaine there assembled.
The Carthaginian captaines and commaunders at the first for the nonce, suppressed and stopped the rumour of the winning of Carthage. But when the thing was too too apparent, and could not be hidden and smothered, they used all the words they could to elevate it, and make the matter lesse than it was.
To wit, that by a suddaine invasion and expedition of the Romans in one day (as it were) by stealth, it chaunced that one of the cities of Spain was surprised; that the insolent and foolish yong man bearing himselfe prodigally prowd, and jocound beyond all measure, would  seeme to make up the measure of so smal a catch that he hath gotten, with a great shew of a brave victorie: but when he shall heare once, that there are three Generals comming toward him, and three victorious armies of enemies, he will soone pull in his hornes: he will then tell us another tale, when presently he shall call to remembrance with greefe of every vain in his heart, the death of father, of unckle, and other progenitors. These and such like speeches, they gave out among the people and common sort, knowing in their own conscience what a blow they had caught, and how much their strength was decaied by the losse of new Carthage.


 THE XXVII BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS  of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the seven and twentith Booke.
CNeus, Fulvius the Proconsull was slaine, and with his armie utterly deffeated by Anniball at Herdonea. But Cl.Marcellus the Consull had better fortune in a battell against him, before Numistro. From whence Annibal dislodged and departed by night. Marcellus pursued after him, and ever as he fell off, followed him hard still, untill he gave him battaile. In the former fight Anniball had the better, but Marcellus in the latter. Fabius Maximus the father being Consull, had the  Tarentines yeelded up unto him by treason. In Spaine, Scipio fought a battaile with Asdruball the sonne of Amilcar, at Batula, and wan the field. Among others there was a boy taken prisoner of roiall bloud, and of incomparable beautie^ whom he sent with rich gifts unto Masanissa his uncle by the mother. Clau. Marcellus; and T. Quintius Crispinus the Consuls, who chaunced to goe out of their campe, to discover as espials the countrie, were forel aid by an ambush of Anniball, and entrapped. Where Marcellus was slaine: Crispinus fled. This book containeth also the wars and exploits atchieved by P. Sulpitius the Pretour, against Philip and the Achaeans. The Censors held a solemne survey and numbring of citizens, and purged the citie. In which survey there were found of Romane citizens 137108. By which account it was seene, how many the people of Rome had lost, by the adverse fortune of so many battailes. Asdruball, who with an armie had passed over the Alpes for to ioine with Anniball, was slaine, and with him 56000 men besides, by the conduct of M. Livius the Consull, but not without the equall good service of Cl. Nero the other Consull: who being appointed to make bead against Anniball, left the campe so, as the enemie was not ware thereof, and  with an elect power of bardie men, environned and enclosed Asdruball about, and so diffeated him.


THus stood the affaires in Spaine. In Italie the Consull Marcellus having  recovered Salapia by composition, wan by force two towns from the Samnites, Maronea and Meles. Where there were slaine three thousand of Anniball his souldiours, who had beene left there in garrison. Some good portion of the pillage was shared amongst the souldiours. Of wheat besides, there was found there 240000 measures called Modij, and of barly 110000. But the joy from hence was not so great, as the losse and dammage received within few daies after, not far from the citie Herdonea. Cn. Fulvius the Pro-consull lay there encamped upon hope to regaine that citie, which after the defeature at Cannae, had revolted from the Romanes: a towne neither seated in a place of suretie, nor yet well furnished and manned  for defence. The captaine thereof (Cn. Fulvius aforesaid) was by nature ever negligent, but growne much more retchlesse now, presuming upon a vaine hope that hehad of them within, in that he perceived how the townsmen alreadie began to faile in their devotion and faithfull allegeance to the Carthaginians, especially, after they heard, that upon the losse of Salapia, Anniball was departed out of those parts into the Brutians countrey. Anniball had intelligence of all this brought unto him from Herdonea by secret messengers, which, as it caused him to have a carefull eic to the saving and keeping of a friend citie, so it ministred good hope unto him for to surprise his enemie at unwares and unprovided. Whereupon with his armie lightly appointed, hee tooke long journies, and made hast to Herdonea, so as hee prevented almost the fame and bruite of his comming. And to strike the more terrour into his enemie, hee thither marched in  battaile array. The Romane Generall; as adventurous and bold as he every way, but nothing at all so polliticke nor so strong, brought his forces forth in more hast than good speed, and gave him battaile. His fifth legion, and the left wing or cornet of Cavallerie, began the skirmish, and charged hotely. But Anniball had given his horsemen direction, that when the Infanterie was in the middest of skirmish, with mind and eie wholly occupied that way, they should wheele about and fetch a compasse, and whiles some of them assailed the camp, the rest should play upon the back of their enemies: himselfe iterating eftsoones unto his men the name of Cn. Fulvius, for likenes sake, because two yeers before in the very same quarters, he had vanquished another Cn. Fulvius who was Pretour also, assured them of the like successe now in this conflict. And verily this conceit and hope of his, prooved not vaine and frustrate. For when as in close fight and skirmish of  the footmen, many of the Romanes were fallen downe and slaine, but so, as yet the ranckes stood unbroken, and the ensignes upright, behold, a suddaine fresh charge of the horsemen on their backe, and a great shout of the enemies withall descried and heard from the campe, first discomfited the sixt legion, which being marshalled in the second battaillon, had beene put in disarray before by the Numidians, and then the fift, and so consequently, even those that fought in the forefront of the vaward before the ensignes. Some fled amaine, others were killed in the middest betweene, where Cn. Fulvius himselfe with twelve Tribunes or knight marshals were left dead in the place. Of Romanes and Allies how many died in that medley, who is able to set downe for certaine; seeing in some records I find the number fifteene thousand, and in others not above seven thousand?
The conqueror Anniball, was maister likewise of the camp and all the pillage there. As for the towne Herdonea, because he understood for truth, that it minded to have revolted unto the Romanes, and would not continue fast in their fidelitie, if his backe were once turned: after hee had conveyed away the multitude of the inhabitants to Metapontum and the Thurians, he set it on fire and burnt it quite. The nobles and principall citizens, who were known to have had secret talke and conference with Fulvius, he put to death. The Romanes, who out of so great an overthrow escaped, made shift by divers and sundrie waies to flie, halfe naked as they were, to Marcellus the Cos. into Samnium. But Marcellus nothing dismaied and afrighted at this so great defeature, addresseth his letters to the Senate at Rome, with advertisement of the losse of the captaine generall, and the armie at Herdonea: giving them yet to understand, how himselfe, even hee who  after the Cannian field had tamed and daunted Annibal, as lustie and proud as he was upon that victorie, was minded presently to encounter him, and make him take no long joy and pleasure, wherein now he so vaunted and exalted himselfe.
And at Rome verilie, as they mourned much for the losse past, so they feared as greatly the

 future daungers. The Consull having passed out of Samnium into the Lucanes countrie, sate down before Numistro, in the very sight of Anniball, and there in a plaine encamped himselfe, notwithstanding the enemie was possessed before of the hill, and had the vantage of the ground. And for to make more shew of his owne confidence, and how little he feared, hee first brought foorth his men, and marshalled them in order readie to bid battaile. Anniball so soone as he saw the ensigns advaunced forth of the gates, staied not behind. And they arraunged their battailes in such manner, as that the Carthaginians with the right wing tooke up part of the hill, and the Romanes displayed their left wing in length, to the very walls of the towne. After they had continued fight from the third hower of the day unto night, and that the vauntguards on both sides were wearie with maintaining of skirmish so long: then the first legion of the Romanes, with the right wing  of their horsemen; the Spanish soldiors also of Anniball his part, the Balearian slingers likewise, together with the Elephants, began to fight, whiles the rest were alreadie in hote conflict, and close together. For a long time the medley shruncke not of any hand. The first legion of the Romans was seconded with the comming in of the third: and among the enemies likewise, there came in new souldiours that were lustie, in place of the foiled and wearied. Whereby, of a lingring and long skirmish, there began all on a suddaine, a new, hote, and cruell battaile, by reason that their courages were fresh, and their bodies in heart. But the night parted the fray, and left the victorie doubtfull in the middest. The morrow after, the Romanes from sun-rising stood arraunged in the field untill it was farre day: and seeing none of the enemies appeare and shew themselves, they fell to gather up the spoiles by leasure, and heaped up in one place all the bodies of their own men  that were slaine, and made one great fire, and burnt them to ashes. The night ensuing, Annibal dislodged secretly without any noise, and departed into Apulia. And Marcellus, so soone as daylight discovered the flight of his enemie (leaving his hurt and wounded people at Numistro with a small guard, and L. Furius Purpurio a Colonell to be their captaine) followed him by his steps, and at Venusia overtooke him. There for certaine daies, passed some sallies from the guards of both armies, whiles both horse and foot one with another, rather made slight skirmishes, than any set battailes; and lightly the Romanes had alwaies the better hand. From thence the armies were conducted through Apulia, without any memorable fight at all, by reason that Anniball in the night season ever set forward, seeking some opportunitie of forelaying and entrapping his enemie; and Marcellus never followed but in broad day light, and sent out his espials before to cleere  the coasts.
In this meane while Flaccus spending the time at Capua, in making port-sale of the noblemens goods, and in setting and letting out to ferme, the land which was confiscate and forfeit to the common wealth of Rome (and all for a rent of corne) there hapned a new complot and practise which lay hidden for the time, to be detected and come to light, to the end that he might never want one matter or other to take occasion for to plague and torment the Campanes. He had taken order that his souldiours should remove out of the houses within the town, partly for that as well the tenements of the said towne within as the lands without, should be rented forth: and partly for fear least the exceeding pleasantnes and delectable seat of that citie should effeminate his armie, as it had done the host of Anniball before time: and commaunded  them to build themselves about the gates and along the walls, cotages and sheds in warlike fashion, and only to serve for souldiours. These were most of them made of hurdles and bourds, some watteled and wound with reedes, and all of them thatched with straw and stubble, as it were of purpose to minister fuell for fire. Now there were some hundred and seventie Campanes had conspired at one certaine houre of the night to set all a fire: and the principall heads and chiefetaines were certaine brethren of the Blosij: and it fortuned that by some of the same house and familie the conspiracie was disclosed. Whereupon at once the gates were made fast by the commaundement of the Proconsull: and the alarme being striken up and sounded, all the souldiers ran together. All those that were partie or privie to the intended treason, were apprehended, and after rigorous examination had by torture, they were condemned and executed: the informers  were made free, and had each one a reward of 31 li. 5 sh. sierl. 10000 peeces of brasse called Asses.
When the Nucerines and Acerranes made mone that they wanted place of habitation, for as much as Acerrae was in part burnt, and Nuceria utterly rased and destroyed: Marcellus referred them over to the Senate of Rome, and sent them thither. The men of Acerrae had leave graunted to re-edifie againe their owne edifices which were burned: But they of Nuceria, according

to their owne desire, were translated to Atella, and the Atellanes commanded to remove  unto Calatia, there to dwell.
Amids the managing of many and weightie affaires, which falling our variably one while well, another while ill, busied and amused the minds of men; yet the Romanes forgot not the castle of Tarentum: for M. Ogulnius and P. Aquilius, went as embassadors into ^ Heiruria. Aetolia, for to buy up corne, to be conveighed and brought to Tarentum: and a thousand souldiours out of the citie armie, whereof the number of Romanes and Allies was all one, were sent with the sayd corne thither to lye in garison.
Now was the summer at an end, and the time drew neere of the Consuls election. But the letters of Marcellus unto the Senate (wherein he signified that it was not for the good of the Common-wealth to depart one foote from Anniball, whom he himselfe pursued still at heeles, and so  much the more hotely, because he fell off and forbare to fight:) set the LL. of the Senate into a great perplexitie, for feare either to call away the Consull from the warres, especially now in the mids of his best service, or to be without Consuls the next yeare. But it was thought in the end the best course, that Valerius the Consull, although he were not in Italie, but beyond sea, should rather be sent for, and called forth of Sicilie. So by order from the Senate, there were letters dispatched unto him, from L. Manlius the Pretour of the citie, together with those other letters of M. Marcellus the Consull: to geve him to understand, what the reason was, why the LL. called him rather out of his Province, than his colleague and companion in government.
At the same time there fortuned Embassadors to come unto Rome from King Syphax, recounting  what prosperous warres their king had fought with the Carthaginians, assuring the Senate, that their lord and maister, as he was not a greater enemie to any nation than to the Carthaginians, so he was not more readie to friend any state than the Romanes: saying moreover, that he had sent aforetime his Embassadors into Spaine unto the Romane Generals Cn. and P. Scipions, and now was most willing to seeke for the amitie and friendship of the Romanes even at the very fountaine and well head. The Senate not only returned answere to those embassadors in most gratious and courteous termes, but also addressed embassadors of their owne with rich gifts unto the king, and by name, L. Genutius, P. Petellius, and P. Popilius. The presents which they caried, were a side robe, and a kirtle of purple, an yvorie chaire, a boll or cup of beaten gold, weighing five pound. These Embassadors had in commission and charge, presently after they had dispatched with the king, to visit other princes and great lords of Affrick: and for  to bestow on them also, they caried robes purfled and embrodred with purple, and golden bowles of three pound weight. Likewise there were sent as farre as Alexandria (in Aegypt) unto K. Ptolomeus and Cleopatra the queene, M. Attilius, and M. Acilius as embassadors, for to call to remembrance, and renew the old friendship: and to them also they presented gifts, namely unto the king a long robe and a kirtle of purple, with an yvorie chaire: unto the queene a rich mantle of Baudkin, wrought with sundrie colours, with a vaile of purple.
In this summer time, whiles these foresaid matters passed, there were from out of the cities and countrie townes adjoyning, many prodigious sights, and fearefull tokens reported. At Tusculum, there fell a lambe, having an udder yeelding milke: the louver or lanterne of the temple of Iupiter was stricken with lightning, and in manner all the rouse uncovered. And much about  those daies at Anagnia, the very soyle and ground before the gate thereof, caught fire with lightning, and for one day and night burned so, without any matter of fuell: and the foules and birds of the aire forsooke their nests which they had built in trees of the grove consecrated to Diana, neere unto the carrefour or crosse waie of Anagnia. Neere unto Tarracina there were seene in the sea not farre from the haven, serpents of an huge and wonderfull bignesse, to leap up above the water, and to disport and play like fishes. At Tarquinij, a swine farrowed a pig with a mans face. Also in the territorie of Capena, about the grove and temple of Feronia, there were foure statues sweat much bloud a day and a night. These fearefull tokens were by a decree of the Prelats purged and expiate, by greater sacrifices. And a solemne Supplication proclaimed one day at Rome in every church and chappell before all the shrines of the gods: and another day in  the territorie of Capena, at the said grove and chappell of Feronia.
M. Valerius the Consull, called by the foresaid letters of the Senate, after he had recommended the charge of the province and the armie, unto Cincius the Pretour; and sent M. Valerius Messala the Admirall of the navie, with a certaine number of ships into Affrick, as well to fetch

 in prizes, as to espie and learne what the people of Carthage did and went about: himselfe with ten saile tooke the seas, and having a prosperous fore-wind arrived at Rome.
And being come, presently he assembled the Senate, where he declared what acts and deeds he had performed in his province, namely, Whereas for the space almost of three score yeares there had bene warre in Sicilie both by land and sea, and the same oftentimes fought with great losse and many deffeatures; that he now had brought those troubles to an happie end, and set the province in quiet. That there was not in all Sicilie one Carthaginian left; nor one Sicilian, of all them that for feare had bene chased and driven out from thence, but was returned and there replanted; that they were all brought home againe to their owne cities to inhabit, to their own lands, to plough and sow; that now at last, the fore-let and wast ground was husbanded againe, and made fruitfull,  not only for the profit and commoditie of the occupiers and tenants thereof, but also for the most assured reliefe and sustentation of the people of Rome, both in warre and peace. After this, Mutines, and the rest who had deserved any thing well of the citie of Rome, were brought into the Senat: unto whom, both all and some (for the credit of the Consull, and to discharge him of his promise unto them) there were rendred all sorts of honorable recompense. Mutines also was enfranchised citizen of Rome, and a Bill was preferred in that behalfe to the people, by the Tribune of the Commons, and with the graunt and auctoritie of the Senate.
During these affaires at Rome, M. Valerius Messala arrived in Affrick with a fleete of 50 fayle, and being landed one morning before day, sodainly and unwares to the people of the countrie, made a roade into the territorie about Vtica: and having forraid it farre and neere, taken many  men and women prisoners, and raised a great bootie of all sorts of things besides, returned to the Armada, and crossed the seas back for Sicilie, and arrived againe at Lilybaeum upon the thirtenth day after he loosed from thence, and tooke the seas first.
Of the captives (after streight examination) he learned thus much (which also he set downe orderly in writing, and sent unto the Consull Laevinus, that he might be acquainted likewise with the state of the affaires in Affrick) namely, that there were in Carthage five thousand Numidians, under the conduct of Masanissa the sonne of Gala, a most forward young man, and a right valiant warriour; that there were other souldiers also throughout all Africk waged and levied for money, readie to be transported and sent over into Spaine unto Asdruball, to the end that he with a most puissant power, might with all speed passe over into Italie, and joyne his forces with Anniball: that in the effecting of this  designement, the Carthaginians were assuredly persuaded of the victorie. Moreover that there was a mightie navie a rigging and decking for to recover Sicilie againe, and as they verily thought, it should passe the seas very shortly.
These newes being red by the Consull, so troubled and disquieted the Senate, that they thought there was no tarying for the ordinarie election of Magistrates, summoned and called by the Consull, but that they should nominate a Dictatour of purpose to assemble that solemne Session, and the Consull immediatly to returne againe into his province. But hereupon grew some debate and question for a time, while the Consull said, that he would nominate and create Dictator M. Valerius Messala, who was then in Sicilie, and Admirall of the fleete: but the LL. replied againe and said, that a Dictator might not be elected or declared without the territories of Rome, and those were all within the limits and marches of Italie. But after that M. Lucretius (a Tribune of the Commons) had put this controversie to question before the Senate for to be cast and decided by their opinions; then the Senate graunted out a decree, That the Consul before he departed from the citie, should put up a bill or supplication unto the bodie of the people, that it would please them to elect a Dictatour: and whom soever they by their suffrages chose, him should he pronounce and declare for the Dictatour: and in case the Consull refused so to do, then the Pretour of the citie should propose the same unto the people: and if not he neither, then the Tribunes should propound it unto the Commons. But when the Consull denied flatly to put it unto the people, being a thing merely belonging to his authoritie and place, and likewise expressely for bad the Pretour to do it: then the Tribunes of the Commons tooke  the matter upon them, whereupon the commons graunted, that Q. Fulvius who then was in Capua, should be nominated Dictator. But the night before that very day that this assemblie of the commons was to be holden, the Consull departed privily, and tooke his journey toward Sicilie. The Nobles thus being disappointed and destitute, thought good to send letters unto Marcellus, for to lend his helping hand now unto the Common-weale, thus forsaken and abandoned

by his colleague, and to declare him for Dictatour, whom the people had by their voices  elected. So Q. Fulvius was pronounced Dictator by Marcellus the Consull: and by vertue of the said act of the commons, P. Licinius Crass^s the Arch-prelat, was by Q. Fulvius nominated Generall of the Cavallerie.
The Dictatour after he was come to Rome, sent Cn. Sempronius Blaesus his Lieutenant, whom he had at Capua, to the armie into the province of Hetruria, in stead of C. Calpurnius the Pretour: whom by his letters he moved to take the government of Capua, and his armie there. And himself sent out precepts for the solemne elections of Consuls, against the first Comitial day that hee might by law. But by reason of a contention that grew betweene the Tribunes of the Commons and the Dictatour, it could not passe and be performed.
For the centurie Galeria of the yonger sort, which by lot had the prerogative of giving their first voises, elected for Consuls Q. Fulvius, and Q. Fabius: unto whose election no doubt, the rest of the Tribes called forth in right course and lawfull order would have inclined, but that C. and L. Ariani, the Trib. of the Com. came betweene with their negative voice: who said, it stood not well with civilitie, that one man should continue ever still in magistracie, and besides, that it was a more shamefull example and foule precedent, that himselfe should be created Consull, who assembled the election: and therefore, if the Dictatour would admit of his owne name, and allow himselfe eligible, they would not suffer the assembly to continue any longer: but if there might be some other propounded besides him, they would not hinder the proceedings thereof, untill all was finished. The Dictatour alleadged in the behalfe of the election, and mainteined the cause by the authoritie of the Senate, by the graunt and act of the Commons, and by sundrie examples of former times. For when Cn. Servilius was Consull, at what time as Flaminius the other Consull, was slaine at Thrasymenus; by order graunted out of the Senate, there was a bill preferred to the Commons, and the same passed by their voises, That so long as the warre continued in Italie, it might bee lawfull for the people to chuse and create Consuls againe, as often as they pleased, whom soever they would, out of the number of them that had bene Consuls. And as for examples (quoth he) in this case, I can alleadge both old and new: to wit, long ago L. Posthumius Megillus being Interrex, was even in that very election which he called and held, created Consull himselfe, with Cn. Iun. Bubulcus: and of later daies Q. Fabius likewise, who verily would never have accepted of the Consulship, and suffered it to be hung upon him so continually, if he had deemed it to be against the good of the common-weale. After much debate and long alteration, interteined with sundrie  like speeches, at length the Dictatour and the Tribunes agreed to this point, and agreed of this issue, That they would stand to the award and judgement of the Senat. The LL. of the Senat were all of this mind, that the present condition of the common-weale, required no lesse, but that the state and the affaires therof, should be mannaged by old and experienced captains and Generals, and such as were skilfull in feates of armes. And therefore they utterly misliked, that the election should be hindered and disturbed. Thus the Tribunes relented, and the election went forward and was finished. So there were declared Consuls, Q. Fabius Max. the fift time, Q. Fulvius Flaccus the third time. Then were created Pretours, L. Veturius Philo, T. Quintius Crispinus, C. Hostilius Tubulus, and C. Aurunculeius. When the magistrats were once elected for the yeare, Q. Fulvius resigned up his Dictatours roume.
In the very end of this summer, a Carthagian fleet of fortie saile, under the conduct of Amilcar the Admiral, passed over into Sardinia, and at first invaded and wasted the territorie of Olbia: then, after that P. Manlius Volso the Pretour there, shewed himselfe with an armie, they fet a compasse about, and sailed to the other side of the Iland, and foraied the lands about Caralita: and so returned againe into Affricke, enriched with prises and booties of all sorts.
In that yeare, divers priests died at Rome, and new substituted in their roumes. C. Servilius the Prelate or Pontifex, was invested and enstalled in stead of T. Octacilius Crassus. In like manner T. Sempronius Longus, the son of Caius, was chosen Decemvir, deputed for holy ceremonies, in place of T. Sempronius Longus, the sonne of Titus. M. Martius the K. of Sacrificers departed this life: and M. Aemylias Pappus likewise the grand-Curio or Priest of the Curiae: but to succeed  them, were no priests deputed that yeare. In this yeare also were Censors created, to wit, L. Veturius Phil^, and P. Licinius Crassus, the High-priest. As for Crassus Licinius, had neither bene Consull nor Pretour, before hee was made Censor, but stepped streight from his Aediles roume, into the place of Censor. But these Censors neither made choise of new Senatours, nor yet did any

 publicke act: the reason was, because L. Veturius died, wherupon Licinius also gave over the Censureship. The Aediles of the chaire L. Veturius, and P. Licinius Varus, exhibited the Roman games, and renewed them againe one daie more than ordinarie. The Aediles of the Commons, Q. Catius, and L. Porcius Licinius, set up in the temple of Ceres, the molten images of brasse, which were made of the money taken for fines and amercements; and represented the plaies and pastimes to their office belonging, right stately and with great furniture and preparation, as the wealth and plentie of those times would affourd.
In the end of this yeare, C. Laelius the Lieutenant of Scipio, arrived at Rome, the foure and thirtieth day after that hee losed and tooke sea at Taracon. And as hee entred the cittie with a mightie traine of captives, he set the people on running out of al parts, to see that sight. The morrow  after, he was admitted into the Senate-house: where he related, that new Carthage the head cittie of Spaine, was forced and woon in one day; that divers citties which had revolted, were received upon surrender; and other new entred into societie and friendship with the people of Rome. And by enquirie of the captives, they found their intelligences to agree in manner with the advertisments and tidings conteined in the letters of M. Valerius Massala. But the thing that troubled the lords most, was the voiage of Asdruball into Italie, which hardly was able to withstand the forces of him and Anniball togither. Laelius being brought into the generall assembly of the people, discoursed ofthe same points which hee had related in the Senate-house. And the Senate, in regard of the happie successe of P. Scipio, graunted by a decree, a solemne procession for one day; and gave order that C. Laelius with all convenient speed should make hast againe, and repaire  into Spaine with the very same ships that he brought from thence.
The winning of Carthage I have set downe in this yeare, having the warrant of many writers: and yet I am not ignorant, that some there bee, who have affirmed that it hapned the next yeare following. But me seemes, it was an unlikely matter, that Scipio should spend one whole yeare in Spaine, in doing just nothing.
Now when Q. Fabius Max. was Consull the fift time, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus the third time, on that very day upon which they entred their office (which was in the Ides of March) both of them by decree of the Senate, had the government of the province Italie: but so, as their jurisdiction was set out by the countries: so as Fabius should war about Tarentum, and Fulvius in the Lucanes and Brutiens countries. M. Claudius continued still in government one yeare longer. The  Pretours had their provinces parted betweene them by lot: unto Caius Hostilius Tubulus, fell the jurisdiction over the citizens, but to L. Veturius Philo, over foreiners, togither with Gallia. Titus Quintius Crispinus ruled Capua, and C. Aurunculeius governed Sardinia. The armies were divided among the provinces in this wise: Vnto Fulvius were assigned the two legions which M. Valerius Levinus had in Sicilie: Vnto Q. Fabius, those in Hetruria, which were commaunded by C. Calpurnius. The citie armie was appointed to succeed those legions in Hetruria: and C. Calpurnius was ordained to sit in the government of that province, and to have the leading of that armie which Q. Fulvius had. It was agreed moreover, that T. Quintius should be lord President of Capua, and have the charge of the armie there. And that C. Hostilius should receive the jurisdiction of C. Lectorius the Pro-pretour, over the province at Ariminum, and likewise his armie. Vnto M. Marcellus the same legions were allowed, wherewith he had warred so fortunatly when hee was Consull. Vnto M. Valerius and L. Cincius (for they also continued one year more, governors in Sicilie) was the armie remaining after the battaile at Cannae, graunted: and they were commaunded to supply and make up all the companies thereof, out of those souldiours that were left of the legions of Cn. Fulvius. For the Consuls caused them to be sought out and gathered togither, and sent them into Sicilie: and disgraced them with the very same kind of ignominious soulderie, in which the Cannians served: as also those, who remaining of the armie of Cn. Fulvius the Pretour, had bene thither sent by order from the Senate, for anger and despite that they fled like as the other. Vnto C. Aurunculeius, the same legions were given by decree in Sardinia, wherewith P. Manlius Volso had ruled and governed that province. And P. Sulpitius having his government  proroged for one yeare longer, was commaunded to rule Macedonia with the same legion and armada still. Thirtie Galleaces of five bankes of ores, were appointed to bee sent out of Sicilie unto Tarentum, to Q. Fabius the Consull. With the rest of the navie, it was agreed and order set downe, that M. Valerius Levinus, should either himselfe passe over into Affricke, for to forey and spoile the countrie, or send L. Cincius, or M. Valerius Messala, whither of them he would.

For the government of Spaine there was no alteration, save only this, that Scipio and Syllanus had  their commission continued, not for a yeare as the rest, but untill such time as they should bee called from thence by order from the Senate. Thus were the provinces divided, and thus were the forces bestowed for this yeare.
Among other affaires of greater importance, the Election of the high Curio, or chiefe parish preist, who was to be elected in the roum of M. Aemylius late deceased, renued and set on foot again an old contention [betweene Commons and Nobles.] For the Patrity denied, That C. Manilius Attilius (who was the onely man of the Commons that stood for it) was eligible, and therefore not to be pricked; for as much as never any before him, obtained that sacerdotall dignitie, but one of Senatours calling. The Tribunes being called unto for their assistance, referred the matter to the Senate. And the Senate put it unto the people, for to be decided by them. So C. Manilius  Attilius, was the first Commoner that ever was created Maximus Curio, [i. the Grand-superintendent over all the Curiae in matters of religion.] And P. Licinius the Arch-bishop, constrained C. Valerius Flaccus to bee installed and inaugurate the flamine of Iupiter, against his will. And C. Lectorius was created Decemvir for holie rites and ceremonies, and for sacrifices, in steed of Q. Mutius Scavola late deceased. The cause and occasion of inaugurating that Flamin by constraint and compulsion, I would willingly have concealed and smothered in silence, but that the ill name, wherein he was, turned afterwards to good fame and reputation. This Flaccus for his carelesse, loose, and roiotous demeanure in his youth, in regard of which vicious course of life, he was odious to his owne naturall brother L. Flaccus, and other his kinsfolke, was for the same cause chosen Flamin, by P. Licinius the said Arch-bishop. This man, so soon as his mind was emploied  about church-matters and religious ceremonies, so suddainely all at once altered his life, and cast off his old behaviour, that there was not one of all the young men in Rome in more account and credite, nor better liked of the cheefe of the Nobilitie and LL. of the Senate, as well those of his owne house and linage, as others that were straungers unto him. And when hee saw himselfe grown generally into this good opinion and reputation among men, he began to have a very great conceit of his owne partes and worthinesse, insomuch, as hee brought up an old custome againe, and was so bold as to take his place in the Senate house (a thing, that for many yeares space had been intermitted and discontinued, in regard of the base unworthinesse and insufficiencie of the former Flamines.) When he was entred into the Senate chamber, C. Licinius the Pretour willed him to goe forth, as being no place for him, and therwith drew him out: wherupon  the Flamine called for helpe of the Tribunes of the Commons, pleading the ancient right and preheminence of that priestly dignitie, and alleadging, that C. Flaminius in times past enjoied that place, together with the pall, or embrodered rich robe, and the yvorie chaire. The Pretour on the other side came upon him againe and said, That right was not grounded upon old examples past all date, fet out of Chronicles time out of mind: but he would needs have it to be caried by the most fresh practise of the newest and latest custome, affirming, That by prescription of the time, either of our fathers or grandfathers daies, there was no Flamine of Iupiter usurped that priviledge. The Tribunes, who were to moderate this question, gave their judgement thus, That if a thing were forelet, and discontinued through the supine negligence of some Flamins, it was worst for themselves; and they deemed it no reason, that it should hurt or prejudice the whole  Priesthood. Wherupon, the Pretor himselfe forced not greatly upon the point, nor stood much with him, and so they admitted the Flamine into the house, with great consent of the Nobles, as well as of the Commons. And all men thus conceived of it, That the Flamine had obtained the thing, rather in regard of his sanctimonie and holinesse of life, than in the right of his sacerdotall dignitie.
The Consuls before that they went into their provinces, enrolled two legions of citizens, for to supplie and make up sufficiently the defect of all the other forces. The old cittie armie, Fulvius the Consull committed unto C. Fulvius Flaccus his Lieutenant, (and brother he was besides to the Consull) for to be led into Hetruria; with direction, that the Legions alreadie in Hetruria should be brought to Rome. And Fabius the Consull caused the residue of the armie of Fulvius to bee sought up and rallied, which arose to the number of 3336: and commaunded his sonne Q. Maximus to lead them into Sicilie, unto M. Valerius the Pro-consull, and of him to receive the charge of two Legions, and the thirtie galliaces aforesaid bearing five ranckes of oares. The withdrawing of these Legions out of the Island, nothing diminished nor abridged the garisons

 of that province, either in strength or shew. For besides the two old legions, well and sufficiently fulfilled and furnished, he had a great power as well horse as foot, of Numidians, such as were fled from the adverse part unto the Romanes: and tooke up and levied besides for new souldiors, even those Sicilians also, who had ben of the armie of Epicides and the Carthaginians, men of approved valour, and skilfull warriours. These forraine aids, when hee had put to each of the Romane legions, hee kept still the forme of two complete armies. With the one he gave order to L.Cincius to defend that part of the island, which had been the realme of king Hiero^ with the other, he maintained the rest of the Island, divided sometimes by the confines of the Romane and Punick dominions. There was a fleet also rigged and trimmed, consisting of seventie ships, for to guard and defend all the maritine coasts, along the tract of the sea side. Himselfe in person, with the  horsemen of Mutines, rode about all the province, for to visit the lands and grounds, and to take note which were tilled and well husbanded, which lay forelet and untilled, and to commend or chastise and rebuke the landlords and owners thereof accordingly. The care and regard of corne, thus farre forth did good, that the province was able both to send good store to Rome, and also to convey unto Catana sufficient to maintaine the armie, that was to lie in standing campe that summer about Tarentum.
But the souldiours who were transported over into Sicilie (and for the better part they were Latines and other Associates) were like to cause a great rising and commotion: whereby we may see, that of small occasions and beginnings often times, arise great matters of important consequence.
For the Latines and Allies in all their Diets and counsels at home, began to mutter and  grumble, That now for tenne yeares space they were with continuall musterings and paiments of souldiours wages consumed and spent, that there was not a year in manner went over their heads, but it cost them some great losse and overthrow in battaile. Many were slaine in the warres, other died of diseases. So that a citizen of theirs, if he were taken and prest ones by the Romans, for to bee a souldiour, was more sure to perish, than if he were taken prisoner by the Carthaginians: for the enemie sent their captives backe againe gratis and without raunsome, home into their countrey; the Romanes posted and packed them away out of Italie, as confined to a place of banishment (to speake truly) rather than appointed to serve in warfare. For, see how the souldiours, remaining after the field of Cannae, have continued there, and waxen old these eight yeares alreadie, and no doubt, there were they like to lay their bones, before that the enemie (who never  so flourished, nor was so strong as now) would depart from thence. In case then that old souldiors returne not into their countrey, and new still be chosen, within a while there would bee none left behind. And therefore best it were for them, before they were come to extreame povertie and desolation, presently to denie the people of Rome that, whiles somewhat is left, which shortly they must bee driven to doe of very necessitie when all is gone. And if the Romanes see their Allies once agree together, and take this course, they will then verily bethinke themselves, and grow to some tearmes of making peace with the Carthaginians. For otherwise, be sure as long as Anniball hath a day to live, Italie will never be cleare of warres. These and such like speeches passed in their Diets abovesaid. There were at that time thirtie Colonies of the people of Rome: and whiles the Embassages from them all were at Rome, twelve of them denied the Consuls flatly,  and said they were not able any longer to find either men or money. And those were these, Ardea, Nepet, Sutrium, Circeij, Alba, Carseoli, Suessa, Sora, Setia, Cales, Narnia, Interamna.
The Consuls amazed at this straunge and unexpected accident, being desirous to drive them out of that mind, and to skare them from so detestable a resolution, supposed they should prevaile more by chastising and rebuking, than by faire and gentle dealing: and therfore told them againe, That they had presumed to speake that unto the Consuls, which they again were abashed and could not find in their hearts, to deliver and relate in the Senate house. For surely (say they) this is not a refusall of souldierie and warre service, but a very meere revolting from the people of Rome, and no better than an open rebellion. Therfore, they were best to return again speedily into their severall Colonies, and to consult with their neighbors and countrimen, whiles the matter  remained yet all whole, as men who had rather let fall some words rashly at aventure, than resolved indeed to attempt and commit so heinous an act: yea, and to tell them, and put them in mind, that they themselves were neither Campanes nor Tarentines, but meere Romanes, from them descended, and of their race; from thence sent as Colonies, into the lands that were woon by conquest, for to breed increase and multiplie; and to admonish them, That whatsoever

duties children owe to their parents, the same they owed unto the Romanes, if there remained in  them any kind and naturall affection, any remembrance of their auncient native countrey: and to exhort them to consider better of the matter, and to lay their heads together a new. For as much as those dessignements of theirs, tended to betray the State and Empire of Rome, and to deliver the victorie of all unto Anniball. When the Consuls one after another had delt and bene in hand with them a long time in this manner: and the embassadors nothing moved with their words, made answere againe, That neither they knew what other message to bring home; nor their Senate what new counsell to take: since that they had not any more men to be mustred for souldiours, nor money to be pa^ed for wages: the Consuls seeing them so stiffely and obstinately bent, made relation thereof before the Senate, whereupon every man was stricken into so great feare and trouble of mind, that many of them gave out, that the empire of Rome was  come to an end. The like, say they, will the rest of the Colonies do, and surely all our confederates and allies are combined and agreed to betray the citie of Rome unto Anniball. But the Consuls comforted the Senate, and bad them be of good cheere, saying, That all the other Colonies besides, would continue loyall and fast in their dutie and alleageance: and even those also which had failed in their obedience, if there might be embassadours sent amongst them, to rebuke and chastise them, and not to speake them faire and intreat them by way of prayer, would no doubt have a respective reverence of the majestie of the Romane empire.
Now when the LL. of the Senate had committed the ordring c.^ this matter wholly unto them for to manage and handle, according as they should thinke good for the weale publick: after they had throughly sounded the hearts and minds of all the rest of the Colonies, they called and cited all the embassadors, and demaunded of them whither their souldiers were in readinesse, according to the capitulations of the covenant. Then M. Sextilius of Fregellae, made answere in the behalfe of eighteene of them, That not only their souldiers were readie according to the forme of the covenant, but also if more were needfull, more they would allow, and whatsoever els the people of Rome imposed upon them, and wished them to performe, the same would they streine themselves to do, to the utmost: for, as yet they had people store, and a purse good enough: and as for their heart, it was much better than their abilitie. The Consuls after they had made a short speech unto them by way of a preamble, saying that they thought it not sufficient for their desert to be commended from their mouth only, unlesse all the LL. generally in the Senate house, gave them condigne thanks with one voyce and common accord, willed them to follow after them thither. The Senate having thanked them, in as honorable termes as they could possibly devise, and enterteined them with most gracious words, gave order to the Consuls, to bring them forth also in the face of the whole people of the citie: and before them, among other singular favours and kindnesses which they had shewed both unto them and also unto their auncestors, to make rehersall of this late good desert of others, which they affourded unto the Common-wealth: to the end, that now also, after so many ages and lives of men past they should not be forgotten and buried in silence, nor defrauded of their just prayse and due commendation. And these were they that remained true hearted and fast unto the citie of Rome: The Signines, Nolanes, and Norbanes; the Satriculanes, Brundusines, and Fregellanes; the Lucerines, Venusines, and Adrians; the Firmanes, and inhabitants of Ariminum. And from the other sea side the Pontianes, Pestanes, and Costanes: and of midlanders, the Beneventines, Essernines, Spoletines, Placentines, and the inhabitants of Cremona. Vpon the aid and succour of these Colonies, the Romane state at this time rested and stood mainteined: and these all were highly thanked both in the Senate, and in the assemblie of the people. As for the other twelve Colonies, which had refused to do their obedience, the LL. of the Senate gave expresse commaundement that they should not be so much as once minded or named: and that the Consuls should neither geve them their dispatch, nor reteine them still, nor so much as speake unto them. This silent kind of rebuke without word geving, seemed to stand most with the majestie and grandeur of the people of Rome.
Whiles the Consuls were diligent in providing and making readie all other things requisite  and meete for the warres, it was thought good to bring abroad the vicesimarie gold [to wit, the twentieth part of al their tributes and revenewes] which had bene laid up and reserved apart in a more secret closet of the citie-chamber, against an hard winter (as they say) to serve for what need soever the common-wealth should stand in. So there was taken foorth foure thousand pound

 weight of gold, whereof three hundred pound was geven to the two Consuls apeece, and so likewise to M. Marcellus, and P. Sulpitius the Proconsuls: and to L. Veturnus the Pretour, unto whose lot the province of Fraunce befell. And Fabius the Consull had an addition besides himselfe above the rest of one hundred pound weight of gold, for to be caried into the castle of Tarentum. The rest of the gold they disbursed for to make readie payment downe upon the naile, unto them that undertooke to provide apparell for the armie in Spaine, which to their owne fame and the honor of their Generall, served there in the warres.
Moreover it was thought good that before the Consuls departed into their Provinces, the prodigious tokens should be purged and expiate. On the Albane mount there were smitten with fire from heaven the image of Iupiter, and a tree standing neere unto the temple: likewise the  lake at Hostia, the w^ll at Capua, and the church of Fortune: and at Sinuessa, the wall and gate of the towne. These I say were blasted with lightning, and smitten with thunderbolts. There were some also brought word, that the water at Alba ran bloud. And at Rome within the sanctuarie of the chappell of Fors Fortuna, a little image that stood upon her coronet, fell of it owne accord from the head of the goddesse into her hands. And at Privernum, it was for certaine reported and knowen of a truth, that an Oxe spake, and that a Vulture or Gripe flew into a shop in the market place, when it was full of people. And at Sinuessa there was an infant borne of doubtfull sexe, betweene male and female, (which the common sort call Androgynos, as for the most part greeke names, admit more easy composition of two words than the latine) and there it rained milke, and a man child was borne with an Eliphants head. These strange and feareful signes  were expiate, and satisfaction made for them with greater sacrifices: and a solemne procession in all the churches and chappels, with prayers and supplications, was proclaimed for one day. Besides, a decree was graunted, that C. Hostilius the Pretour should vow and set out the games and playes of Apollo, in such manner as of late yeeres they had bene vowed and set forth.
About the same time Q. Fulvius the Consull held an assemblie for the creation of Censors, and elected Censors were M. Cornel. Cethegus, and P. Sempronius Tuditanus, who neither of them had ever bene Coss. And by a graunt or commission from the Senate, there was a bill preferred unto the Commons, and the same passed, that these Censors should set and to ferme let the territorie of Capua. The revew of the Senate and choise of new Senatours was hindred and stayed, by reason of a contention betweene the two Censours, who should be the president of the Senat.  Now the choosing of him lay in Sempronius his hand. Howbeit Cornelius alleadged, that the custome and tradition of forefathers should be followed, namely, to elect him for President, who of all them that were now living, had borne first the office of Censor. And that was T. Manlius Torquatus. Sempronius replied againe and said, that as the gods had geven him by lot the first place, so they had graunted him free libertie to choose whom he would. And therefore he would elect^ Q. Fabius Max. whom at that time he was able to prove to be the principall man of all the citie, without exception, and take Anniball himselfe for the judge. After much variance and contesting of words, at length Sempronius by relenting and permission of his colleague, elected Q. Fabius Max. the chiefe Senatour. Then the Senate was changed, and new Senatours chosen, and eight were overpassed and left out, among whom was L. Caecilius Metellus, he that  gave the infamous and shamefull counsell, to abandon Italie after the deffeature at Cannae. In noting likewise and disgracing the knights and gentlemen, the same cause was considered of, and tooke effect, but very few there were of them, that were touched with that infamie: but all those horsemen belonging to the Cannian legions who were in Sicilie (and no small number there was of them) had their horses taken from them: And to aggravate this sharp punishment and note of disgrace, they were plagued also with time of long warfare: for so many of them as had served with horse allowed by the citie, should not recken upon the yeeres passed alreadie, but were to follow warfare to yeere forward, and find themselves horses. Moreover these Censours after diligent search and survey, found out and met with a great number of those that ought to have served on horseback: and looke how many of them were sixteene yeeres old and upward at the beginning  of the war, and had not bin emploied in the warres, those all they disfranchised, and made Aerarij, or contributaries. After this, they bargained by the great, for the repairing and reedifying again of those edifices which had bene consumed by (...) about the Forum, [or market place] namely, the seven shops, the [fish] shambles, and the kings hall, or royall gallerie.
Thus when all things were finished which were to be done at Rome, the Consuls set forward

to the warres. And first Fulvius went before to Capua: and some few daies after, Fabius followed: who besought both his owne colleague by word of mouth most earnestly, and also Marcellus by effectuall letters, to make sharpe warre upon Anniball, and to keepe him occupied, while hee assailed Tarentum: which cittie, if it were once taken from the enemie, he were then driven out of all, and having no place to put his head in, nor which he might make account to stand fast and trustie unto him, he should have no reason at all, once to stay in Italie. Hee dispatched also a messenger to Rhegium unto the captaine of the fort and garison, which by Laeuinus the Consull was there placed against the Brutij: and those were eight thousand men. The greatest part of them, was of those good fellowes, and that damned crew, whereof we spake before, who used to live by robbing and stealing, and were broght thither from Agatirna out of Sicilie. Vnto whom there were adjoyned many of the Brutij also fugitives from thence, and as good as themselves every way, both for audaciousnesse, and also, for needinesse, to set upon any bold adventure whatsoever. This power of men he commaunded should be lead to wast and spoile the Brutiens countrie first, and then to lie against the cittie Caulonia, and to assault it. They having performed this service, not onely willingly and chearfully, but also with greedinesse; having also chased away and rifled the husbandmen and pesants of the countrie, assailed the citie with all forcible means. Marcellus stirred up and provoked by those letters of the Consull: and having a good opinion of his own, that of all the Romane captaines, there was not one so able to match Anniball as himselfe, left his wintering standing campe, so soone as ever there was forage and grasse in the countrie, tooke the field, and encountred Anniball at Cannusium. Now was Anniball in hand with the Cannusines, and sollicited them to revolt. But hearing once that Marcellus approched, hee dislodged  from thence. The countrie thereabout was plaine and open, without any covert places to bestow an ambush, and to lay traines in, therefore he began to retire himselfe from thence, into the wood-land parts. Marcellus tracked him still, and followed him hard at heeles, and encamped close unto him: and ever as hee had fortified and entrenched himselfe, he brought forth his men into the field, readie for battaile. Anniball entertaining small skirmishes, with certaine comets and troupes of horsemen, and with light appointed footemen, that launced darts and javelines, thought it not necessarie yet, to come unto a pight set battaile, and venture all upon one throw. Howbeit he was drawne to a fight, maugre his head, howsoever he labored to avoid it. For being gone afore one night, Marcellus overtooke him upon a plaine and open ground: and as hee was pitching his tents, he kept him from fortifying, by charging his pioners and labourers on every  side. Wherupon they came to a very battel, and fought with all the forces they had on both sides: and when it grew toward night, they depatted asunder on even hand: but before it was darke they had encamped not farre one from another, and in great hast made shift to fortifie themselves.
The next morning by day light, Marcellus came foorth into the field with all his power: neither refused Anniball the chalenge, having with many words comforted and encouraged his soldiers, to remember Thrasymenus and Cannae, to cut the comb and beate down and tame this fell stomacke and lustie courage of the enemie: who preaseth still (qd.he) and seeketh upon us, not suffering us to march on quietly in our journey, nor to pitch our tents: giving us no leave to breath our selves, nor time to looke about us. There is not a morning, but so soone as the sunne is up in the horison to give light to the world, the Romane armie is out in the field, to give us battaile. If we  could draw bloud of him once, and set him out of the field with bloud about his eares, he would for ever after, fight more quietly, and take better leisure with him. With these and such like comfortable words and effectuall remonstrances, they were well animated; as also provoked seeing themselves thus molested by the enemie, who day by day, never ceased to chalenge, and brave them still: whereupon they began a fierce and cruell battaile. They had now continued fight above two houres; and then began the Romane Cavallerie from the right wing, and the extraordinarie souldiours that flanked the maine battaile, to give ground and dismarch. Which Marcellus perceiving, he brought forward the eighteenth legion in the vaward. And whiles some recule backe fearfully, others come forward but slowly, the whole battaile was put out of order; and disaraied; and so at length it was discomfited: and for that feare surmounted shame, they  turned their backes and fled away a good. Slaine there were in the conflict and in the rowt togither, some 2700 citizens and allies one with another: among whome, there were foure Romane Centurians, and two Colonels, Marcus Licinius, and Marcus Fulvius. Of militarie ensignes, there were foure lost of that right wing which first shrunke and lost ground: and two others of that

 legion which came to succour their fellowes that gave backe and reculed. Marcellus after that he was returned into the campe, welcommed his souldiors with such a bitter and sharpe Oration, that the very words of the Generall in his angel and wrath, were more heavie and grievous unto them, than the medley it selfe,The Oration of Marcelius to his souldiours. which they had unfortunatly endured all the day long before.
I yeeld praise yet, and render thankes to the immortall gods, (quoth he) as I may in such a case, that our enemies having vanquished and conquered you in the field, and driven you in so great feare to run headlong within your trenches and gates, came not with all at once to assaile the camp. For surely in the same fearful fright that you forsooke battel, you would likewise have abandoned your tents and pavilions. What fearfulnes is this? Whence commeth this terror? What means this oblivion of yours? How commeth it to passe, that ye should so forger al on a sodain, both your own selves, and  them with whom ye have to fight? Why surely, they are the same enimies and no other, whom the summer past, you did nothing but either vanquish and overcom, or else pursue and follow in chase: whom for these certain daies past, ye have bene redie to tread on their heels as they fled and ran away before you both by day and night; whom in light skirmishes ye have discomfited; whom no longer ago than yesterday, you suffred neither to march forward, nor to pitch their campe. I forbear to speak, and I passe in silence those things which in good right ye may stand upon and make your boast. I say nothing of that wherof ye ought to be ashamed and displeased with your selves, namely, how but even yesterday, ye brake off the fight on even hand, and retired out of the field, when the enemie had gotten no advantage? What hath this one night, or what hath one day cut you off? Are either your forces in this mean time abridged and diminished, or your enemies augmented  and encreased? Now surely, me thinkes, I speak not to mine own armie, nor to Roman soldiers. Only yee carrie about you the same bodies and armor, that ye were wont. For if ye had born the same minds and hearts with you, should the enemies ever have seene your backes? should they have taken either banner from any companie, or ensigne from cohort and squadron? As yet the enemie never vaunted and made boast of the defeature of our Romane legions. You are the very first, that this day have given him the honour of discomfiting and putting to flight our armie. Then they all cried out, and besought him to pardon that daies default, and to make triall once againe of his souldiours courages, when and wheresoever hee would. Mary and that I will (quoth he) my souldiours: I will put you to it: even to morrow I will bring you abroad into the field, and after yee have gotten the victorie, yee shall obtaine that pardon which now yee crave.  So he gave order that those cohorts which had lost their ensignes, should have their allowance of barley in stead of wheat: and as for those Centurions of the bands or companies, whose banners were lost, them he degraded in this manner: Hee caused them to bee disarmed, and their skeines to be drawne naked and taken from them, and so let them go and shake their eares. And withall, he made proclamation, that the next day they should all present themselves in readines, as well footmen as horsemen. Which done, hee dismissed the audience, and they all confessed and acknowledged, that they were justly and worthily thus checked and rebuked: and that there was not that day one man in the Romane armie, setting aside the Generall himselfe onely, but he was bound to make amends and satisfaction, either with spending heart-bloud, or atchieving a noble victorie. The morrow after, they all shewed themselves unto him in their armor, and well appointed, according  to his commaundement. The Generall commended them for their forwardnes: and gave them to understand, that he would set those in the forefront of the vaward, which the day before began to run away, as also those cohorts likewise that lost their ensigns. And now he gave them warning, and charged them all to fight it out lustily, to win the field: and to endevor and strain themselves, both all and some, that the news of yesterdaies flight came not to Rome before, and prevented the fame of this daies victorie. Then he willed them to go to their meat, and to strengthen their bodies: that in case the fight should hold long, they might be able to endure to the end. Now when al was said and done, that might encourage and stir up the harts of soldiors, they went out and advanced their ensigns into the field.
Annibal being advertised hereof, Now beleeve me (qd. he) we have to deale with an enemie indeed, who is of that nature, that he can neither brooke his good fortune, nor  away with bad. If hee hath woon at any time, he pursueth those whom he hath vanquished, cruelly. Contrariwise if he have lost, he beginneth to fight with the conquerors againe right freshly. Then he commaunded the trumpets to sound, and brought forth his power in battell array. A field was fought there on both hands more sharpely a good deale, than the day before. The Carthaginians strived to keepe the honour and reputation of yesterdaies service: the Romanes strained

to wipe away the ignominie and shame of that daies foile. On the Romanes fi^e, the Cavallerie  of the left wing, and those cohorts which had lost their ensignes, fought in the vauntguard, and the twentieth legion was marshalled and raunged in the right point of the battell. L. Cornelius Lentulus, and C. Claudius Nero had the leading of both these wings. M. Marcellus himselfe commaunded the maine battell, and withall his personall presence encouraged them, as a witnesse of their valour and courage. Now, when as the fight had continued long, and the victorie enclined no way, Anniball commaunded the Elep^ants to be put foorth upon the very forefront of the battell, to see if that object might possiblie work some terror and confusion among the Romans. And at the first they disordered the ensignes^ and troubled the ranckes: so as partly by treading under foot, and partly by scattering them for feare, that were al about, they had laid naked and open the battell in one part; and inmore places than so had the Romanes fled, but that C. Decinius Flavus, a Colonell, having from the first band of the Hastati, caught up the banner in his hand, commaunded the companie thereto belonging to follow him; and thither hee led them where the foresaid Elephants were gathered round, and made foulest worke, and charged them to fling their darts and javelines at them. All this shot light sure, and missed them not, yea, and some stucke in them: and no marvell, for the beasts were neere at hand, the bodies great and standing thick in a plump together. But as they were not all wounded, so they that had the darts set fast in their backes and sides, were as readie (such is their nature, daungerous to meddle withall) for to hurt their owne maisters, as the enemies: and all turned upon their fellowes that were unhurt, and drave them backe. So as now, not that entire band onely, but every souldior else for his owne part, who was able to reach the heard (as it were) of the Elephants as they fled, did  his best to launce javelins and short darts at them. And so much the more furiously ran the beasts upon their owne, and made a farre greater havocke there, than they had done among the enemies; by how much more fiercely feare and fright set them agate, and sent them forward, than the will of their maisters that sate upon them, was able to rule and restraine them. The Romane footmen espying this advauntage, came forward with their ensignes and banners upon that battaillon, which was put in disarray by the running to and fro of these unruly dumbe creatures, and without much adoe and farther skirmish, put them to flight, after they were once broken out of their ranckes, and set in a fright. Then Marcellus sent his Cavallerie after them, to pursue them as they fled, and to follow the chase, and never gave they over hunting and coursing them, untill they had lodged them in great feare within their camp. For besides all other things, which made  them thus scared and affrighted, there chaunced two Elephants to fall downe in the very gate and entrance thereof, so that the souldiours were forced to rush into it over the trench and rampier. In that place was the greatest slaughter made of the enemies. For there were slaine eight thousand men, and five Elephants. Neither had the Romanes a bloudlesse victorie of it: for of the two legions, there died fast upon 1700, and of the Allies more than 1400. Besides, many a citizen and confederate sore wounded. And Anniball the next night dislodged and departed. Marcellus although he was desirous to follow upon him, yet he could not for the multitude of his hurt men. The espials that were sent out to pursue him in his march, brought word back the next day, that Anniball tooke his way into the Brutians countrie.
Neere about the same time, the Hirpines, Lucanes, and Volscentes, after they had delivered  up the garrisons of Anniball, which they had in their cities, yeelded themselves also to Q. Fulvius the Consull, and were received to mereie with great clemencie by the said Consull, after some rebuke given them in words onely for their trespasse and errour past. The Brutians also had the like hope of pardon, when as Vibius and Pactius, two brethren, of the noblest house of that nation, came from them to sue for the same condition of yeelding and surrendring themselves, which was graunted unto the Lucanes.
Q. Fabius the Consull, woon by assault a towne in the Salentines countrey called Manduria. Prisoners were taken there, 4000, and some good store of other pillage. From thence he went to Tarentum, and in the very mouth of the haven, lay against the citie. Those ships which Livius had for to wast the convoy of victuals, hee partly charged with engines, and other ordinance to  assault townes withall, and partly furnished with artillerie, with stones, and shot of all sorts: the ships of burden likewise, and not the gallies onely which were guided by oares; to the end, that some might bring engines and ladders unto the walls, and others aloofe from out of the ships, wound and hurt those that defended the citie. These ships were ordained and appointed from the

 open sea to assault the cittie. And cleare was the sea of all daunger from the Punicke navie, which was sent unto Corcyra, at what time as Philip minded to assaile the Aetolians. In this mean while, the assailants of Caulonia, a little before the comming of Anniball, for feare least they should be surprised, be took themselves to a little hill; which as it was (for the present daunger) a place of safetie, so it wanted all things els. Fabius, as hee lay at siege about Tarentum, was much helped to the atchieving of a matter of great importance, by a trifling thing to speake of, and of small moment in it selfe. The Tarentines had a garison of the Brutians, sent from Anniball to defend the citie. The captaine of this garison was greatly enamoured and readie to die for the love of a woman, who had a brother that served in the armie of Fabius the Consull. He being certified by letters from his sister, of this new acquaintance that shee had with that forrainer and straunger, so  wealthie and so honorable a person among his countrimen; conceived some hope by means of his sister, that her lover might be brought to any thing, and wrought as they would: and so acquainted the Consull with his conceited hope. And this seemed no vain imagination. Wherupon the young man was sent to Tarentum in habite and qualitie of a fugitive, and by the mediation of his sister, grew into some favour with the captaine aforesaid: and at first practised secretly to underfeele and found his mind, and afterwards seeing the weakenesse and inconstancie of the man, he prevailed with him so much, through the flattering speeches and allurements of the woman, as to betray the keeping and guard of that place whereof he had the charge. After that the manner how, and the time when this plot should be put in execution, was agreed upon, the said souldiour was let out of the cittie closely by night in a place betweene the corps de guard, and enformed  the Consull what was done alreadie, and in what sort every thing was to be done. Fabius at the first watch, after he had given a token and watchword to them in the castle, and to those likewise that had the keeping of the haven, himselfe fet a compasse about the said haven, and lay as closely as he could to that part of the citie which lieth to the East. Then all at once the trumpets sounded from the castle, from the haven and ships, which in the open sea rid neere at hand. Great houting there was, and much adoe for the nones from all these quarters, whereas indeed there was least daunger or none at all there. In the meane season the Consull kept his men in. Wherupon Democrates, who had beforetime beene Admirall of the Armada, and whose chaunce it was to have the guarding of that place, against which the Consull lay close, seeing all thereabout quiet ynough, and no stirring at all, and hearing all other parts to ring againe and resound with  such al'armes as otherwiles it seemed the citie was taken and woon, and fearing least if he sat still and bestirred not himselfe, the Consull would make some Camisado, and give the assay to enter the citie with banner displaied; withdrew his guard toward the castle, from whence was heard the greatest and most terrible noise. Fabius, when hee perceived once by guessing at the time, as also by the silence it selfe in that place (for where but a while before they kept much adoe, raising up one another, and calling to arm, there now all was husht, and not a word) that the guards were had away from thence, he commaunded that the ladders should bee brought to that side of the wall, where the brocher and broker both of the treason, had brought word that the cohorts of the Brutians were quartered and kept their guard. Thus on that part was the wal woon, by the means of the Brutij, who were readie to helpe and take them up, and so they got over into the citie. Then was the  next gate broken open, that the armie might come by companies under their severall colours. Whereupon they set up a shout, and a little before breake of day, they marched as far as into the market stead, and met with none to make head against them, and caused al them that fought at the castle and the haven, to turne upon them. There, in the very entrance of the market place, began a great skirmish, rather fought hotely than mainteined thorowly. For the Tarentine souldiours were nothing comparable to the Romanes, either in courage of heart, or goodnesse of armour; in skill and knowledge of warre, or in lustinesse and strength of bodie. And therefore when they had onely shot their darts, even before they came to handstrokes, they turned backe and slunke away through the lanes of the cittie, wherewith they were well acquainted, some to their owne home, and some to their friends houses. Two of their captaines, Nico and Democrates, fought  manfully, and were slaine. Philomenes, who was the principall head that wrought the revolt unto Anniball, fled out of the skirmish as fast as ever his horse would carrie him: but a while after his emptie horse was seene and knowne wandering astray in the cittie, but his bodie could never bee found. It was commonly beleeved, that he flung himselfe headlong from his horsebacke, into a certaine open pit. As for Carthalo, captaine of the Punicke garrison, he cast away his armour and

weapon, and as he was comming to the Consull with a goodly tale, recounting and remembring  his fathers friendship and intertainment to the Romanes, there hapned a souldiour to meete him and strike off his head. Then by some or other in every place, the Carthaginians and Tarentines both went to wrack, and were killed without mercie and regard, as well unarmed as armed. Yea, there were many of the Brutians also fell upon the edge of the sword, were it that they were mistaken, or for an old grudge and in-set hatred; or to suppresse and extinguish the bruit and rumor that went of betraying the towne: to the end that Tarentum might seeme the rather woon by assault and force of armes. Then from murder and slaughter, they fell to sack and spoile the citie. There were taken prisoners by report thirtie thousand head of slaves: a mightie masse of silver tried and coined: of gold 87000 pound weight. Images and peinted tables or pictures, so many, as very neere amounted to the number of the ornamentsof Syracusa. But Fabius of a  braver mind, absteined from that kind of prize and pillage, which Marcellus forbare not. For when his S^ribe or Secretarie asked him, what his pleasure was, should be done with the images (and the Statues they were of the gods, of a mightie bignesse and proportion, portraied every one in their owne habit like warriours:) Mary (quoth he) let the Tarentines have their angrie gods stil among them, for me. After this, the wall which devided the citie from the castle, was dismantled, rased downe, and laid even with the ground.
Whiles these things hapned at Tarentum, Anniball (after they had yeelded themselves unto him that besieged Caulonia) hearing of the siege and assault of Tarentum, went night and day and made all the hast he could, with a running march, to reskue and succour the citie: but hearing by the way that it was forced and gone, Ah, I see well, quoth he, the Romanes also are not  without their Anniball. In good faith, so was Tarentum woon, and so lost againe, by treacherie and treason. But because he would not be thought to turne back and flie, in the very same place where he made stay he sat downe, and encamped almost five miles from the citie: and after he had abode there some few daies, he retired himselfe to Metapontum. From thence he suborned two Metapontines, and sent them to Fabius at Tarentum, with letters devised from certaine principall men of that citie, wherein they promised to betray Metapontum and the Punick garison into the Consull his hands, upon assurance made unto them, that all former trespasses and offences should be forgeven and forgotten. Fabius supposing all was truth and plaine-dealing, appointed a certaine day when he would come to Metapontum, and sent his letters also to those principall citizens, which letters were brought unto Anniball: whereat he was right glad  and tooke great contentment that his fraud sped so well, and that Fabius also might be entrapped, caught, and overtaken by his wily fetches as well as others: and thereupon laid an ambush for him in the way not farre from Metapontum. As Fabius (before he should go out of Tarentum) attended to know what the birds signified, he observed once or twise that they approved not his journey. And when he killed a sacrifice, thereby to know the will of the gods, the Soothsayer, or bowell-prier gave him warning, to take heed of the deceit of his enemies, and beware of wait-laying. The Metapontines, seeing that he came not at the day appointed, were sent againe to hasten him forward, and to encourage him to come: who were all sodainely at once apprehended, and for feare of farther torture, disclosed the practise of the ambush.
In the beginning of that summer wherein these occurrents hapned, after that Scipio had bestowed  the whole winter, in winning and reconciling the harts of the barbarous people, partly with gifts and rewards, and partly with enlarging and sending back their hostages, and the prisoners: there came unto him one Edesco, a noble and famous captaine of the Spaniards. His wife and children were in custodie with the Romanes: but besides that occasion which brought him to Scipio, there was another cause, even a generall inclination of all their minds, that chanced I wot not how, which withdrew and estranged whole Spaine from the Carthaginian empire, unto the Romain. The same reason moved Indibilis also and Mandonius, the greatest LL. and Princes no doubt of all Spaine, to leave Asdruball, and with all the power they could make of their followers and vassals, to depart into the mountaines standing just over his camp, from whence they might from hill to hill continually retire themselves in safetie to the Romanes. Asdruball perceiving the puissance of his enemies to grow and increase still more and more by little and little, and his owne to diminish; and foreseeing, that unlesse he made some hardie adventure and prevailed that way, all would be naught, and fall to the ground, as it was beginning alreadie to reele, determined to put it to a battaile with all speede possible. Scipio also was sharp set, and the

 more desirous of fight, as well for the good hope, which the successe of his former affaires confirmed and encreased; as also because, before the armies of his enemies should joyne together, he was more willing to fight with one Generall and one armie, than with all them joyntly at once: and yet he had well amended and encreased his forces politickly of purpose, against the worst, in case he should be driven to fight with many of them together. For, seeing there was no use of ships, because all the river and seas along Spaine, were cleered of the Carthaginian navie, he withdrew his fleete up into the harborough at Taracon, and joyned his sea-servitours to his land souldiours. For armour he had store enough, which was either taken in the pillage of Carthage, or newly made after the winning of the towne, by so many Artificers and Craftsmen that he kept there hard and close at worke. With this power, Scipio in the beginning of spring departed  from Taracon (for now by this time was Laelius returned from Rome, without whose companie he was not willing to enterprise any service of great moment and importance) and led forward against the enemies. As he journeyed peaceably all over the countrie, and passed through the territories and confines of every cittie and State, his Allies were readie to entertaine and accompanie him. Indibilis also and Mandonius among the rest, with all their power met him. Then Indibilis in the name of them both, spake, not like a sottish barbarian foolishly and inconsiderately, but rather with a modest kind of gravitie: more like one that excused his revolt and running from the adverse part upon constreint and necessitie, than made boast of catching and embracing the vantage therof upon the first opportunitie presented.
I know full well (quoth he) that the very name of a fugitive revolt, as it is odious and detestable to old Allies, so it is suspicious to new.  And I cannot greatly blame the manner of men in so doing, in case it bee not the bare name, but the double dealing that causeth the hatred. Then he reckned up his owne good turnes and deserts done unto the Carthaginians on the one side: and recounted their covetousnesse and pride on the other side, together with their injurious dealings with himselfe and his people. And therefore quoth he, this bodie of mine onely hath conversed among them untill this day, but my hart and affection hath long since bene with them, where I beleeve verily, that right, justice and religion is regarded and mainteined: for even so do we flie as suppliants in humble manner to the gods also, when we can no longer endure the violence and wrongfull outrages of men. Beseeching Scipio this one thing withall, that this his starting from the enemie, and raunging with him, he would neither blame and condemne presently as a transgression, nor honor and  commend as a good desert of his: but as he should find both him and the rest, by good proofe from that day forward, even so to make reckoning of them accordingly, and not otherwise. Scipio made answer again, That in truth he would so do: neither would he take them for fugitives and runawaies, who judged that they were not bound in conscience to mainteine the societie and alliance with them as good and lawful, who made no count at al to observe inviolable, any promise or dutie to God or man. Then were their two wives and children brought forth into their sight, and delivered unto them, whom they received, and shed teares abundantly for joy, and so for that day they were had to their lodgings. The morrow after, faith was plight and contracted betweene them, and the same confirmed by covenant; and they were dismissed to bring their forces, and to shew them before him: and so they quartered and lodged in the same camp with the Romanes,  until by their guidance and direction they came unto the enemie. The armie of the Carthaginians next unto them was under the conduct of Asdruball, neere unto the citie Baetula. Before his camp, he kept certaine standing guards of horsemen. Vpon them the light armed forlorne hope of archers and dartars of the Romane hoast which went before the battaile to skirmish, likewise they of the forefront and vaward, charged forcibly with their shot; yet so contemptuously, and in skornefull wise, even presently upon their travaile in journey, and before they had chosen a peece of ground to encampe in, that it was soone seene what hart there was in both parts. For, the Cavallerie of the enemies fearefully fled, and were driven into the camp: but the Romanes advaunced with banners displaied, hard to the very gates: and so for that day their stomacks were onely up and provoked to a fight, and then the Romanes pitched their tents. Asdruball in the night retired his armie to a mount, which in the top had a broad plaine. Behinde this hill there ran a river, the fore-front thereof, and the sides all about the skirts were compassed as it were with a steepe banke standing plumbe upright. There lay under this hill top another plaine, lower than the other, which also was enclosed round about with the like banke, as difficult for ascent as the former. The next day Asdruball, after he

saw the enemies standing arraunged before their campe, sent downe his Numidian horsemen, the light armed Ilanders also of the Baleares, and likewise the Africanes.
Then Scipio rode about all the regiments, ensignes, and rankes of his armie, marshalled as they stood in battaile wise, and shewed unto them their enemies, how they despaired afore-hand to fight on equall and even ground, how they taking the vantage of the hils, braved and shewed themselves, presuming and trusting upon the place, and not upon their owne valour and strength of armes. Howbeit (quoth hee) Carthage had higher wals, and yet the Romane soldiours were able to skale and get over: neither hills nor castle, no nor the very sea, stood in their way then, nor stopped them of their entrie. And as for these high places which the enemies are possessed of, they happily may serve their turnes well, when they shall take their flight, and leape from off the steepe bankes, and runne downe-hill apace, and so get away. But I trow, I shall debat them  there, and lay a blocke in their way on every side. Whereupon he commaunded two squadrons, the one to keepe the streights of the valley, through which the river runneth: the other to beset the passage that leadeth from the cittie into the fields, and crosseth overthwart the hill side abovesaid. Himselfe led the light appointed vantcurriers, who the day before had discomfited the guards and wards of the enemies, to affront the light armed souldies, that were quartered in the neather brow of the hill. And first they passed through the roughes, and were not impeached nor hindered otherwise than by the difficult avenues. But afterward, when they were come within shot, at the very first, they were welcommed with a mightie voley of all sorts, pouring (as it were) like haile upon them. Himselfe answered them againe, and recharged upon them, letting drive and discharging the stones which lay strewed all over the ground, and were such in manner all, as  might be welded and flung from them with ease. And not onely the soldiers, but lackies and horseboies, and such as followed the camp, were intermingled amongst the armed companies. And albeit the ascent up the hil was hard, and they were pelted and almost overwhelmed with darts and s^ones, yet being so inured as they were to clime walls, and resolute withall, they mounted up first to t^e top: and so soon as they had gotten some even ground, where they might have sure footing, they found the enemie, (who was light and nimble, and able to runne to and fro, and to save himselfe, and shift well when he was farre off, all the time that they skirmished aloufe, and plaied upon one another with light shot) now that they came to close fight, and to handstrokes, not able to stand his ground: and so they drave him from his place, and with great slaughter chased him and set him backe to the very battaile, that stood upon the higher hill. Then Scipio having given commaundement to these, for to follow on the traine of their victorie, and to enter up still upon the maine battaile of the enemies, parted the rest of his forces, togither with Laelius, willing him to coast along and wheele about on the right hand of the mount, untill hee found some way of easier ascent himselfe on the left hand, fetched no long circuit and compasse, untill he came crosse overthwart the flanke of the enemies. Hereupon first began their battaile to be disordered, whiles they were desirous to turne their wings, and to oppose their ranks and squadrons against the noises and shouts which rung every where about them. In this tumultuous trouble, Lelius also was gotten up: and while the enemies drew backward and gave ground, because they would not be charged behind on their backe, the vaward of their part was displayed and lay open: and so the Romanes even of the middle battaile also, had a lane and spacious  roume to get up and enter upon them: who never had beene able to have gained the ground, and woon the plaine above, (considering the disadvantage of the steepe banke) so long as the rankes had stood unbroken, and the elephants were opposed against them before the ensignes, in the forefront. Downe went the enemies now on every side, and were pittiously killed: and Scipio, who with his left wing encountred the right, charged and plaied especially upon the naked sides of the enemies. And so by this meanes, they had no way left them to flie and escape cleare. For the Romane guards on both hands, as well on the left as the right, had beset all the avenues. And as for the gate of the campe, the Generall himselfe, and the other captaines and officers of the campe, had taken it up as they fled that way: besides the combersome trouble of the Elephants, whom being now affrighted, they feared no lesse than their enemies. So there died of  them 8000. Asdruball who before the conflict, had made sure worke with all the money, and taken it with him, sent the elephants before, and having rallied as many as he could, of them that fled and escaped out of the campe, he made hast along the river Tagus, toward the mountaine Pyrenaeus. Scipio being now maister of the enemies campe, after he had given to the souldiours all

 the pillage and spoile, but onely the prisoners, such as were free men: when he came to take the number of the captives, found they were ten thousand foot, and two thousand horse. Of which number, as many as were Spaniards he set at libertie and sent them home without ransome. But as for all the Africanes, hee commaunded the Treasurer to make money of them. Then the whole multitude of the Spaniards, as well those that before had yeelded themselves, as they that were taken prisoners the day before, saluted him with great consent and generall voice, by the name and title of king.
Wherupon Scipio, after silence made by the crier, said, That he tooke the name ofImperator. L. Generall or Commander, to be the greatest of all other names, by which his own soldiers used to call him. As for the title of King, howsoever in other places it was great and honorable, at Rome surely, it was odious and intollerable. For his owne part, the mind indeed hee caried of  a king, and if they deemed it to be the highest honour that can fall to the nature of man, let them judge so in their owne hearts secretly, and please themselves with that style: only he wished them to forbeare the word and tearme thereof. These very Spaniards, as barbarous as they were, perceived by this speech how haughtie and magnanimous hee was, who in the height of spirit contemned that as a base thing, wherat in admiration onely of the very title, all mortall men besides are amazed and astonied. After all this, he bestowed upon the Princes and great Potentates of the Spaniards, sundrie gifts. And of the horses, whereof he had taken in the field and campe great store, hee gave Indibilis the choise of three hundred where he would. When the treasurer was selling the Affricanes, according to the Generall his commaundement, he hapned upon a yong springall and stripling, of rare and singular beautie: and hearing that he was of roiall bloud, hee  sent him to Scipio.
And when Scipio demaunded of him who he was, and what countrieman, and wherefore at those yeares he was in campe among rude souldiours; I am (saith hee) a Numidian borne, (and with that his eies stood full of water) and in my countrie they call me Massiva. Being left an orphane and fatherlesse, I was brought up with my grandfather by the mother side, Gala the king of the Numidians. And with my unckle by the mother, Masanissa, who was lately come with a power of horsemen to aid the Carthaginians, it was my hap to saile over into Spaine. And never to this day, have I bene in any battel, by reason that Masanissa would not in regard of my tender age, suffer me in any hand to go to the warres. Howbeit that very day when the battaile was fought with the Romanes, unwares to my said unckle, I secretly got an horse under me, and armour upon my backe, and went foorth into the field; where my horse chaunced to fall, and cast  me downe headlong on the ground: and so it was my fortune to be taken by the Romanes. Scipio gaue order that this Numidian youth should be kept safe, and so proceeded to finish matters that were brought before him, as he sat upon the Tribunall in marshall court. And after he was come back from thence into his roial pavilion, he called the party again before him, and asked him, whither he were willing to returne againe to Masanissa. Whereat the teares gushing out of his eyes for joy, yea full faine (quoth he) and with all my heart. Then after he had given the yong gentleman a ring of gold, a coat embrodered with purple stud-wise, with a Spanish souldiours cape, a golden clasp or button, and a brave courser, with all the furniture and caparison therto belonging, he sent him away, and commanded certaine horsemen to safe-conduct and accompanie him, so farre as he would himselfe.
 Then Scipio fell to consult about the warre. Some there were that advised him, presently to pursue Asdruball: but he supposing that to be a daungerous course, for feare least Mago and the other Asdruball should joyne their forces to his, he sent onely a good guard to keep the passage of the hill Pyreneus, and imploied the rest of the summer, in receiving homage and fealtie of other States of Spaine.
Within few daies after the battell at Boetula, when as Scipio in his returne to Taracon, was gone past the chase or forrest of Castulo: Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo and Mago, the two Generals, arrived out of the farther province of Spaine unto Asdruball the sonne of Amilcar. But they came a day after the faire, and too late to helpe an overthrow past alreadie: yet in very good time, to give counsell for the managing and executing of the warre behind. There, as they conferred  together, concerning the disposition of the Spaniards, and how they stood affected in the countries of each province, onely Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo was of opinion, and persuaded, That the utmost tract and coast of Spaine, which lieth upon the Ocean and Gades, was hitherto unacquainted with the Romanes, and therefore fast ynough and sure to the Carthaginians. But the other Asdruball and Mago, were of another mind, and agreed in this, That Scipio with his favours

and benefits had possessed the affections and hearts of all men alreadie, both in generall, and  also in particular, and that there would never be an end of sliding from them, and siding to the Romanes, before that all the Spanish souldiours were either remooved into the farthest parts of Spaine, or conveighed over into Fraunce. And therefore, albeit the Senate of the Carthaginians had not graunted out any such act and commission, yet there was no remedie, but that Asdruball must go over into Italie, where Anniball was the head of the war, and in whom lay the main chance of all: by which means also he might withdraw out of Spain all the Spaniards, far ynough from the naming and hearing of Scipio. For Asdruball his armie, as well by daily falling away and revolting to Scipio, as also by the late defeature much empaired, was to be replenished again with new souldiours. Moreover, that Mago should deliver his armie to Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, and himselfe in person crosse over into the Baleare islands, with a great summe of money, to wage new aids and succours from thence. And that Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, with his armie should retire farther up into Portugall, and not encounter the Romanes at all in any hand. And that out of all the Cavallerie there should bee chosen out the very flower and strength, to the full number of three thousand, for Masanissa, and that he should raunge and overrun all the hither province of Spaine, partly to helpe the distressed Allies, and partly to spoile the enemies townes, and forray their lands. After these orders and directions set downe, the Generals departed asunder to the execution of these determined dessignements. Thus yee see what were the affaires and occurrences of Spaine for that yeere.
At Rome the fame of Scipio grew greater every day than other. Fabius for the winning of Tarentum, albeit he gat it rather by craft and pollicie, than by force and vertue, was glorious therefore. The name of Fulvius began to age and decay. Marcellus grew also into an ill name and some obloquie, both for that at first hee had a foile, and also because hee suffered Anniball to raunge over Italie at his pleasure, and himselfe at midsommer had retired his souldiours to Venusia to take up there (as it were) their winter harborough. He had a sore adversarie in the citie, one C. Publicius Bibulus, a Tribune of the Commons: who from the very first time of that discomfiture, with continuall speeches and Orations brought Claudius into hatred and infamie with the common people, and now was in hand with them to deprive him of his governement. Howbeit, the friends and kinsfolke of Claudius obteined thus much, That Marcellus leaving his lieutenant at Venusia, should repair to Rome for to make his purgation, and acquit himselfe of such crimes as his adversaries objected and laid against him: and that during his absence, they should not treat  nor debate about his deprivation.
It hapned much about one time, that both Marcellus came to Rome (to meet with the shamefull slaunder that ran on him, and to save his honour) and also Q. Fulvius the Consull, about the new election for the yeere following. The question touching the governement of Marcellus, was debated and handled in the lists or Circus, called Flaminius; and a great assembly there was, and much concourse of the Commons, and of people of all degrees and calling.
The Tribune accused not Marcellus onely, but all the nobilitie: by whose fraudulent practise, and by whose cold and delayfull proceedings, it was come to passe, that Anniball now these ten yeares had remained in Italie (as it were) in his province continually, where hee had led a greater part of his life, than at Carthage in his native countrey. And now (quoth he) the people of Rome tast the fruit, proceeding  of proroguing and continuing of government still in one person. For see what is come of it; Marcellus his armie hath been twise defeated and fallen upon the enemies sword, and now forsooth is housed in Venusia for sun-burning. But Marcellus so confuted this accusatorie speech of the Tribune, by recounting his owne worthie noble acts; that not onely the bill preferred for the deposing him out of his roume, was disanulled, and the necke of it broken, but also the next day after, all the Centuries with one generall voice created him Consull. There was joined with him companion in government T. Quintius Crispinus, who then was Pretour. The morrow after were the Pretors chosen, to wit, P. Licinius Crassus Dives, who was at that time the Arch-bishop, P. Licinius Varus, Sex. Iulius Caesar, and Q. Claudius Flamen.
During the time of this solemne parlement or session for the election of Magistrates, the citie  was much disquieted for the revolt of Hetruria: C. Calpurnius who ruled that province as Propretour, had by his letters given notice, that the beginning thereof arose from the Arretines: and therefore immediately M. Marcellus the Consull elect, was thither sent with commission to looke into the matter, and (if hee thought it requisite) to send for his forces, and to translate

 the warre out of Apulia into Tuscane. For feare whereof, the Tuscanes puld in their heads, and were quiet.
The Tarentine Embassadours made suite for peace, and that together with their freedome they might enjoy their own lawes. And this answere was returned by the Senat, That they should come againe when Fabius the Consull was returned to Rome. The Romane Games, and also the plaies called Plebeij, were exhibited that yeere, and renued one day apeece more than ordinarie. The Aediles of the chaire were L. Cornelius Caudinus, and Servilius Sulpitius Galba: but those of the Commons were C. Servilius, and Q. Cecilius Metellus. As for Servilius, it was denied, that hee had beene Tribune of the Commons before, or now Aedile by right and order of law, because it was now for certaine knowne,For none might bee Tribune or Aedile, whose father was living. that his father (of whom the opinion went currant for ten yeares  that he was slaine by the Boians about Mutina, at what time as hee was Triumvir for the division of lands) was now living, and in the hands of the enemies in slaverie and bondage.
In the eleventh yeere of the Punick war, M. Marcellus entred his Consulship the fift time (so you reckon upon that Consulship which hee never bare through, because there was an errour committed in his creation) and with him T. Quintius Crispinus. To both Consuls the province of Italie was assigned, and both armies of the Consuls the former yeere. There was a third armie then at Venusia, whereof M.Marcellus had the conduct. Of these three, they were to chuse two, which they would: and the third remaining, was to bee committed unto him, who was by lot to have the government of Tarentum, and the Salentines. The rest of the provinces were thus divided amongst the Pretours. P. Licinius Varus had the jurisdiction civile, and P. Licinius Crassus, (then Pontifex Max.) that of the forreiners, and to go whether soever the Senat should think good to send him Vnto Sex. Iulius Caesar befell Sicilie, and to Q. Claudius Flamen the citie of Tarentum. Q. Fulvius Flaccus had his commission renued, to continue in government for one yeere longer: and he was appointed to governe Capua, which had been the charge of T. Quintius the Pretour, and to have under his hand the commaund of one legion. Likewise C. Hostilius Tubulus remained still in office, and that as Pro-pretour he should succeed C.Calpurnius, and have the conduct of two legions. Moreover, L. Veturius Philo had his authoritie and government confirmed to him anew, that as Propretour he should sit L. Deputie in the same province of Fraunce, and have the same two legions as before, when he was Pretour there. The like decree that was graunted for L. Veturius, passed also in the Senate for C. Aurunculeius, and a bill was propounded unto  the people for the proroguing and continuance of his office, who as Pretour ruled the province Sardinia with the strength of two legions. And for the defence and guard of the said province hee had an addition of fiftie shippes of warre, which P. Scipio had sent out of Spaine. P. Scipio likewise and M. Syllanus, held still, by vertue of a decree, their provinces of Spaine, and commaunded the same armies for one yeare longer. As for Scipio, he had direction to send over into Sardinia fiftie ships, out of those eightie which he had under his hand, either taken with him out of Italie, or woon from the enemie at Carthage, because there ran a rumour, that there was great preparation at Carthage, for a navie that yeare: and that the Carthaginians would take up, and fill all the sea coast of Italie, Sicilie, and Sardinia, with an armada of two hundred saile. In Sicilie the government was divided in this maner, Sextus Caesar had the leading of the Cannian  armie: M. Valerius Levinus (for his government also was confirmed for a yeer longer) the charge of that fleet of seventie ships, which rid about Sicilie: with commission to ad thereto, those thirtie ships which the former yeer lay before Tarentum: and with this armada consisting of one hundred saile, to put over into Affricke, if hee thought so good, and there to forray and fetch booties. Over and besides, P. Sulpitius was for one yeere longer to continue in office, and to governe the provinces of Macedonie and Greece, with the force of the said navie which hee had before. As touching the two legions which remained about the citie of Rome, there was no alteration. Only the Consuls were permitted to levie and enroll a new supplie, as need should require. Thus the Empire and State of Rome for that yeere was mainteined with the power of 21 legions. P. Licinius Varus the Pretour of the cittie, was charged to repaire those thirtie old ships, which  lay at Hostia, and to furnish twentie new built, with sailers and mariners, that with this armada of fiftie saile he might be able to defend all the sea coast neere unto the citie of Rome. C. Calpurnius was forbidden to remove his forces from Arretium, be fore a successor came in his place. The same order was given to Tubulus, and to have especially a vigilant eie, that no commotion arose from thence. And then the Pretours went into their provinces.

As for the Consuls they were troubled in mind and made some scruple of conscience to go  to their provinces, upon the report of some prodigious and ominous signes, and also because in their sacrifices they found not the gods so propicious and favourable unto them. For out of Campania newes came, that in Capua two temples, to wit, of Fortune and Mars, and also some tombes and sepulchres, were smitten with lightning: and besides (see how vaine and preposterous superstition, imputeth even the least trifling things to the hand of God) that certaine mice forsooth, in a chappell of Iupiter gnawed the gold. Also that in Casinum, a great swarme of bees settled in the very market place. Moreover, that the wall and one of the gates at Hostia was blasted and stricken with lightning. That in Caere, a gripe fled into the church of Iupiter. That at Volsinij, there was a poole flowed with bloud. In regard of these strange and wonderous tokens, there was a devout supplication for one day. And for certaine daies together, greater  beasts were killed for sacrifices, without any good token: and for a long time the grace and favour of the gods could not be obteined. But yet the fortune of the Common-weale stood still upright, and all this anger and mischiefe portended by those wonders, light upon the head of the Consuls alone, and their death excused all the rest. The Plaies called Apollinares, in the yeere of Q. Fulvius and Ap. Claud. Consuls, had ben by P. Cornel. Sulla Pretour of the citie, first exhibited: after whom all the Pretours ever after did the like. But they vowed them a yeare before, and performed them upon a day uncertaine. The same yeare hapned a grievous plague both in the citie and in the countries about, which yet in the end turned rather to long and chronick diseases, than to sharp and deadly maladies. For this pestilence there was not only solemne going in procession, in all the high streets, carrefours, and crosse waies throughout the citie: but also  P. Licinius Varus Pretor of the citie, was commaunded to propound unto the people, that the Plaies abovesaid should be vowed for ever against a set and determinate day. Himselfe therefore was the first that vowed them, and exhibited them upon the5 day of Iuly. third day before the Nones of Iuly, and the same day ever after was observed and kept holiday for that purpose.
As the rumor of the Arretines revolt encreased daily greater, so the LL. of the Senate were carefull about it every day more than other. Letters therefore were sent unto C. Hostilius, that he should without delay take pledges of the Arretines: and C. Terentius Varro was sent with commission, to receive the said hostages at his hands, and to bring them to Rome. He was no sooner come, but Hostilius presently commaunded that one legion, which lay in camp before the towne, should enter the citie with banner displaied, and there he put sufficient gards  in places convenient. Then having called and summoned the Senatours to appeare in the market place, he demaunded of them hostages. And when the Senate requested but two daies respit to consider of the matter, he made proclamation, that either they should deliver them presently, or els the next day hee would seaze upon all the Senatours children every one. Then he commaunded the Colonels, the captaines of the Allies, and the Centurions, toward the gates, that none might go forth of the citie by night. But this was slackly and negligently executed, for seven principall Senatours, before the warders were set at the gates, escaped forth with their children before night. The morrow morning by breake of day, when the Senate began to be cited into the Common hall, these parties were missed, and their goods confiscate and sold in port sale. Of the rest of the Senatours, their children were taken hostages to the number  of 120, and were delivered to C. Terentius, for to be conveighed to Rome: who when he was come into the Senate, made such relation of the matter, that the suspition of their revolt was much more pregnant than before. And therefore, as if some insurrection had like presently to grow from Tuskane, C. Terentius himselfe was commaunded to conduct one of the two legions about the citie of Rome, unto Arretium, and there to lye in garrison with it for to keepe the towne in order. And it was thought meete that C. Hostilius with the armie besides, should survey and visit the whole Province, and to be carefull and circumspect, that no occasion nor opportunitie might be given unto them, that were minded to seeke alteration and to rebell. C. Terentius so soone as he was come to Arretium with the legion, when he called unto the Magistrates for the keyes of the gates, and they made answere that they were but miscast aside and  could not be found; supposing that they were rather cautelously laid out of the way for the nonce, than lost by negligence, caused other keies and locks to be made, and set upon every gate: and tooke as great heed and care as he could, to have all under his owne hand. He gave especiall warning also to Hostilius as touching the Tuskanes, and told him, that he should never

 hope to rest in securitie, that they would not rebell, unlesse he tooke order with them aforehand, that they possiblie could not rebell.
After this, there was much debate and contention in the Senate about the Tarentines, even before Fabius, whiles himselfe excused and defended them whom he had conquered and subdued by force and armes: but others were mightely offended with them, yea and most of them gave out plainely, that they were full as faultie as the Campanes, and deserved no lesse punishment. And so there was an Act of the Senate graunted according to the opinion and advise of M. Acinius, that the towne should be held with a garison, and all the Tarentines kept from stirring out of the citie: and that the matter should further be debated and decided afresh another time, when the state of Italie stood in better termes of peace and quietnesse. And the like contention  and variance was among the LL. of the Senate touching M. Livius Constable and Captaine of the Castle of Tarentum, whiles some were of mind to condemne him as in great fault, because through his carelesnesse and sloth, Tarentum the citie was betraied to the enemie: others againe awarded him good consideration and reward, for that he kept the fort so well by the space of five yeeres, and by his meanes especially and by none else Tarentum was recovered. But some were of opinion betweene these and said, that the discussing and determination of that matter perteined properly to the Censors and not to the Senate: of which judgement Fabius also himselfe was. And this moreover he said withall, that he must needs confesse, that true it was, which Livius his friends in the Senate stood so much upon, and iterated so often, namely, that he was the only meanes that Tarentum was recovered: for in good faith, quoth he, it never could have  bene regained if it had not once bene lost before.
T. Quintius Crispinus one of the Consuls, went to the armie which Q. Fulvius Flaccus had, with a new supplie into the Lucanes countrey. But Marcellus still was staid behind, upon occasion of new scruples of conscience, and sundrie objects that troubled his mind, and kept a hammering in his head one after another. Amongst which, this was one, that having vowed in the Gaules warre at Clastidium, a temple to Honor and Vertue: the dedication of the said church was hindred by the Bishops, who said, that one chappell, by right and according to their ceremonies, served but for one sainct, and could not be consecrated unto more. For in case it should be blasted and smitten by fire from heaven, or otherwise some prodigious token happen therein, hardly could the right expiation and purging thereof be performed, because it might not be  knowen, to which of the saincts or gods the sacrifice should be done: for by order one sacrifice could not serve twaine, unlesse they were some particular and especiall gods named. So there was faine to be another chappell built for Vertue: and great hast there was made for the rearing therof, and yet it was not his fortune ever to dedicate those chappels. So (...) length he set forward and put himselfe on his journey with a supplie, unto the armie which he had left the yeare before at Venusia.
When Crispinus minded to assault Locri in the countrie of the Brutiens, because there went a great name of Fabius for the assayling and winning of Tarentum, he sent for all kind of artillerie and engines out of Sicilie, and shippes also were brought from thence, for to batter that part of the cittie that lieth to the sea side. But the enterprise went not forward, because Anniball  had remooved, with all his forces to Lacinium. And besides, the newes went that his colleague had alreadie brought out his forces from Venusia, with whom hee was desirous to joyne. And therfore he returned out of the Brutiens countrie into Apulia: and so between Venusia and Brutia, the Consuls encamped severally, within three miles one from the other. Anniball likewise was retired into the same countrie, considering that the war was turned from Locri. There the Consuls (hote men of nature both) almost every day led foorth their men into the field, not doubting but if Anniball once met them (having two Consular armies joyned togither) to make a dispatch of the warre once for all. Anniball because the yeare before, he had twise affronted Marcell^s, and both given and taken the foile: like as he had great reason, as well to feare as to hope, if he were to encounter and fight with him alone: so he thought verily, that hee was never  able to make his part good with both the Consuls togither. And therefore laying off his lyons skin, he tooke himselfe wholly to his olde foxes coate, and sought all meanes and opportunities to lay a traine for to entrap them. Howbeit there passed some light skirmishes betweene both their campes, with varietie of fortune and interchangeable successe. By which, the Consuls thinking that they should hold out and keepe the enemies play, during the summer season, and

yet neverthelesse be able to assault Locri, wrate unto L. Cincius, that he should take the seas, and  crosse ouer with his fleet out of Sicilie to the cittie of Locri. And to the end that the town might bee likewise assailed from the land side, they commaunded part of the armie which lay in garrison at Tarentum, to bee conducted thither. Anniball having intelligence afore-hand of these things, by certaine Thurines, sent forth certain of his forces to beset the waies from Tarentum. And there under the side of the Petellian mount, he bestowed secretly in ambush two thousand horse, and three thousand foot. Vpon whome the Romanes (marching without their espials sent afore them) chaunced to light, and were slaine to the number of two thousand, and upon twelve hundred taken alive: the rest were scattered and fled over the fields and forrests backe to Tarentum. Now there was a little hill betweene both the campes of the Carthaginians and Romanes, and the same all overgrowne with wood, which at first was possessed and kept, neither by  one nor other: because the Romans knew not the situation of that side which lay toward the enemies campe: and Anniball supposed verily that it was a place fitter for to lay an ambush, than to encampe in: and therefore he sent by night for that purpose, certaine troupes of Numidians, and bestowed them closely in the mids of the wood, and not one of them stirred all the day long out of their standings, for feare least either their armour or themselves might be espied a farre off. In the Romane campe, every man generally was of mind, and let not to say, that the said hill was to be seized and fortified for their use, with a good fortresse built upon it, for fear least if it were first gained by Anniball, they should have the enemie as it were over there heads readie to annoy them. And Marcellus himselfe was of the same opinion: wherupon, Why go not we our selves in person (quoth he to his colleague) with some few horsemen
, to view and consider the place, where our eies shall be our judges; and seeing the ground once, wee shall resolve more certainly what course to take? Crispinus liked well of the motion: and so they went forward accompanied with two hundred and twentie horsemen; of which, fortie were Fregellanes, the rest all Tuskans. There followed after them, M. Marcellus, the Consull his sonne and Aulus Manlius, two Colonels: also L. Arennius and M.Aulius, two captaines of the allies. Some authors have set down in writing, that Marcellus the Cos. sacrificed that day; and when the first beast was killed, the liver was found without an head: howbeit in the second, all things appeared that were wont to be seen. But in the head of that liver there shewed I wot not how, a kind of extraordinarie exc^escence: which the Soothsaier had no liking to, because after those inwards which seemed before short, unperfect, and misliking; now those againe were seen too well fed and overgrowne. But the Consull  Marcellus was so hote and desirous to fight with Anniball, that he thought himselfe never encamped neere enough unto him. And even then also as he went forth out of the campe, he gave order to his souldiours to be readie at a short warning, and have their eie upon the place; that presently, if he liked the hill, for which they went to view, they should dislodge, trusse up bag and baggage and follow presently. Now there was a litle flat and plaine ground before the camp, from whence the way that led unto the said hill, was on every side very open and evident to the eye: where there lay a skout or spie, set of purpose to discover any of the enemies gone farre from the camp, stragling and ranging abroad, either for fewell or forage, that they might be intercepted: and not for any hope of so great effect as fell out. This fellow gave a signe unto the Numidians, that all at once they should arise out of their lurking and starting holes. And they that from the  top and ridge of the hill, were to rise and shew themselves affront, never appeared and made head, before that they had fet a compasse about, for to shut up the passage at the back of the Romans. And then from all parts they began to start up, and with a maine shout charged and ran upon them. The Consuls now were in that valley, from whence they neither could possibly get up to the pitch of the hill, possessed aforehand by the enemie: nor had any place of safe retreat behind, for that they were invironned and hemmed in on every side. Howbeit they might have mainteined skirmish and held out a good while, but that the Tuskanes began to run away, and put all the rest in a bodily fright. Yet the Fregellanes, forsaken as they were of the Tuskanes, gave not over, but fought manfully, (so long as the Consuls stood on foot unhurt) and received the charge of the enemies, encouraging their people, and fighting themselves right valiantly. But when they  saw once both their Consuls wounded, and Marcellus also run through with the push of a lance, and falling from his horse redie to die: then they also (and few of them God wot remained alive) togither with the Consull Crispinus (who was wounded with two javelines) and young Marcellus, who was himselfe also sore hurt, fled away and escaped. There were slain in this skirmish, A. Manlius

 a Colonell, of the two captaines of allies, M. Aulus was killed out-right, and L. Arenius taken prisoner. As for the Lictours belonging to the Consuls, five of them then fell alive into the hands of the enemies: the rest were put to the sword, or escaped with the Consull. So there were three and fortie horsemen died either in the conflict, or in the flight, and eighteen taken prisoners. In the campe there was much ado, and crying out for to go and succor the Consuls, when they saw one of them, and the other his sonne grievously hurt, and the poore remnant of that unfortunate expedition, comming toward the campe. The death of Marcellus was much pittied and lamented in many other respects, but for this especially: that he, a man of that age (for he was now above threescore years old) and who should have had more wit: an old captaine and leader (I say) that should have had more wisedome and forecast, so unadvisedly had brought both his  colleague togither with himselfe, and also in manner the whole common-wealth into so desperat a daunger. I should make much circumstance, and fetch many turnes and compasses about one point, if I would rehearse all that writers have diversly set downe, as touching the death of Marcellus. But to let all others go, L. Caelius delivereth the thing three manner of waies: the one by hearesay onely, and a generall report: the other, extant in an Oration of the praise of Marcellus, penned by his owne sonne, that was himselfe present at the action: the third, which Caelius himselfe alleadgeth upon his owne knowledge, and after diligent enquirie into the matter. But howsoever the voice and fame varieth in some circumstances, most of them jump in the occasion, That he went forth of the camp to view the place: and all agree of the event, That he was entrapped and so slaine. Anniball supposing that the enemies were mightily terrified, as well by the  death of the one Consull, as the hurt of the other: because he would take all advantage, and omit no good opportunitie offered, forthwith removeth his campe, and pitcheth upon the very hill where hee had fought. There hee found the corps of Marcellus, and caused it to be enterred.
Crispinus affrighted both at the death of his companion in governement, and also at his own hurt received, dislodged in the dead time of the night following, and in the very next mountains that he could come unto, encamped and fortified himselfe upon an high ground, and surely fensed on every side. There the two Generals of both parts, beat their braines, and occupied all their wits, contriving the one to lay traines, and the other to avoid them. Anniball together with the bodie of Marcellus, had gotten his ring or signe manuell. Crispinus fearing that Anniball might practise some craftie fetch, and beguile some bodie by the meanes of that signet, sent messengers  to all the cities next adjoining, giving them notice, that his brother Consull was slaine, and that the enemie had gotten his seale ring, and warning them, that they should give no credite to any letters written in his name, or signed with his seale. This message was not so soon brought to Salapia, but streight after there came letters thither from Anniball, framed and endited in the name of Marcellus to this effect, That he would the next night that immediately followed that present day, be in person at Salapia; willing the garrison soldiors to bee in readinesse, for to bee emploied in some service that should be thought needfull. The Salapians perceived whereabout he went, and supposing that it was a perrillous plot, whereby Anniball sought some opportunitie to bee revenged of them and to punish them, for anger, not onely that they were revolted from him, but because they had killed his horsemen: they therefore sending the messenger backe againe, (who was a Romane fugitive and renegate, and had fled from them to Anniball) to the end, that  their souldiors might effect that which they were minded to doe, without the knowledge of the messenger, and not be espied by him; bestowed all the townesmen along the walls and in sundry convenient places of the town, to keepe a standing corps de guard. The watch and ward they tended the next night very carefully, and about that gate where they supposed the enemie would come, they opposed the strength and most able men of all the garison. Anniball neere about the time of the releefe of the fourth watch came to the citie. In the vaward marched certain Roman rebels and renegates, with Roman armor upon them: who when they were come to the gate, called up the watch, and spake all in Latine unto them, willing them to set the gates open, for that the Cos. was come. The watchmen making semblant as if they were roused and awakened at their  call, began to bestir themselves, to make hast with much ado, as busie as ever they might be. The Port-cullis which had ben let downe, stood yet shut. Then they began, some to heave and to weigh it from the ground with leavers and coleweighes, others to draw it up with ropes unto that heigth, that men might goe upright under it. The passage was scarcely made open, and set wide ynough, when the fugitive traitours, came rushing in at the gate av^e, striving who might enter first. And

when there were almost sixe hundred of them gotten in, the rope was let goe, at which the portcullies  hung, and it fell downe with a mightie noise. The Salapians then, some ran upon the fugitive Romanes abovesaid, carying their armour loosely and retchlesly, hanging upon their shoulders, as travellers and wayfaring souldiours in a peaceable countrie of their friends: others from the turrets of the gate pelted the enemies with stones, and pushed at them with punchion poles, or with darts and javelines maskared them. So Anniball caught in his owne snares, was faine to depart.
He went from thence to levie and raise the siege before Locri, which towne Cincius beleaguered streightly, and assaulted most forcibly, having raised fabrickes about it, and planted all kind of engines, artillerie, and ordinance against it, which were brought thither out of Sicilie. Mago who began alreadie to distrust that he should not bee able to defend and keepe the citie, conceived  now the first hope of better, when he heard once of the death of Marcellus. And then there came also a messenger with news, That Anniball having sent afore him the horsemen of the Numidians, followed after himselfe in person, as fast as hee could, with the power of the footmen. And therefore so soone as he perceived, by a signe given from the hill tops, that the Numidians approched, himselfe at once set the gate open, and suddainely sallied forth upon the enemie with great violence. At the first the skirmish was doubtfull, more because hee came upon them at unwares, than for that he was equall to match them in strength: but afterwards, when the Numidians charged them besides, the Romanes were so terrified, that they fled here and there in every place to the sea and their ships, leaving their fabricks and engines wherewith they had shake^ ^nd battered the walls. So by the comming of Anniball the siege brake up before Locri.
Crispinus, after hee was advertised, that Anniball was gone into the Brutians countrey, commaunded Marcus Marcellus a Colonell or knight marshall, to lead away unto Venusia, the armie which had beene commaunded by his Colleague new deceased. Himselfe went to Capua with the legions, scarce able to endure the shogging and shaking of the horselitter, for pain and greefe of his wounds. From whence he wrote letters to Rome, giving notice, That his brother Consull was dead, and in what daunger himselfe was. Signifying also, that hee could not himselfe come unto Rome against the election, because he thought he should not bee able to endure the travell of the journey: and besides, hee was in great care for Tarentum, least Anniball from out of the Brutians countrey would turne thither with all his power. Moreover, he gave the Senat to understand, that it was requisite there should be sent as Embassadors or Agents unto him, men of wisdome  and discretion, whome hee might conferre with, and acquaint with his will and mind, as touching State-matters. The reading of these letters, caused them much to lament and mourne for the death of the one Consull, and greatly to feare what would become of the other. Therefore they not onely dispatched Q. Fabius the sonne, unto the armie in Venusia, but also sent unto the Consull three commissioners, Sex. Iulius Caesar, L. Licinius Pollio, and L. Cincius Alimentus who but a few daies before was returned out of Sicilie. These had in commission to signifie unto the Consull from the Senate, that in case he were not able himselfe to come to Rome against the election, he should nominate within the Romane territorie a Dictatour for to assemble the people for the said election: also that their pleasure was, in case the Consull went to Tarentum, that Q. Claudius the Pretour should withdraw his legions from thence into those parts, whereas hee  might defend most cities of the Allies.
In the same summer M. Valerius tooke the seas, with a fleet of a hundred saile, and from Sicilie passed over into Africke: and having disbarked and landed his men neere the citie Clupea, wasted the countrey all about, and met no armed men, to speak of, to make head and withstand his invasion. Then these rovers and forraiers retired in hast unto their ships, because on a suddaine there was a rumour blowne abroad, That the punicke Armada was comming, consisting of 83 saile. The Romane Admirall fought fortunately with them not farre from Clupea. And after he had bourded and taken eighteene of their ships, and put the rest to flight, he returned to Lilybaeum, with a rich land-bootie, and much pillage found in the ships.
The same summer Philip also sent aid to the Achaei, that earnestly besought his help: whom  not onely Machanidas the tyrant of the Lacedemonians, greevously afflicted with warring upon their confines, but also the Aetolians, who having crossed the streights or narrow sea, betweene Naupactum and Patrae (which the inhabitants there call Rhios) and set over a power of armed men, had spoiled their territorie. Moreover; there went a great rumour and speech, that Attalus

 king of Asia the lesse, would saile over into Europe, because the Aetolians in their last parlement or generall Diet had conferred upon him the soveraign magistracie and rule of their nation. For these causes Philip came downe with a power into Greece, and at the cittie Lamia, the Aetolians encountred him with their captaine Physias, who for that yeere was created Pretour together with king Attalus in his absence. They had in their armie certaine aids from Attalus, and almost a thousand Romanes out of the Romane Armada, sent from P. Sulpitius. Against this captaine and these forces Philip fought two battailes with prosperous successe, and in both slew very many of his enemies: and when the Aetolians were driven for feare from thence, into the cittie of Lamia, and within the walls thereof saved themselves, Philip retired his armie into Phalera. This is a place situate in the gulfe of Malea, sometimes much peopled and frequented for the  passing faire haven, andmany good harboroughs, and safe rodes for ships, besides other speciall commodities as well of sea as land. Thither repaired sundry Embassadors from divers parts, to wit, from Ptolomaeus king of Aegypt, from the Rhodians, the Atheniens, and inhabitants of Chios, and all to treat about a pacification, to take up the warre betweene Philip and the Aetolians. And of neighbor-borderers there was in the behalfe of the Aetolians as peace-maker, Aminander king of the Athamanes. All of them were not so carefull and earnest for the Aetolians, who were more fierce, stout and imperious than the nation of Grecians naturally is: as they laboured this point, that Philip with his kingly soveragntie, to the prejudice of their libertie hereafter, should not be interessed, nor meddle in the affaires and state of Greece. As concerning a peace, the consultation was put off and referred to the generall counsell of the Achaei: and  for the said Diet or counsell, was a place appointed, and a certaine day set downe and published. And in the meane space, a truce obteined for thirtie daies.
Then the king departed from thence, and through Thessalie and Boeotia, came to Chalcis in Euboea, for to put by Attalus (whom he heard say to be comming with a navie for Euboea) from arriving in any havens, or landing in any place on the sea coast. Then leaving a guard behind for to withstand Attalus, (if happily in the mean season he should chance to passe over) he marched himselfe forward with some few horsemen, and light armed footmen, and came to Argos. There by the suffrages and voices of the people, the honour of exhibiting and celebrating the solemne games, called Heraei and Nemei, was recommended unto him, because the Macedonian kings give out and say, that they are descended from that cittie. After he had performed the solemnitie  of the Heraei, presently he went from the very games and pastimes, to the counsell of his allies long before proclaimed, as is abovesaid. Much debate there was for a finall end of the Aetolians war, that neither the Romans nor Attalus might have any occasion to come into Greece. But the Aetolians marred all this before the time of the truce was well expired: by occasion that they heard, that Attalus both was come to Aegina, and the Romane navie anckered at Naupactum. For being called into the counsell of the Achaei, in which the same Embassies were, who before at Phalera had treated for peace, first they complained, that some things had beene done, during the time of the truce, against the faith of the covenant and accord. But at last they flatly denied and said, That there could not possiblie bee an end of warres, unlesse the Achaei rendred Pylos unto the Messenians; and peace were graunted and restored to the Romanes,  and likewise to the Athamanes, to Scerdiletus, Pleuratus, and Archides. Whereat Philip was very wroth, and thought it a foule indignitie, that conquered persons should take upon them to article and capitulate with him their conquerour.
But neither heretofore (quoth he) gave I audience to the treatie of peace, nor yeelded consent to truce upon any hope I had, that the Aetolians would ever be quiet: but to this end, that all confederate friends might beare witnesse that I sought meanes of peace, and they sought occasions and pickt quarrels for warre. So without conclusion of any peace, hee dissolved the Diet; leaving foure thousand souldiours for the defence and guard of the Achaeans, and receiving of them five ships of warre, (which if hee had joined to the armada of the Carthaginians, lately sent unto him, and also to those ships which were comming out of Bithynia from king Prusias, he determined to assaile the Romanes  with ship-fight, who had a long time beene mightie maisters of the seas) himselfe presently from that counsell departed backe to Argos: for now the time drew neere of the games Nemei, which he was desirous to celebrate and honour with his presence. Whiles the king was occupied in the preparation of these games and pastimes, and sollaced himselfe during these feastivall holidaies, with more libertie of mind and repose, than he should, in time of war; P. Sulpitius having

losed from Naupactum, arived with his fleete betweene Sicyone and Corinth, and wasted that  goodly territorie, most renowmed of all other for fruitfulnesse of all things. The noyse and rumor of this occurrence awakened Philip, and caused him to leave his disports: and so he tooke his Cavallerie with him in hast, and set forward, having geven order that the Infanterie should follow streight after: where he found the Romanes stragling here and there all over the countrey, loden with bootie and prises, (as who feared nothing in the world lesse) set upon them, and drave them to their ships. Thus the Romane fleet nothing wel appaied for the bootie they had gotten, returned to Naupactum. And Philip greatly augmented the solemnitie and magnificence of the games that were behind, by the fame of a victorie over the Romanes at that time, how mickle or little soever it was. And with great joy and mirth were those holidaies kept: and so much the more, because the king for to please the people withall, laid aside the diademe of his head, put off his  purple robes and other princely and royal habit, and in outward port bare himself equal to others, and no better: a thing right acceptable and pleasing to free States, as nothing can be more. By which deede of his, he had geven great and undoubted hope unto all men, of libertie and freedome; but that he steined and marred all againe with his intollerable lust and loosenesse of life. For he used to go raunging up and downe with one or two of his favourites in companie, and did nothing else but haunt suspected houses by the sea side day and night in desguised maner: and thus by debasing himselfe to the meane estate of a private person, the lesse he was suspected and knowne, the more dissolute he was: and whiles he pretended unto others a vaine shew of freedome, he abused all to his owne licentiousnes. Neither paid his purse for all his pleasures, nor with flattring persuasions and faire speeches obteined he his disires: but to accomplish his  wickednesse, he used oftentimes forcible violence: and dangerous it was both to husbands and parents, to be any thing streight-laced, and make it goodly by tedious delay and unseasonable severitie, to seeme but to stay the unbridled lust and appetite of the king. From one of the Princes also of the Achei named Aratus, he tooke his wife away called Polycratia, and upon hope and colour of mariage with the king, drew her away with him into Macedonie. Having thus with these leaud and wicked pranks passed the time of the solemnitie of the Nemean games, and some few dayes over and above; he went to Dymae for to disseizen the garison of the Aetolians, which they had sent for and received into the citie [of Dymae] from the Eleans. Cycliades (who was the soveraigne or chiefe magistrate of that state) and the Achei, met the king at Dymae: who as they hated the Eleans, because they dissented from the rest of the Acheans, so they were maliciously  bent against the Aetolians, whom they were persuaded, to haue stirred the Romanes to levie warre upon them. So from Dymae they departed, and with joint armies passed over the river Larissus, which devideth the country of the Eleans from the territorie of Dymae. The first day after they were entred the confines of their enemies, they spent in forraying. The morrow after, in battaile array, they presented themselves before the citie, having sent out their horsemen before them to make bravadoes before their gates, and all to provoke the Aetolians; a kind of people full of stomack, and readie enough to sallie forth and make excursions. Now were they not ware all this while, that Sulpitius with fifteene ships had crossed over from Naupactum to Cyllene: nor that he had landed foure thousand souldiers in the still time of the night (because they might not be seene to march) and entred Elis. And therefore, this sodaine and unexpected object put them  in a terrible feare, when they saw and knew once among the Aetolians and the Eleans, the Romane ensignes and their armour. At the first, the king would have had his men to retire: but afterwards seeing the skirmish was begun alreadie between the Aetolians and Triballi, (a kind of Illyrians) and perceiving that his souldiours also were put to it and charged, then the king also himselfe with his horsemen assailed the Cohort or Squadron of the Romanes. There his horse was with a dart shot through: and when he had once flung and cast the king forward over his head, there was a cruell and deadly fight on both sides, whiles the Romanes laid hard at the king, and the kings men protected and guarded his person. Himselfe fought tight manfully above the rest, considering he was forced on foote, to mainteine skirmish among the horsemen. But afterwards, by reason of the great disadvantage, and seeing many about him stricken downe and  wounded, he was caught away by his gard, mounted upon another horse, and so he fled and escaped. And the same day he encamped 5 miles from the citie of the Eleans. The next morrow he led all his whole power to a castle of the Eleans situate neere at hand, called Pyrgos: into which he had intelligence that a multitude of the country peisants for feare of being spoiled, were with

 their cattaile driven and retired. This confused, disordred, and naked companie he tooke captive at his comming, presently upon the first charge and onset that he gave: and with that bootie he licked himselfe whole againe, and salved the shameful diffeature that he had received at Elis. As he was busy in sharing the prizes, and dealing abroad the prisoners (and there were of men some foure thousand, and of cattaile of all kinds one with another twentie thousand head) there came a post out of Macedonie with newes, that one Eropus had surprised Lychnidum, by corrupting for a peece of money the constable of the Castle, and captaine of the garrison there: and that he held in possession certaine borrough townes of the Dassaretians, and still raised the Dardanians to rebellion. The king therefore gave over the Achaean and the Aetolian warres: yet leaving two thousand five hundred armed souldiers of all sorts, under the leading of Menippus  and Polyphantes for to defend his Allies, he went from Dymae through Achaia, Boeotia, and Beboeis; and upon the tenth day came to Demetrias in Thessalia. Where other messengers also encountred him, bringing tidings of a greater insurrection: namely, that the Dardanians had invaded Macedonie, and were maisters of Orestis, and came downe into the plaines of Aestraeum: and that the rumor was rise and went currant among the barbarous people that Philip was slain. The truth is, in that expedition wherein he fought at Sicyon with those that preyed and made spoile in the countrie, he was carried by his hote and stomack-full horse under a tree, and there against a bough or arme thereof that stood out, he chaunced to breake a corner of the crest of his helmet at one end. That peece chanced to be found by a certaine Aetolian, and was brought into Aetolia unto Scerdiletus, who knew by the marke that it was the kings helmet: whereupon the  fame of the kings death was divulged commonly abroad. After the departure of Philip out of Achaea, Sulpitius who was arrived with his navie at Aegina, went forward, and joyned with Astalus. The Achaei, not farre from Messene struck a fortunate battaile with the Aetolians and the Eleans. Attalus the king, and P. Sulpitius wintred in Aegina.
In the end of this year, T. Quintius Crispinus the Consul, when he had nominated for Dictator, L. Marcellus Torquatus, for to hold the solemn election of magistrats, and to set out the games, died of his hurt aforesaid. Some say he left his life at Tarentum: others in Campane. Thus both Coss. being slaine without any memorable battaile, (a thing never seene afore in any other warre) left the common-wealth desolate, and as it were cleane fatherlesse. Manlius the Dictatour chose for his Generall of the horse, C. Servilius, at that time Aedile curule. The Senate upon the very first  day that the LL. were assembled, gave order to the Dictatour, to exhibit the great Romane games, which M. Aemylius the Pretour of the cittie, whiles C. Flaminius and Cn. Servillius were Coss. had represented and vowed for 5 years. Then the Dictator, both set them forth and also vowed them for the next five yeares.
But considering there were two Consular armies without their Generals, so neere unto the enemies: the LL. of the Senate and the people set all other matters aside, and had a principall care above all things, to creat Consuls as soone as possibly they could: and such especially, whose vertue and valour should bee thought secured and safe enough, from Punicke craftinesse and deceitfull traines. For wheras during the time of all these wars, the overhastie heads and hote spirits of the Leaders, had bene ever daungerous and hurtfull to the state: so in this very yeare, the Consuls upon immoderate desire to fight with the enemie, was fallen and plunged into a jeopardie and mischiefe ere they were aware. Howbeit the immortall gods  had mercie and pittie upon the Romane name, in sparing the guiltlesse armies, and punishing the inconsiderate rashnesse of the Consuls, with the losse onely of their owne lives. And when the LL. of the Senate looked about every way, to see if they could spie out any to make Consuls of: above all others by many degrees, C.Claudius Nero excelled and was the onely Paragon. But a companion with him in the government they were likewise to seeke for. As for him, no doubt, they deemed him a singular man and a brave captaine: but yet more forward and egre, than the qualitie and occasions of this warre required, or to be matched with such an enemie as Anniball was. And therefore they thought good to joyne with him for his colleague, a sober, wise, and prudent man, who might temper and qualifie that fierce nature and disposition of his. Now M. Livius,  many yeares ago had bene upon his Consulship condemned by the judgement of the people. Which ignominie and reproach he tooke so grievously to the heart, that he departed into the countrie, and for many yeares togither, forbare not onely the cittie, but to converse and keepe companie with men. And almost eight years after his condemnation aforesaid, M. Claudius Marcellus, and M. Valerius Laevinus the Consuls, reduced him againe into the cittie. But hee used to

go in old and worne apparrell, letting the haire of his head and beard grow long, carrying in his  very countenance and array, the fresh and notable remembrance of the disgrace before received. But L. Veturius and P. Licinius the Censors, compelled him to cut his haire, and lay away his vile and unseemly weed, to come into the Senate, and to meddle againe in civill matters and affaires of State. And yet in so doing, he would never proceed farther, than to say Amen to other mens opinions, and speake but one word, yea and nay: or else nothing at all, but shew his mind by passing on his feet to one side or other. Vntill such time as a kinsman of his owne, M. Livius Macatus, being in trouble, and his name and honour called in question, caused him to stand up in the Counsel-house and deliver his opinion.
And when after so long discontinuance, he was seen and heard, once to speake, he turned every man his eye upon him, and ministred occasion also of speech in these tearmes, namely, That the people had done the man exceeding great wrong, yea  and hurt the common-weale much, in that during the time of so daungerous a warre, there had bene no imploiment of so worthie a person, either for his travaile and paines, or his advise and counsell. But to returne againe to the lords of the Senate: they knew well, that neither Q. Fabius, nor M. Valerius Laevinus, could possibly be joyned as companion in government to C. Nero: for as much as it was not lawfull that both should bee chosen out of the Nobles or Patritij. And the same was T. Manlius his case also. Besides that, as he once refused the Consuls rowme, when it was offered unto him, so no doubt hee would not accept thereof the second time if it were tendred upon him. But if they should sort Marcus Livius and C. Claudius togither, there would be an excellent couple of Consuls in deed. Neither stood the people against this overture, thus moved first by the lords of the Senate. The onely man in the whole cittie, that denied  it, was the very partie himselfe, unto whom this dignitie and honourable place was presented.
Who much blamed the levity and inconstancie of the citie: saying, that they had no pittie of him, when it was: namely, whiles he was in question and accused, and during the time of his trouble ware poore and simple garments: but now against his wil, they offred him a glittering white robe to stand for a Consulship. Thus (quoth he) they punish and depresse, thus they honour and advance the same persons. If they tooke me for a good and honest man, why condemned they me as they did, for a wicked one and a guiltie? If they found me naught and faultie, what cause have they to trust me with a second Consulship, who used the former so badly, which was committed unto me?
As he argued and made complaints in this wise, the lords of the Senate reproved him, and replied againe: setting before his eies the example of M. Furius, who in times past was called home our  of exile: and when the state was decaied and lying along, set it upright again in her former place and pristine glorie. And like as the curstnesse and rigor of parents, is to be mollified by patience, even so the hard and shrewd dealings of a mans countrie, is to be dulced and mitigated by bearing and sufferance. So they all stucke close togither, and chose M. Livius Consull, with C. Claudius. Three daies after, they went to the election of the Pretours. And there were created Pretours, L. Porcius Licinius, Caius Manlius, A. Hostilius, and C. Hostilius, both Catoes. When the election was finished, and the games celebrated, the Dictatour and Generall of the cavallerie surrendred their places. C. Terentius Varro was sent into Hetruria as Pro-pretor, to the end that out of that province, C. Hostilius should go to Tarentum, unto that armie which T. Quintius the Cos. had. That L. Manlius should go beyond sea as embassador, to see how the world went there: And  withall, considering that in summer, there were to be solemnized the famous games at Olympia, which were celebrated with a most frequent resort and meeting of all Greece, in case hee might safely and without impeachment of the enemie, hee should visite that great assembly: to the end that if he could light upon any Sicilians, who were fled and banished their countrie, or any cittizens of Tarentum, confined thither and sent away by Anniball, they should repaire home againe into their owne countries, and know, that whatsoever they were possessed of, before the warres began, the people of Rome would restore the same, and make good againe unto them.
Because it was like to be a right daungerous yeare, and no Consuls were invested fully in the common-weale, all men depended upon the Consuls elect, and were desirous that they should with all speed, cast lots for their provinces: and every man was willing to know aforehand, what  province each one should rule, and what enemie he was to deale withall. Moreover, a motion and speech there was in the Senat-house, that the Consuls should bee reconciled and made friends, and Q. Fabius Max. propounded that first. For there had beene notorious enmitie and variance betweene them aforetime and the calamitie of Livius made the same more grievous and unsupportable

 unto himselfe; in regard that he was persuaded, how in that miserie of his, hee was despised of his adversarie. Whereupon he grew to be more implacable of the twaine, and worse to be intreated.
There needs (quoth he) no reconciliation, neither is it materiall and to any purpose. For they will do all with more diligence and better spirit, who ever stand in feare that their adversarie and concurrent shall grow great and be advaunced by their default. Yet the authoritie of the Senate bare such a stroke with them, that they laid aside all malice and old grudge, and with one mind, consent, and counsell, administred the affaires of common-weale. Their provinces were not intermingled, nor their government extended into one anothers countrie, as in former yeares, but distant asunder and divided by the remote frontiers and farthest marches of Italie. For unto one of them wer assigned the Brutians and Lucans countrie against Anniball: unto the other,  Gallia against Asdruball; who as the rumour and bruite went, was come forward neere unto the Alpes. Of those two armies which were in Gallia and in Hetruria, he whose fortune was to go into Gallia, was to chuse which armie he would, and have besides, that other of the cittie. And he whose lot should be to go into the Brutians countrie, besides the new legions enrolled of cittizens, was to take unto him, the armie of whether Consull he list, of the former year. Also Quintius Fabius the Pro-consull, had the charge of that armie which the Consull refused: and his authoritie was renued for one yeare longer. As for C. Hostilius, whose province Tarentum they exchanged for Hetruria, they altered his province againe, to wit, Capua in stead of Tarentum. Vnto him was allowed that one legion which Fulvius the last yeare commaunded.
Now encreased their care every day more than other, concerning the comming of Asdruball  into Italie. And the Embassadours of the Massilians had brought newes first, that hee was passed over into Gallia: and that the minds of the Gaules were mightily cheered up by his comming, because the speech went, that he had brought a huge deale of gold with him, for to hire and wage souldiours for aid in the warres. Then afterwards, Sex. Antistius, and M. Retius, who were sent Embassadours backe with them from Rome, for to see whether it were so indeed, had made relation unto the Senate, that they had sent certaine of purpose guided by the Massilians, who by meanes of their especiall friends, the princes and lords of the Gaules, might learne the truth, and bring word backe accordingly. By whose report it was for certaine knowne, that Asdruball having levied alreadie a puissant armie, was minded the next spring to passe over the Alpes: and that there was nothing els staied him, but that it had beene done alreadie, saving onely the avenues  of the Alps which were closed up with the winter snow.
In the roume of M. Marcellus, L. Aquilius Paetus was created Augur, and so consecrated. And likewise Cn. Cornelius Dolabella was inaugurat or installed king of the sacrifices, in steed of Marcus Martius, who died two yeares before. In this very same yeere the citie was purged, and there was a generall survey and numbring of the people, by the Censors taken, P. Sempronius Tuditanus, and M. Cornelius Cethegus. There were reckoned and entred into the Censours bookes of cittizens, 137108. A smaller number by much ods, than before the war. It is recorded in the Annales, that this yeere first after that Anniball came into Italie, the Comitium was built over head and covered. And that the Romane Games were once renued by the Aediles of the chaire, Q. Metellus, and C. Servilius: and that the other Games called Plebeij, were renued two daies by Q. Manlius,  and M. Caecilius Metellus, Aediles of the Commons: who also offered three images, and set them up in the chappell of Ceres. And the solemne feastivall dinner of Iupiter was celebrated by occasion of those Games.
Then C. Claudius Nero, and M. Livius the second time, entered their Consulship: who (because whiles they were but Coss. elect, they had cast lots for their provinces) commaunded the Pretors to do the like. And to C. Hostilius fell the jurisdiction over the citizens, who had that likewise over strangers and forrainers; to the end, that the other three might go forth into their provinces. To A. Hostilius, was allotted Sardinia; to C. Manlius, Sicilia; and to L. Porcius Fraunce. In summe, the legions were in number three and twenty, divided into the provinces in this sort: to wit, the Consuls had two apeece, Spaine foure. The three Pretours for Sicilie, Sardinia, and Fraunce each of  them twaine. C. Terentius in Hetruria commaunded two. Q. Fulvius in the Brutians country, other two. Q. Claudius about Tarentum, and the Salentines conducted twaine: and Caius Hostilius Tubulus at Capua, one. Last of all, two were enrolled for the cittie. In the foure first legions, the people chose all the Colonels or Marshals, but to all the rest the Consuls sent new to make up the defect.

Before the Consuls went forth, there was a Novendiall sacrifice celebrated, because at Veij it  had rained stones from heaven. And after one prodigious sight was once minded and spoken of, there were (as it is commonly seene) others also reported: namely, that in Minturnae the temple of Iupiter, and the sacred grove ofThe same that (...). Marica was smitten with lightning: and at Atellae the wall and gate likewise, was blasted with fire from heaven. The men of Minturnae spake also of a more fearfull and terrible thing than that, to wit, that there ran a river of bloud in their very gate. Last of all, at Capua a Wolfe entered the gate at night, and werried and dismembred one of the watchmen.
These wonderfull signes were expiate with sacrificing of greater beasts, and a supplication was holden for one day, by vertue of a decree from the Prelates. Then was the Novendiall sacrifice once againe renued, because it was seene, that in Armilustrum it rained stones. And mens  minds were no sooner freed of one religious scruple, but they were troubled againe with another. For word was brought, that at Frusino there was an infant borne, as big as ordinarie a child is at foure yeeres of age. And the thing was not so straunge for the bignesse of the bodie, as for that it was borne doubtfull, whether it were male or female, like as two yeeres before, at Sinuessa. The wisards that were sent for out of Hetruria, said, that this of all other was a foule and filthie monster, and that it should bee had foorth of the dominion of Rome, and drowned in the deepe, so as it might touch no ground. Whereupon they put it alive into a coffer, and when they had carried it a good way into the sea, they flung it in. Moreover the Prelates made a decree, that certaine virgines in three companies, having nine apeece, should goe through the citie, and sing certaine canticles. And whiles in the temple of Iupiter Stator, the maidens were a learning their  song by heart, devised and framed in verse by Livius the Poet, the temple of queene Iuno in the Aventine hill, was stricken with lightening from heaven. And when the Aruspices had declared that this prodigious token touched the matrones and dames of the cittie, and that the goddesse was to be pacified with an oblation; they were (by vertue of an edict granted out by the Aediles of the chaire) called all into the Capitoll, as many as had any house, either in the citie of Rome, or within ten miles every way. And they among themselves chose five and twentie, into whose hands all the rest should put some small portion of their dowrie. Of which there was made a faire and large golden bason, for to be presented unto Iuno: and it was brought into the Aventine: and withall, the dames offered unto her purely and chastly their sacrifices. And streight after the Decemvirs proclaimed a day for another sacrifice of the same goddesse, the manner and  order where of was this: There were two white heifers led from the temple of Apollo into the citie, through the gate Carmentalis: after them were carried two Images, representing Iuno, made of Cypresse wood: then went there seven and twentie virgines in long side garments, chaunting hymns and songs to the honour of Iuno. These songs in verse were peradventure commendable, and passed for good with those rude and grosse wits then living: but if they should be rehearsed now adaies to our fine heads, they would seeme but simple stuffe, and composed without rime or reason. After this row of maidens, followed the Decemvirs deputed for sacred ceremonies, with chaplets and garlands of Baies, clothed in vesture and robes embrodered with purple. From the gate above named, they passed by the street Iugarius into the Grand place, and there rested this solemne pomp and train. Then these virgins taking hold of a cord, which went through all their hands, sung  a song, and daunced the measures, footing it artificially according to the note. From thence they went by the Tuscane street and Velabrum through the beasts market, and so forward into the Clivus Publicus, untill they came to the temple of Iuno. There the Decemvirs sacrificed two beasts, and the Images of Cypresse wood were offered and set up in the temple. When the gods and goddesses were duly pacified, the Consuls tooke musters more streightly and with greater precisenesse, than any man could remember in former yeeres. For both the feare of the warre was two-fold, by reason of a new-come enemie into Italie, and also there was lesse store of youth, out of which the souldiours should bee enrolled. Whereupon they compelled the inhabitants of the Colonies by the side, who were said to have an especiall immunitie of warfare (by a sacred law) for to find souldiors: and when they denied, and stood upon their priviledge of exemption, they set  them down a certain day, upon which every man should repair into the Senat, and shew what cards they had for their immunitie and vacation. Vpon the day appointed there presented themselves before the Senat these Communalties following, to wit, of Hostia, Alsia, Antium, Anxur, Minturnae Sinuessa, and Sena, from the upper sea. When every one of these States exhibited and read their

 charter of immunitie, there was none of all them dispensed with, but they of Antium and Hostia, in regard the enemie abode in Italie: and so the yong and serviceable men of those Colonies, were put to their oth and sware, that not above fortie of them should lie one night forth of the walls of their Colonie, so long as the enemie continued in Italie.
When all the LL. of the Senate were of opinion, that the Consuls were to goe foorth to the warres with all speed possible (for that both Asdruball was to bee encountred comming downe the Alpes, for feare he should sollicite the Gaules on this side the Alpes; and the Tuscanes likewise who hoped and looked every day for a change and alteration; and also Anniball was to bee kept occupied in his owne warre, that he might not goe forth of the Brutians countrie, and meet with his brother) onely Livius made some stay and drew backe, as reposing but small trust in the  armies belonging to his owne provinces. And as for his Colleague, well he wist, that hee had the choise of two notable Consular armies, and of a third, wherof Q. Claudius had the charge at Tarentum. Whereupon hee had made some motion of calling the Volones [or voluntaries] againe to their colours, and to serve in the warres. The Senate graunted the Consuls a large and free commission, both to make supplie from whence soever they would, by chusing out of all the armies whome they pleased, and to make exchaunge with whome they would, yea, and to draw out of the provinces whomsoever, according as they should thinke it good for the Commonweale. And all this was executed with the exceeding concord and unitie of the Consuls. The Volones were enrolled into the nineteenth and twentieth legions. Some authors have written, that Scipio sent unto Livius from out of Spaine, a strong power of auxiliaries for that warre, to wit,  eight thousand of Spaniards and Frenchmen, two thousand legionarie footmen, and eighteene hundred men of armes, partly Numidians, and partly Spaniards: and that Marcus Lucretius brought these forces by sea: also that C. Manlius sent out of Sicilie foure thousand archers and flingers.
The feare and troubles in Rome were much increased, by occasion of letters sent out of Gallia from L. Porcius the Pretour: pourporting thus much, That Asdruball was removed out of his wintering harbours, and was passing over the Alpes: that there were eight thousand Ligurians levied and readie in armes, to joyne with him so soone as ever he was come into Italie, unlesse some one were sent against the Ligurians, to prevent and keepe them otherwise busied with war. As for himselfe, he would with that weake armie that he had, go forward, as far as he thought he  might with safetie. These letters caused the Consuls to dispatch the musters in great hast, and to go forth into their provinces, sooner than they had purposed: with this intent, that both of them as well the one as the other, might in his severall province keepe the enemies occupied, and suffer them not to joyne, and lay their forces together. And verily the thing that helped them most in this their designement, was an opinion and persuasion that Anniball had: For albeit he was assured that his brother would that summer passe over into Italie, yet when he called to remembrance what a toile he had himselfe, and how much trouble and travaile he endured in the passage, one while of the river Rhodanus, another while of the mountaines of the Alpes, and how for the space of five moneths together, hee was forced not onely to fight with the people, but to struggle also with the difficulties of the places; he never looked that Asdruball could so easily and  so speedily passe over as he did: which was the cause that he dislodged out of his wintering places so much the latter. But Asdruball found better expedition, and all things more easie and speedie than either himselfe hoped for, or others expected. For the Arverni, and other nations (by their example) both of France and also about the Alpes, not only received and interteined him, but also accompanied him to the warre. Over and besides, as he conducted his armie by those avenues which were prepared and made open by his brothers journey, and had bene aforetime unpassable wilds and craggie rags: so against his comming, the Alpes were much more easie, by reason of twelve yeares continuall passage too and fro those waies: and the nature of the paisants more civile and tractable. For the people before, being not used to any strangers and aliens, nor accustomed to see passengers or travailers comming into those parts, were in manner unsociable,  savage and wild, and could not away with the societie of men. And at the first not knowing whither Anniball intended to go, they supposed that he came for to surprise their holds in caves and rocks, to take their fortresses, and to drive away their people and cattaile as booties. But afterwards, the fame that went of the Punick warre (wherewith now twelve yeeres Italie was plagued and vexed) had taught them sufficiently, that the Alpes were nothing but the way for the Carthaginians

to travaile through. And by this time well they knew, that two most puissant Cities and  States, devided and removed one from another by a great space of land and sea betweene, strived together and warred for their greatnesse and Soveraigntie. Vpon these occasions, I say, the Alpes were open and passable to Asdruball with ease. But looke what time he gained by speedie journeis, the same he lost againe by stay about Placentia, whiles he lay there in vaine, rather beseeging than assailing it. He was caried away with a persuasion, that the towne seated upon a plaine and champain countrie, might soone be forced and woon: and the great name that went of that noble Colonie, induced him to beleeve, that by the overthrow and rasing of that citie, he should strike a terror to all the rest. But in lying against that towne, he not only hindred himselfe much, but also stayed Anniball: who having heard that he was passed over the Alpes, and come downe into Italie, so much sooner than he looked for, was upon the point to dislodge out of his standing  wintering camp. For he considered and cast in his mind, not only what a long and tedious peece of worke it is to beseege and assault cities, but also well remembred how himselfe after his victorie at Trebia, assaied to force that colonie in his returne from thence, but might not prevaile.
The Consuls being departed from the citie, and gone divers wayes as it were for two sundrie warres at once, distracted mens minds with many cares and troublous imaginations, as well in remembrance of those losses and overthrowes, which they had received at Anniball his first comming: as also in thinking, what gods should be so propitious and favorable to the citie and empire of Rome, as to prosper the affaires of the State and Common-weale, at one time in both places. For until then, their successe had ben variable and alternative; and their prosperitie alwaies dilaied with semblable adversitie: and againe, their losses were recompensed with equall gaines. For when in Italie the Common-wealth of Rome went one way downeward headlong to the ground at Thrasymenus and Cannae; the fortunate warres another way in Spaine, set it upright againe. Afterwards, when in Spaine one overthrow and deffeature hapned in the neck of another, at what time as two noble Captaines were slaine, and two valiant armies in part destroyed; the happie and luckie hand in Sicilie and Italie, made up those breaches, and set the reeling state on foote againe. For why? the very distance of the place so farre remote (because one of the warres was mainteined in the farthest part of the world) yelded time and respite to breath themselves and gather new strength. But now, two warres at once are interteined within Italie, two most brave warriors and renowmed Captaines enclose betweene them the citie of Rome: all dangers come huddle together: all the heavie lode and whole burden beareth upon one and  the selfesame place: and no doubt, but whither of those two Captaines first shall get a victorie, he will within few daies after joyne his forces to the other. The fresh and lamentable remembrance also of the very last yeere, wherein two Consuls lost their lives, mightily affrighted the harts of the people. So as, in these perplexities and troubles of minde, they accompanied the Consuls as they departed and went into their severall provinces. It is moreover in some records found, that when Q. Fabius advised and warned M. Livinus being upon his journey toward the warres, not rashly and hand over head to give battaile to the enemie, before he knew his nature and qualities, he full of anger still and discontentments with his fellow citizens, made this answer, That so soone as ever he could have a sight of his enemies armie, he would fight: and being asked againe, why he would make such hast? Mary (quoth he) either shall I by victorie of mine  enemies win singular honor and renowme: or by the overthrow of my fellow citizens gaine some harts-ease and contentment, if not honest in all respects, yet at leastwise such as they have deserved.
Before that Claudius the Consull was come into his province, C. Hostilius Tubulus accompanied with certaine cohorts lightly appointed, encountred Anniball as he led his armie and marched by the utter confines and marches of the territorie of Larinum, which leadeth to the Salentines: and charging upon his disordred armie, put them to great trouble, slew foure thousand of his men, and caried away nine ensignes. Q. Claudius who had certaine garizons planted in all the cities of the Salentines country, hearing of the enemies comming, had removed out of his wintering camp: and therefore Anniball, because he would not fight with two armies at  once, by night dislodged out of the territorie of Tarentum, and withdrew himselfe into the Brutians country: and Claudius turned with his armie to the Salentines againe. Hostilius in the way to Capua, met with the Consull Claudius at Venusia. There, out of both armies, the Consull picked forth fortie thousand choise footemen, and 2500 horsemen, for to warre with Anniball.

 The rest of the forces Hostilius was commaunded to leade unto Capua, and to deliver them to Q. Fulvius the Proconsull.
Anniball having assembled his forces from all parts, as well those which he had in camp during winter time, as those that lay in garison in the Brutians country, came as farre as Grumentum in the territorie of the Lucanes, upon hope to recover the townes, which for feare, had revolted to the Romanes. Vnto the same place the Romane Cos. making out his espials before to discover and cleere the waies, marched from Venusia, and about a mile and halfe from the enemie, encamped himselfe. The Carthaginians had fortified themselves, and cast a trench close in a manner to the walls of Grumentum: and betweene the camp and the Romanes was some halfe mile. A plaine lay in the midst: and on the left hand of the Carthaginians, and the right  hand of the Romanes all along betweene, the hils overlooked them, bare and naked, and of neither part suspected, by reason that they had no wood growing upon them, nor any lurking places to hide an ambush in. Into the plaine betweene they used to put out certaine bands and companies from the Corps de guard of both sides, and made light skirmishes not worth the talking of. And it seemed that the drift of the Romane Consull was to keepe the enemie in, and not to suffer him to go his waies. But Anniball desirous to be gone, entred the field with all his power in order of battaile. Then the Consull borrowing a little of his enemies cunning, for that in so open hils there was lesse feare and suspicion of ambush, gave order that five Cohorts of horsemen, reenforced with as many bands of footemen, should by night get over those hils, and in the vallies behind, sit downe closely: with direction to T. Claudius Asellus a colonell of footemen,  and P. Claudius a captaine of allies whom he sent to conduct them, at a certaine time to arise out of ambush, and to charge the enemie: himselfe by day light led forth all his whole power as well foote as horse into the field. Within a while after, Anniball likewise put forth the signall of battaile: and all the camp over they set up a cry, running all about to their armour and weapons. Then footemen and horsemen both rushed avie out of the gates who could be soonest foorth; and scattered as they were all over the plaine, made hast to the enemies. Whom when the Consull saw thus disordered, he commaunded C. Aurunculeius a Tribune or Colonel of the third legion, to put out the Cavallerie belonging to that legion, for to charge the enemie with all the violence he could: for that like sheepe they were so spred over the plaine without all forme and fashion, and might be surprised, discomfited, and beaten downe, before they could be  brought into array and set in order of battaile. Anniball himselfe was not come forth of the campe, when hee might heare the noyse of them fighting together and hard at it: and excited with this tumult, hee led in great hast all the rest of his forces against the enemie. By this, the vaward and forefront of his battaile was frighted with the horsemen of the enemies: yea and the first legion of the Infanterie and the Cavallerie of the right wing began to charge. The Carthaginians disordered as they were, fought at a venture, as they chanced to meete either with footemen or horsemen. The conflict grew hoter, by reason of new supplyes and fresh succours, and encreased still by the number of them that continually ran out to the medley. And surely Anniball, notwithstanding this tumult and troublesome feare, had set and marshalled his men in good order as they were fighting (which had bene no easie  thing to do, but that the armie was of old souldiours, and their captaine well experienced and beaten to it) if it had not bene for the shout of the cohorts and bands above-said, which they heard at their backs, as they from the hils behind ran downe upon them; and set them in great feare, least that they would thrust in betweene them and home, and so shut them out of their camp. Hereupon I say they were affrighted, and began to flye here and there. But the slaughter was the lesse, because the camp was neere, and farre they had not to run thither and save themselves in this their fearefull fright. For the horsemen plaid upon their backs still, and gave not over: the cohorts from the open mountaines ran easily downe the hill, and charged crosse upon their sides and flanks. Howbeit, there were slaine more than eight thousand men, and above 700 taken prisoners: nine ensignes woon and caried away: of Elephants also (whereof there was little  or no use) in a sodaine and tumultuarie skirmish foure were killed, and two gotten alive. Of Romane and Allies, there dyed two hundred. The next day after, Anniball stirred not. The Romane Consull having brought his armie forth into the field, and seeing none to come abroad and make head against him, commaunded the slaine enemies to be disarmed and despoiled, the spoiles to be gathered up, and the bodies of his owne men to be brought together into a

place and buried. For certaine dayes after continually, he preassed so hard at the camp gates, that he wanted but little of entring thither with banner displaied. In so much as Anniball at the third watch of the night, leaving behind him many fires burning, and divers tents standing, on that side especially which looked toward the enemies, and some few Numidians, to make a shew upon the Rampiar and at the gates; dislodged, and purposed to goe into Apulia. The next morning by day light, the Romane armie embatrailed, approached the trench and rampiar. The Numidians of set purpose shewed themselves in the gates and upon the rampiar: and when they had a good while dallied thus and plaied with the enemie, they mounted on horsbacke, and spared no horse-flesh untill they had overtooke their fellowes. The Consull perceiving that all was quiet within the campe, and seeing not so much as those few appeare any where, who in the morning betimes had walked their stations, sent foorth two horsemeninto  the campe as espials. After he understood for certaine that all was safe, and the coasts cleare, he commaunded his ensigns to make an entrie. And staying no longer there, than whiles his souldionrs ranne up and downe to pill and spoile, hee sounded the retreat: and long before night, brought his armie back again. The next morrow after, he set forward by the dawning of the day, and with long journeis, following his enemies by the voice of the countrie, and tracing them by their footsteps, hee overtooke them not far from Venusia. There also was a skufling skirmish between them, and not so few as two thousand Carthaginians slaine. From thence Anniball ever marched by night, and journied through the mountaines, because he would give his enemie no vantage of fight, untill he came to Metapontum. From whence Hanno (for hee was captaine of the garrison there) was sent with some fewe in his traine into the Brutians countrie, to levie a newarmie. And Anniball after he had joyned those forces to his owne, returned againe to Venusia, by the same way that he came from thence; and so forward he marched to Cannusium. Nero never left the enemie, but was readie to tread on his heeles, and as he marched himselfe toward Merapontum, hee had sent for Q. Fulvius to repaire into the Lucanes countrie, because those parts should not be disfurnished of defence.
In this mean space, there were foure French horsemen, and two Numidians, sent to Anniball with letters from Asdruball, after he was removed from the siege of Placentia: who having travailled in manner all the length of Italie, through the mids of the enemies, whiles they follow after Anniball in his retire unto Metapontum, missed of their waie, and light upon Tarentum: where they were encountred by the forragers of the Romans that raunged about the fields, and by  them were brought before Q. Claudius the Propretor. At the first they entertained him with flim flams, with doubtfull and intricate answeres: but when the feare of the racke and other tortures, had forced them to tell a truth, they confessed, that they had letters about them to deliver from Asdruball to Anniball. With those letters sealed as they were, they were committed unto L.Virginius a Colonell, for to be conveied unto Claudius the Consul. And two troupes or Corners besides of Samnite horsemen were sent to guard them. So soone as they were come vnto the Consull, and the letters read by an enterpretour, and some examination taken of these captives: then Claudius considering that the common-weale was not now in that good case, nor the occasion such, that each governour needed no more, but to make warre by the ordinarie course of commission, within the compasse and limits of his owne province, with the helpe of his owne armie  alone, and against an enemie assigned unto him by the Senate: but that some unlooked-for adventures must be enterprised, some new designements and unexpected put in execution, which when they are begun and attempted, might make no lesse wonder and feare among their owne friends, than terror among the enemies: and being once performed and done, might turn the former fear into as great joy and gladnes; sent the letters of Asdrubal to the Senat at Rome: and withall, himselfe acquainted the lords of the Senate what he entended to do. And forasmuch as Asdruball wrate unto his brother to meet him in Vmbria, hee advised them to send for the legion at Capua to Rome, to take musters also at Rome, and to oppose that armie of the cittie, against the enemie at Narnia. Those were the contents of his letters to the Senate. Hee dispatched likewise messengers before, through the territories of the Larinates, Marrucines, Ferentines, and  Pretutians, (by whom he meant to lead his armie) for to give notice, that all the inhabitants of those parts, should out of their villages and good towns, provide and bring forth victualles into the high waies, for to refresh his soldiors; also to come with their cart-horses, draught-oxen, and other beasts for carriage, togither with waines and carts, that the wearied souldiours might ease

 themselves thereby. Himselfe out of his whole armie, as well of citizens as allies, chose foorth the floure and most picked men of all, to the number of fix thousand foot, and one thousand horse, and gave it out openly, that hee minded to surprise the first cittie that hee came next unto in the Lucanes countrie, and withall, the garrison of Carthaginians that lay there: and therfore commaunded them to be readie for the journey and expedition. Thus when he had set forward in the night, he turned his way into Picenum. And the Consull made no more ado, but with long journeies highed him as fast as he could, and led his armie directly to his colleague, leaving Q. Tatius his Lieutenant, to guard and commaund the campe.
At Rome, they were no lesse terrified and troubled, than they were two yeare before, at what time as the Carthaginians were encamped before the wals and gates of the cittie. And men wist  not well, what to make of this adventurous and audacious journey of the Consull, whether they should praise or dispraise it. And it seemed that they would measure it and report therof according to the event, than which surely, there is nothing more unjust and unequall.
But thus they whispered, That the camp was left with an armie, and without their General, neere unto the enemie Anniball, yea and the same guelded of all the strength and floure thereof: that the Consull pretended an expedition into the Lucanes countrie, when indeed he went toward Picenum and Gallia; leaving the campe by no one thing more safe and secure, than by the errour and mistaking of the enemie, who is altogither ignorant, that the Generall is gone from thence, and part of the forces with him. But where would they be then, and in what taking should the campe be, in case that were knowne abroad; or if Anniball would either with his whole armie follow after Nero, being gone with no more than fix thousand? or assault the campe, left as it were for a prey unto him, without forces, without conduct, and without the fortune and good lucke of the Generall to protect it? The old defeatures received in this warre, the fresh remembrance of two Consuls slaine but the last yeare, encreased mens feare. All which misfortunes hapned, when there was in Italie but one captaine Generall, and one Angle armie of the enemies. Now, of one warre of the Carthaginians there are made twaine: and two Annibals (as a man would say) be both at once in Italie, right valorous and renowmed warriours. For even Asdruball also, was Amilear his sonne as well as Anniball, as valiant and redoubted a captaine every way: as who for so many yeares togither in Spaine, hath bene exercised in the Romane warres, and borne the name of atchieving a twofold victorie, and diffeating two armies, with two most noble and famous  commaunders: and as for expedition and speed in his voiage out of Spaine, and for raising the nations of Fraunce up in armes, he may make his boast much more truly than Annibal himselfe. For even in those very places, where Anniball had lost the greater part of his souldiors, with hunger and cold, (which kind of death of all others is most miserable) this Asdruball hath levied a power of armed men. Moreover, they that knew Spaine well, and the affaires which had passed there, said besides, That he had not to deale with Nero, as with a warriour whom he knew not alreadie; for why? he had when it was, made a child of Nero, by a good token, That when Asdruball was by chaunce in a wood, and could not get out, was put to his shifts; but whiles he trifled out the time with Nero in booking deceitfull conditions and capitulations of peace, hee shewed him a cousening Carthaginian cast, gave him the faire slip, and escaped out of his hands.  And to conclude, in all their discourses at Rome, they magnified every thing on the enemies part above all truth, and debased all their owne meanes of helpe beneath all reason: such was their feare, which interpreteth and construeth all to the worst.
Nero,The speech of Nero to his souldiours. when he had now gained so much ground, and was gone so farre from the enemie, as it had not mattered much if his designes had bene revealealed and made known unto him, for any danger that might ensue therof; called his soldiers before him, and spake some few words to this or the like effect. Never was there designment (quoth hee) of any Generall in the field, in outward shew more dangerous, in deed and truth more safe and secure, than this of mine. I lead you to a certaine and assured victorie, even to that warre, unto which my colleague would not go before the Senate had allowed him to his full contentment, a greater power both of foot and horse, and the  same better set out and more furnished, than if he should have gone against Anniball himselfe: and therefore whatsoever small poise and addition of forces you bring thereto, you shall sway thereby the whole, and as it were weigh downe the ballance. For when the enemies readie embattailed to fight, shall heare (and before that time, I will take order I trow, that they shall not heare) that another Consull and another armie is come, no doubt the day will be ours, and they

shall yeeld us the victorie. For it is a fame and name onely, that fighteth the field and determineth  battailes. And small matters many times carrie away the game, and cause mens minds both to stoupe for feare, and to rise with hope. And verily, of a well foughten field you are they that shall reap the fruite and gaine the glorie. For alwaies it is seene, that a little helpe that commeth last, is more than all besides, and seemeth to effect the whole. And you see your selves, with what concourse, with what admiration, with what affectionate favour all men doe entertaine and regard you by the way. And in very truth, as they marched along in their journey, it was a world to see, how both men and women flocked out of all the villages of the countrey to see them, how they sorted themselves into companies and degrees to welcome them, and how as they passed as it were in a lane through them, they made vowes in their name, they poured out their praiers in their behalfe, and dealt praises among them: calling them the very guard and defence of the Commonweale, the saviours and redeemers of Rome and the Romane Empire: acknowledging that the lives and liberties of themselves and their children, lay in their right hands, and depended upon the force of their arms: praying to all the gods and goddesses, and to all the holy halows of heaven, to vouch safe them a luckie journey, a fortunate fight, and a speedie victorie over their enemies: wishing heartily, that they might be bound and condemned (as it were) to pay and performe their vowes, which in their name they had undertaken and promised: desiring earnestly, that as now they went along, and accompanied them with carefull minds for feare of the perill which they went unto, so after few daies they might meet with them upon the way with joifull hearts, as they returne with triumph for their victorie. Every man for himselfe in particular invited them friendly, offered them franckely, entreated and besought them importunately, that all things whatsoever  they stood in need of, either for themselves or their beasts, they would receive at his hands especially, as being readie to affourd them all most liberally, heapefull, and with the better. The souldiors againe, for very modestie strove to take no more than was very needfull and necessarie, no stay they would make with any, nor one jot depart from their colours. Their meat they tooke by the way as they went, journeying night and day, and scarce allowing their bodies rest and sleepe to content their weake nature that looked for it. Now had Nero sent afore-hand to his brother Consull certaine courriers, to give him advertisement of his comming, and to know again from him his mind, whether he should come openly or secretly, by day time or by night, and lodge in one campe with him, or in another apart by himselfe. Livius his advise was, and he thought it the better of the twaine, to enter into his campe, closely in the night season, and had given a watchword, and made it knowne throughout all the campe, that every Marshall and Colonell should lodge a Marshall or Colonell, every Centurion entertaine a Centurion, every knight or man of armes receive a knight or horseman, and every footman take unto him a footman into his pavilion and cabbin. For it was not expedient that the campe should bee enlarged and set out wider, for feare that the enemie might take knowledge of another Consuls comming: and so much the more easily might many of them be bestowed in the streight roume of their pavilions, because the armie of Claudius had brought in manner nothing with them in this expedition, save their armour onely. Moreover, in the very way as they came, the companie was well mended and much encreased, by many voluntaries that offered themselves willingly of their owne accord, as well old souldiours, such as had served out their yeeres, as young and lustie men: whom Claudius perceiving  so to strive for to have their names entre
, if he saw them personable and strong of bodie, and like to do good service, had enrolled into the muster book. The other Consull lay encamped before(...). Sena, and Asdruball some halfe mile from him. And therfore Nero, being now approched and come neere, sat him downe close among the mountaines, because hee would not put himselfe within campe before night. And when they were come thither, they were welcommed every man according to his degree, by them of their owne place and calling, and brought into their tents and pavillions, and with a generall joy of all, friendly entertained as their loving guests. The next day following they assembled together to counsell: at which meeting, L. Porcius Licinius the Pretour was present: who was himselfe encamped close unto the Consuls leaguer. Hee before their comming, by leading his armie over the high places, and one while keeping the  narrow streights of the forrest, to impeach and stop the passages, another while charging upon the flancke and sides, or els upon the backe and taile of the enemie, had by all the devises and policies of warre, mocked him and kept him play. This man, I say, was at the foresaid counsell. Many men there were of opinion, that the day of battell should be deferred for a time, whiles Nero

 might have some few daies respite, both to refresh his souldiours, wearied with long travaile and much watching, and also to know the qualitie somewhat better of his enemie.
Nero not onely persisted still to persuade, but also began most earnestly to intreat, That they would not by long delay make that designe of his to seeme rash and daungerous, which speedinesse in execution had made safe and secure. Considering, that whiles Anniball, upon ignorance and error (which is not like to continne long with him) lay still asleepe and benummed, neither once thought upon it, to assaile the campe left without a Generall, nor put himselfe upon the way, to make pursute after mee; now before hee once stirre, I may (quoth hee) defeat the armie of Asdruball, and returne againe into Apulia. But hee that by deferring still, giveth the enemie time and respite, betraieth as much as lieth in him, the campe unto Anniball, and  laieth the way open for him into Gallia, to joine with Asdruball at his good leasure and pleasure. Nay (quoth he) the signall of battell must bee given foorthwith, and wee must into the field. We must, I say, take the vauntage, and make the best of the error and ignorance of our enemies both absent there, and present here: that neither they with Anniball may know that they are to deale with fewer; nor these again be ware, that they are to fight with more in number, and stronger in power. Thus the counsell brake up, and the signall of battell was put forth, and presently they went into the field. The enemies were alreadie advaunced in battell array, and stood with displaied ensignes. The onely stay of joining in fight was this, That Asdruball riding out with some few horsemen before the ensignes, chaunced to marke some old targuets of his enemies which hee had not as yet seene, and their horses more lanke and leane, than earst before. And (as hee guessed)  the number also was greater than ordinarie and usuall. Suspecting therefore, that which was indeed, hee sounded the retreat in all hast; and sent out presently to the river where they used to water, to see if they might either light upon some, and catch them prisoners, or at leastwise take good markes by their eie, whither any of them haply were higher coloured, or looked sunburnt, presently upon their late travell. Also he gave them commaundement to ride aloofe about their campe, and to spie whether the rampier were enlarged or set out farther in any place, and to listen attentively whether the trumpet sounded single or double within the camp. When all other circumstances besides were related in order affirmatively, onely the not enlarging of the camp, put them by their hint, and gave the occasion that they were beguiled. Two severall campes they were, like as before the comming of the Consull: the one belonging to M. Livius, the other to L. Porcius. And in neither of them were the rampiers and trenches set out any jot, whereby they might put up more tents, and quarter themselves in larger roume. But this one thing troubled this old experienced captaine, and acquainted so well as he was with the Roman enemies, that his espials brought word, how in the Pretors campe they sounded the trumpet once, and in the Consuls twise. For surely that was an evident argument, that two Consuls were there. And in thinking how the other Consull had departed from Anniball, and given him the slip, he mightily tormented himselfe. And he could not once suspect and imagine that, which was indeed the truth, namely, that Anniball was deluded and mocked in a matter of so great moment, as to bee ignorant what was become of the Generall, or of the armie, to which he lay so close and neere encamped. Surely (thought he) and without all question, he hath received no small foile and overthrow, and in this  fright dareth not make after and follow the enemie. Nay hee feared much, least all were lost and gone, and that he should not come time ynough to helpe and succour him: and that the Romans had gotten alreadie the same good hand in Italie, which they had before in Spaine. Otherwhiles he was persuaded, that his letters never came to Anniball his hands, that they were intercepted, and so the Consull made hast to prevent him, and give him the foile by the way. Being perplexed with these carefull cogitations, hee caused the fires to bee put out, and at the signall given at the first watch, to trusse up bag and baggage, and to dislodge, and be gone. In this fearefull hast, and nightly tumult, the guides whiles they were slenderly looked unto, and small heed was taken of them, one of them sat down and rested close in a secret lurking hole which he had before destined in his mind; the other waded over the river Metaurus, through the sourds that he was  well acquainted with, and so got away and made an escape. So the armie left at randon without their guides, first wandered over the fields, and then diverse of them being wearie and sleepie with overwatching, laid them downe along here and there, and left their colours with few about them. Asdrubal commaunded them to march along the banke of the river, and to follow it, untill the daylight might direct them the right way: and so going a compasse in and out according to the winding

reaches and crancks of the river, wandered a great while, and gained but a smal ground forward. Now when day light once appeared, he purposed to spie out the first place for convenient passage and there to get over. But finding no fourds, by reason that the farther it was from the sea, the higher were the banckes from the water that kept in the river, hee spent all the live-long day, and gave the enemie time to follow after him. And first Claudius Nero came with all the horsemen, then Porcius followed hard after with the vaunt-coutriers, and light armed footemen. Whiles they made offer to charge their enemies in their march, every way, and plaid still upon them, in so much as now Asdruball leaving to journey forward (where in he seemed rather to flee than march) was desirous to take a little hil along the river side, and there to encamp and fortifie: Livius was come also with all the maine power of footemen, so armed and so orderly appointed and marshalled, as they were not only provided to march in journey, but readie also presently to  give battaile. But when they were all joyned together, and aranged in battaile array, Claudius had the leading of the right wing, Livius commaunded the left, and the Pretour tooke the charge and conduct of the maine battaile. Asdruball seeing no other remedie but to fight, never fortified his camp; but in the fore-front before the vaward, and in the very mids, placed his Elephants: about them in the left wing he opposeth the French against Claudius; not so much trusting upon them, as supposing verily that the enemie was afraid of them: and in proper person he tooke up the right wing against Livius for himselfe and the Spaniards, in whom (being old beaten souldiours) he reposed his most hope. The Ligurians in the mids were bestowed behind the Elephants. But the battaile was rather drawne out in length, than stretched forth in breadth. The Frenchmen were defended with the hill that bare out over them. That front which  the Spaniards kept, encountred with the left wing of the Romanes. And all the battaile of the right side, which bare out from the conflict, stood still and fought not. The hill that was opposite against them, was the cause that neither afront, nor aflanke, they could charge upon the enemie. But betweene Livius and Asdruball there was an hote fight begun alreadie, and cruell bloudshed on both sides. There were both the Generall captaines: there was the greater part of the Romanes, as well foote as horse: there were the Spaniards, old and experienced souldiours, skilfull also in the Romane manner of fight: there were the Ligurians, a tough nation, and hardie in fight. Against this battailon were the Elephants turned, who at the first shock and onset troubled and disordered the vaward, yea and began to force the ensignes to geve ground. But after upon the noyse that grew greater, and the battaile that waxed hoter, they began to be unruly, and  travers betweene both battailes, as it were doubtfull to whether side they belonged, much like to ships left hulling and floting without their pilots and steeres-men. Then Claudius cried out eftsoones to his souldiours: To what end, quoth he, made we such post hast, and tooke so long a journey? But seeing that he laboured in vaine to avance his banners and mount up against the hill opposite unto him, and perceiving that way how it was impossible to come unto the enemie and to enter upon him, he drew forth certaine cohorts out of the right wing where he saw they were liker to stand still than to fight, and wheeled about behind the enemies battaile, and so unwares not only to the enemies, but also to his owne men, he charged upon the left flanck of the enemies: and he bestirred himselfe so nimbly, that when he had shewed himselfe on the sides, presently he played upon their backs; in such sort, that now on all hands, affront, behind, and on  their flancks, downe went the Spaniards and Ligurians, and were hewen in peeces, yea and the execution reached to the very French. There, with them was least ado, and smallest fight of all: for a great many of their fellowes had abandoned their colours, and being slipt away in the night, lay asleepe all over the fields: and such as were there, weery with travaile and watching (as having bodies that of all things can not away with labour and paines taking) were skarce able to beare their corselets on their backs. Besides, now it was high noone: and what with drought and heate together, they stood gaping for aire, and yeelded their bodies agood either to be massacred, or taken captive. As for the Elephants, there were more of them killed by the hands of governors and guiders that sate upon them, than by the enemie that fought against them. For their manner was to have about them a carpenters chissell and a mallet, and when the beasts began  once to rage and to run upon their owne fellowes, their maisters would set the said chissell betweene their eares, even in the very joynt where the nape of the neck and the head meet together, and with his mallet to drive it as hard as he could: this was found to be the readiest and most speedie way to kill so mightie and huge a beast, when they were past all hope to rule them

 and keepe them in order. And the first inventor and practiser of this feat was Asdrubal, a famous and memorable captaine, as in many other respects, so especially for this battaile. He it was that held out to the end, exhorting his souldiours to fight, fighting also himselfe, and adventuring all dangers: he it was, that when his men were weery and drew back (by reason of long toyle and labour) incensed them againe, one while by faire words and intreatie, another while by sharpe checks and rebukes: he reclaimed them againe when they were running away: he renewed the medley in divers places when it slaked and gave over. And at the very last, when he saw evidently that the enemie had the honor of the day, because he would not remaine alive after so great an armie diffeated that followed his standard, and were induced by the reputation and name that went of him, he set spurres to his horse, and rode among the Squadrons of the Romane  horsemen; and there, as beseemed Amilcars sonne, and Annibals brother, fighting right manfully, was slaine. Never during the time of this warre in one field were there so many enemies killed: and it seemed now that for losse of captaine and overthrow of armie, they might well cry quittance with them for the diffeature at Cannae. Slaine there were 56000 enemies, 6400 taken prisoners: and a rich bootie and pillage gained of all sorts, besides gold and silver. Moreover, there were recovered of Romane citizens above foure thousand, who had bene taken prisoners, and were among the enemies. That comfort they had to make amends for the souldiours that died in this battaile: for they woon not the victorie without bloudshed in this field, wherein to the number almost of eight thousand Romanes and allies together, lost their lives.
And the conquerours themselves had so much their fill of bloud and slaughter, that  the next morrow, when word was brought unto Livius the Consull, that divers Cisalpine Gaules, and Ligurians, which either were not at the battaile, or escaped out of the execution, and were going away in one companie all together, without a certaine leader, without ensignes, without any order or commaund, and might all be put to the sword and utterly destroyed, if there were but one cornet of horsemen sent out after them, Nay quoth he, let some remaine alive to tell the newes both of our enemies losse and ruine, and of our owne vertue and valour. And Nero the very next night after the battaile, marched with more speede backward, than he came thither, and within sixe daies returned againe so farre as to his standing leaguer, and the enemies. All the way as he marched, he was not in deed so resorted unto and frequented by so many men, by reason that there went no harbengers or messengers before: but his comming was  welcommed, with so great gladnesse and mirth, that for very joy, the people were welneere besides themselves. As for Rome, it cannot be uttered and expressed in words sufficiently, how men were affected the one way or the other: neither how pensive the citie was in doubtfull expectation of the event, nor how joyous and jocund againe, upon the newes and tidings of the victorie. For never one day (after the rumour once was blowne thither, that Claudius the Consull was gone forth in his expedition) from the sun-rising unto the setting, departed either Senatour out of the Counsel-chamber, from attendance upon the magistrates, or the people out of the common-hall. The dames of the cittie, because other helpe they could yeeld none, betooke themselves to their beads and devotions, and in every Church went up and downe, and plied all the gods with praiers, with vowes, and humble supplications. As the cittie was thus perplexed and in  suspence; first there came some flying newes, that two horsemen of Narnia were come out of the battaile, and returned to the campe which lay to guard and keepe the streights and passages of Vmbria, who had brought word thither, that the enemies were defeated. At the first, they rather lent their eares to heare these tidings, than bent their minds to entertain the same; as being greater than they might in heart conceive, and more joyfull than they could assuredly beleeve: and the exceeding swiftnes of the rumor hindered the credit therof, because it was reported withall, that the battel was fought but two daies before. Then were letters broght from L. Manlius Acidmus, sent out of the campe, which confirmed the arrivall of those horsemen of Narnia. Those letters were brought through the common place, unto the Tribunall of the Pretour: wherupon the lords of the Senate were sent for out of the Councel-house. But the people kept such a thrusting  and thronging about the doore of the Senat, that the messenger could not passe thither, but was haled and pulled by the people, questioning with him, and calling hard upon him, that the letters should be read at the market crosse, and in the Rostra, before they were opened in the Senat. But at the last, they were restrained by the magistrates and caused to void, and hardly could the joy bee conteiued among so unruly people, who had no measure nor rule of their affections.

Well, the letters were first red in the Senate, and then in the assembly of the people: and there, according to the divers dispositions of men, some tooke joy and contentment of mind, as upon a certaintie: others would give no credit, before they either heard the messengers speake directly from the Consuls, or saw their letters. After this, word came, that there were Embassadours themselves at hand. And then in deed, there ran to meet them, of all sorts, young and old, euery one desired to be the first, to see and to heare these so glad tidings. And they went out so far as the bridge Milvius, and all the way along, was full of people. These embassadors or messengers, were L. Veturius Philo, P. Licinius Varus, Q. Cecilius Metellus. Who being accompanied with people of all degrees and qualities, that flocked about them, came as farre as to the common place: some questioned with themselves, others enquired of their traine and retinue, what newes, and how the world went. And as any one had caught an end from them, that the armie and captaine Generall  of the enemies was slaine, or the Romane legions safe, and the Consuls haile and well, hee would immediatly impart his joy unto others. Much ado had they to come into the Curia, and more ado there was, to keep out the multitude, that they were not mingled among the lords of the Senate. But at last the letters were red in the Senate. From thence were the Embassadours brought into the generall assembly of the people. And L. Veturius after hee had red the letters, explained himselfe from point to point in order, how every thing was done, with great applause; and afterwards, with a generall shout of all the assembly, who hardly could conceive in their minds so great joy. Then they ran divers waies, some to the temples of the gods to render thanks, others to their owne houses, to communicate with their wives and children so luckie and fortunate tidings. And the Senate decreed a solemne procession for three daies togither, forasmuch  as M. Livius and C. Claudius the Consuls, with the safetie of the legions had vanquished the enemies, killed their Generall, and put their armie to the sword. This procession C. Hostilius the Pretour, published in the open assembly of the people: and it was celebrated and solemnized both by men and women. All the temples for three daies fully, were likewise replenished with the one sex and the other. For the Matrones and Dames of the citie, in their best apparrell, togither with their children, yeelded praise and thankes to the immortall gods, as if now they had beene freed from all feare, and the warre come to a finall end for ever. This victorie altered the very slate and course of the common-weale, so as from that time forward, as in time of setled peace, men durst make contracts, buy and sell, borrow and lend, yea and pay debts to their creditors.
C. Claudius the Consull, so soone as he was entred into the campe againe, caused the head of  Asdruball (which he had preserved with great care and brought with him) to bee throwne out before the Corps de guard and stations of the enemies, and that the Affricane captives, should be shewed bound as they were in chaines: and two of them to be sent loose unto Anniball, to declare and recount in order, how everything hapned. Anniball having at once received this double blow, mourning as well for the publicke losse of the state, as for the calamitie hapned in his owne house, fetched a deepe sigh (by report) and said: Ah, I see well the hard fortune of Carthage. And dislodging from thence, because he would bring togither all his forces (which being dispearsed asunder, he was not able to hold and maintaine) into the utmost angle of Italie, (the Brutiens countrie) hee brought thither as well the Metapontines, even the whole state of them, who abandoned their owne townes and citties, as  also the Lucanes, as many as were subject unto him, and under his obedience.




THE XXVIII. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the eight and twentith Booke.
THE prosperous affaires in Spaine, under the conduct of Syllanus the Lieutenant of Scipio, and L. Scipio his brother, atchieved against the Carthaginians: as also the acts performed by Sulpitius the Pro-consull, and Attalus the king of Asia [the lesse] in the quarrell and behalfe of the Aetolians, against Philip king of the Macedonians, are reported and set downe [in this  booke.] When there was a triumph decreed and granted unto M. Livius and C. Claudius Nero the Consuls: Livius, because he had performed the exploit in his owne province, rode in a chariot drawne with foure steeds: and Nero, because hee came into the province of his colleague, to helpe forward the victorie, rode after him mounted on horsebacke: Howbrit even thus, in this habit and manner of triumph, he carried the more glorie, port, and reverence: for to say a truth, in this war hee had done more good service than his brother Consull. The fire went out in the chappell of Vesta, by negligence of a virgin, that had the keepingand tending thereof, and looked no better unto it. The said virgin was well whipped. P. Scipio finished the warre in Spaine against the Carthaginians, when it had continued foureteen yeares: and in the fist yeare after that he went from the cittie of Rome. And having disseized the enemies quite of the possession of Spaine, he recovered it wholly for the Romanes. From Taracon hee losed, with two barkes, and sailed into Africke unto Syphax king of the Numidians, with whom he concluded a league. Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, sat there with him at one table, and they  supped togither. He exhibited a game and pastime of sword-playing at new-Carthage, in the honor of his father and uncle: and the same was not performed by common fencers and sword-plaiers hired thereto, but by such as either for the honour of their captaine, or to determine some controversie, gave defiance one to the other, and entred the lists in combat: Among whom, two great LL. of the countrie, who were brethren, sought at sharpe for the soveraigntie of the kingdome. When the cittie Astapa was besieged and assailed by the Romanes, the townsmen caused a mightie pile of wood to be made, and set on fire, and when they had killed their wives and children, they threw themselves headlong into the fire after them. Scipio himselfe, whiles he lay grievously sicke, and there hapned by occasion thereof, a mutinie to arise in one part of his army, when he was amended once, made an end thereof: and compelled the states of Spaine (that mutined) to come in and yeeld obedience againe. There was likewise an amitie and societie concluded with Masanissa, king of the Numidians: who also promised him his aid, in case he would come over into Africke: With the Gaditanes also, after the departure of Mago from thence: who had received letters from Carthage, that he should passe the seas into Italie. Scipio after he was returned to Rome, was created Consull. And when hee made sute to have the province of Africke, Q. Fabius Max. withstood  him: and so he had the government of Sicilie: but with commission to saile over into Affricke, in case hee thought it good for the Common-weale. Mago the sonne of Amilcar, from the lesser Balcare Iland, where he had wintered, tooke the seas and sailed over into Italie.

WHen it seemed that Spaine was eased as much of warre, as Italie charged therewith, by the voiage of Asdruball thither: behold, all of a suddaine there arose other troubles there, equall to the former. And as for the provinces of Spaine at that time, they were possessed between Romanes and Carthaginians in this manner. Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, was retired with his power farre within the countrie, even to the Ocean and Gades. But the coasts bordering upon our sea, and in maner all Spain bending toward the East, was held by Scipio, and subject to the Roman empire. Hanno the new General, being passed out of Affricke with a fresh armie, and entred into the roume of Asdruball the Barchine, joined with Mago:

and when he had put in armes within a short time, a great number of men in Celtiberia, which lieth  in the middest betweene the two seas; Scipio sent foorth against him M. Syllanus with tenne thousand foot, and five hundred horsemen. This Syllanus made such speed by taking as long journies as possibly he could (considering how much hindred and troubled he was, both by the roughnesse of the waies, and also by the streights, environned with thicke woods, and forrests, as most parts of Spaine are) that notwithstanding all those difficulties, hee prevented not onely the messengers, but also the very same and rumour of his comming, and by the guidance of certaine fugitive revolts out of Celtiberia, hee passed forward from thence to the enemie. By the same guides hee had intelligence, and was for certaine advertised (being now some tenne miles from the enemie) that about the very way where hee should march, there were two campes: namely, on the left hand the new armie abovesaid of Celtiberians to the number of more than  nine thousand lay encamped, and the Carthaginians on the right. As for this leaguer, it was well defended and fortified with corps de guards, with watch and ward both night and day, according to the good order and discipline of warre. But the other was as much neglected, dissolute, loose, and out of order, like as commonly barbarous people and raw souldiours are, and such as fear the lesse, by reason they are at home within their own countrie. Syllanus thinking it good pollicie to set upon them first, gave commaundement to march under their ensigns and colours, and beare toward their left hand as much as they could, for fear of being discovered in some place or other by the guards and sentinels of the Carthaginians. And himselfe in person, having sent before certain vaunt-courriers and espials, with his armie advaunced apace directly toward his enemie. Now was hee approched within three miles of them unespied, and not descried at all. For  why? a mountaine countrey it was, full of roughs and crags, overspread and covered with woods and thickets. There in a hollow valley betweene, and therefore secret for the purpose, hee commaunded his souldiours to sit them downe and take their refection. In this meane time the espials came backe and verified the words of the fugitives aforesaid. Then the Romanes, after they had piled their packes, their trusses and baggage in the middest, armed themselves, and in order of battaile set forward to fight. When they were come within a mile of the enemies, they were discovered by them, who began suddainely to be affraied. Mago at the first outcrie and al'arme, set spurres to his horse, and rode a gallop out of his campe to succour. Now there were in the armie of the Celtiberians, foure thousand footmen targettiers, and two hundred horse. This troupe being in manner the flower and very strength of the whole armie, and as it were, a full and complete  legion, he placed in the vaward; all the rest, which were lightly armed, he bestowed in the rereward for to succour and rescue. As he led them foorth thus ordered and arraunged, they were not well issued without the trench, but the Romanes began to launce their javelines and darts against them. The Spaniards to avoid this voley of shot from the enemies, couched close under their shields, and defended themselves, and afterwards they rose up at once to charge again upon them. But the Romanes standing thicke as their manner is, received all their darts in their targuets, and then they closed man to man, and foot to foot, and began to fight at hand with their swords. Howbeit, the ruggednesse of the ground, as it nothing availed the swiftnes of the Celtiberians (whose guise is to run to and fro in skirmish and keepe no ground) so the same was not hurtfull at all to the Romanes, who were used to a set battell, and to stand to their fight: onely the streight roume, and the trees and shrubs growing betweene, parted their ranckes and files asunder, so as they were forced to maintaine skirmish, either singlie one to one, or two to two at the most, as if they had been matched to cope together even. And look what thing hindered the enemies in their flight, the same yeelded them, as it were, bound hand and foot unto the Romans, for to be killed. Now when all these targettiers welneere, of the Celtiberians were slaine; their light armed souldiours, and the Carthaginiaus also, who from the other campe ran to succour, were likewise disarraied discomfited, and hewne in peeces. So there were two thousand footmen, and not above, and all the horsemen (who scarce began battell) fled with Mago and escaped. As for Hanno the other Generall, together with them who came last, and to the verie end of the fray, was taken alive. But Mago fled still: and all the Cavallerie, with as many as remained of the old footmen followed after, and by the tenth day arrived in the province of Gades, and came unto Asdruball. The Celtiberians, that were but new souldiours, slipt into the next woods out of the way, and so from thence fled home.
This fortunat victorie happening in so good a time, not so much stifled the present war in the

 very birth, as it cut off the matter and maintenance of future troubles, in case the enemies had been let alone, and suffered to sollicite and stirre other nations to take armes, like as they raised the Celtiberians alreadie. Whereupon, Scipio having highly commended Syllanus, and conceived great hope withall, to dispatch quite, and make an end of the warres, in case himselfe lingered not the matter, and made long stay; pursued the remnant behind, and set forward into the utmost province of Spaine against Asdruball. But Asdruball, who happened then to lie encamped inAndelusia. Boetica for to keepe his allies in obedience and faithfull alleageance, all on a suddaine dislodged, pluckt up standards, and away; and more like one that fled than marched, led his armie farther into the countrey, even as farre as the Ocean, and to Gades. But supposing, that so long as hee kept his forces altogether, himselfe was the onely marke which the enemie would shoot at,  before that he cut over the streights of Gibraltar to Gades, he brake up his whole armie, and sent them away here and there to their severall cities, both to save themselves within the walls, and to defend the walls by force of armes. Scipio, so soone as hee perceived that the warne was thus devided into sundrie parts, and that to lead about his forces from citie to cittie, was rather a long and tedious peece of worke, than either difficult or much availeable, retired backe. But because hee would not leave that countrie cleare in the hands of the enemies, hee sent his brother L. Scipio, with 10000 foot, and 1000 horsemen, to assaile the mightiest and wealthiest citie in those parts, which the barbarous people call Oringis. This cittie is seated in the confines of the Melessi (a nation meere Spaniards) the soile fruitfull, and the inhabitants there find silver mines. This was the fortresse of Asdruball, and his place of safe retreat, when he made outrodes all abroad  into the midland countries of the maine and spoiled the people. Lucius Scipio having pight his camp under the said citie; before that he entrenched and blocked the towne, sent certaine to the gates, who by parling neere at hand, might feele and sound the dispositions of the citizens, and persuade with them to make triall of the Romanes friendly alliance, rather than their forcible violence. But perceiving by their answeres, no mind at all nor inclination to peace, he cast a trench, and raised a double rampiar about the towne, and divided his armie into three parts, to the end that one of them should ever follow the assault, whiles the other twaine tooke rest and ease. And when the first troup and regiment of them began to give a camisado, there followed a fierce, cruell, and doubtfull skirmish. For they could not easily either come under the walls, or bring skaling ladders to set to, by reason of the shot that light upon them. And such as  alreadie had reared up ladders to the wall, some of them were pushed off with certaine forks provided for that purpose, others were caught hold of with yron hookes from above, and were in danger to be hung up in the aire, hoised alost, and fetcht over the walls. Scipio seeing that the conflict was unequall, by reason of the small number of assailants, and that the enemies had the advantage besides, in that they fought from the wall top; caused that first regiment to retire, and with the other twaine at once, gave a fresh assault to the towne. This strake so great a feare into them who were alreadie weryed with fighting, that not only the townesmen sodainely abandoned the walls and fled, but also the Carthaginian garison souldiours, for feare least the citie was betrayed, forsooke also their stations and places of guard, and gathered themselves into one place. But then the townesmen were afraid, least if the enemies put themselves within the citie,  they should be massacred every where as they came in their way, without respect and difference, who were Carthaginians, or who were Spaniards. Whereupon they set one gate open on a suddaine, and in great numbers ran out of the towne, bearing their targuets before them, against the darts that were shot a farre off, and shewing aloft their naked right hands, in token that they had laid aside their swords. But whether the enemie could not well discerne them so farre off, or whether they suspected some craftie and deceitfull practise, I wote not, but they fell upon these that fled and yeelded unto them, and flew them downeright, as well as if they had affronted them in the face of a battell, and at the same gate entred the citie with bloudie banners. In other parts likewise they fell to hewing downe the gates with axes, and to breake them open with crowes of yron. And as every horseman gat into the citie, he rode amaine (according to the direction given  by the Generall) into the market place, to bee possessed thereof. And to these horsemen were assigned the Triarij for aid and assistance. The legionarie souldiours besides ran over all the other parts of the citie, spoiling and killing all that ever they met, save such as defended themselves with their armour. All the Carthaginians were taken prisoners and committed to ward, likewise of townesmen about three hundred, such as had shut the gates; but unto all the rest the towne was

rendred againe, and each man had his owne goods delivered and restored unto him. There were  slaine at the assault of that citie, of enemies almost two thousand: but of Romanes not above foureskore and ten. As by the winning of the towne, they that were imployed there tooke great joy and contentment: so in their returne to their Generall himselfe, and the rest of the maine armie, they made a goodly shew as they marched with a mightie multitude of prisoners led before them. Scipio having praised his brother in the most honorable termes that he could devise, and namely for this exploit of forcing Orinx, making him equal in glorie to himself for the conquest of Carthage: because winter drew on, that he could neither give the attempt upon Gades, nor yet follow at once upon the armie of Asdruball, so dispersed as it was in sundry parts over the province, conducted his forces back againe into that province of Spaine that lieth on this side Iberus: and when he had dismissed his legions into their severall standing camps to winter in, and  sent his brother L. Scipio to Rome, together with Hanno the Generall of the enemies, and other gentlemen prisoners, he withdrew himselfe to Taracon.
In the same yeere the Romane Armada being set out under the conduct of the Admirall M. Valerius Lavinus the Proconsull, made a voyage from Sicilie into Africk, and forraied all over the territories of Vtica and Carthage, in so much as they drave booties out of the very utmost confines of the Carthaginians, and even about the walls of Vtica. As they sailed back for Sicilie, they were encountred by the Carthaginian fleete, consisting of 70 long ships of warre, whereof seventeene were bourded and taken, foure sunke in the deepesea, the rest were put to flight and dispersed. Thus the Romane captaine Valerius, after victories atchieved both by sea and land, returned with rich prizes of al' sorts to Lilybaeum: and hereupon by reason that the  seas were open and cleered of the enemies ships, great store and abundance of graine was brought to Rome.
In the beginning of that summer wherein these things hapned, P. Sulpitius the Proconsull, and K. Attalus, after they had wintered in Aegina, as is above said, with a joint navie passed over from thence into the Iland Lemnos. The Romanes were 25 Galleaces of five ranks of ores, and the king had 35. Philip for his part because he would be readie at all affaies to meete with the enemie either by land or sea, went himselfe in person downe to the sea side, as farre as Demetrias, and made proclamation, that all his forces should by a certaine day meere together at Larissa. Vpon the same that went of the kings comming, there repaired sundrie Embassies from the consederate States of all parts, unto Demetias. For the Aetolians having taken hart unto them, as well for their societie with the Romanes, as upon the comming of Attalus, wasted and spoiled their borderers. And not only the Acamanians and Boeotians, and they that inhabit Euboea, were in great feare, but also the Achaeans; whom over and besides the warre from the Aetolians, Machanidas also the Lacedemonian tyrant terrified, who encamped himselfe not farre from the confines of the Argives. All these States made report what perils were like to ensue both by sea and land to their severall cities, and besought the king his aid. Moreover there came unto him out of his owne realme no good tidings of peace and quietnesse, for that Scerdiletus and Pleuratus were gone out and rebelled: and of the nations of Thrace, the Medi especially were readie to invade the frontiers adjoyning upon Macedonie, in case the king should fortune to be busied and occupied otherwise in any long warres. The Boeotians likewise themselves, and other nations  inhabiting the more inland parts of Greece, had geven intelligence, that the avenues of the forest Thermopylae, where as the narrow gullet of the streights yeldeth small passage, were stopped up by the Aetolians with a trench and pallaisade, that it might geve no accesse at all unto Philip, for to come and defend the cities of the Allies. Thus many troubles comming huddle and thick one upon another, had bene able to have roused and awakened even a sleepie and slow captaine, and made him to looke about him. These Embassadors he dispatched and sent away, promising every one of them help and succour, as time and occasion would permit: and willing them each one for the present, to provide those things that were most urgent and important. Then he sent a garrison unto that citie, from whence newes came, that Attalus having passed with a fleete from Lemnos, had wasted and forraied all the territorie about it. And he sent Polyphantes with a small power into Boeotia, and Menippus likewise one of his owne captaines and Cavalliers, unto Chalcis, with a thousand targuartiers called Peltati, (now the Peltae, are certaine small bucklers or targuets, nothing unlike unto the Spanish Cetrae) unto whom were joyned five hundred Aenians, that they might be able to guard all the parts

 of the Iland: himselfe in person went to Scotusa, and there he appointed the Rendezvous, that all the forces of the Macedonians should be brought thither fromLarizzo or Larzo. Lariffa. Newes came unto him there that the Aetolians had summoned and proclaimed a generall Diet or Councell at Heraclea, and that K. Attalus would repaire thither to consult about the managing of the whole warre. And with an intent by his sodaine comming to trouble this solemne assembly and meeting of the States, he tooke great journeis in his march, and led his armie toward Heraclea: but the Councell was newly dissolved when he arrived thither. Howbeit, he destroid all the standing corne, which now was neere-hand ripe, specially in the vale along the Gulfe of the Aenianes, and so reduced his armie back againe to Scotusa: and there leaving his whole power, he retired himselfe to Demetrias, attended only with his royall guard. And because  he might from thence be readie to meete withall sodaine stirres and invasions of the enemies, he sent out men of purpose into Phocis,Nigroporite. Euboea, andLemene Nigra or Saraquino. Castaido. Peparethus, to chuse out certaine high places for beacons, from whence the fires might be seene a farre off. And himselfe set up one watchtowne upon Ciffaeos (a mountaine, the top whereof is of an exceeding height) that upon the signall of the beacons on fire from a farre, he might in the minute of an houre have intelligence, so soone as the enemies went about any trouble whatsoever. But the Romane Generall, and K. Attalus, passed the seas from Peparethus to Nicea, and from thence failed with their Armada to Euboea, unto the citie Oreum, which as a man beareth his course from the gulfe of Demetrias to Chalcis andStreccho de Nigroponte. Euripus, is the first citie of Euboea that sheweth it selfe upon the left hand. And thus it was agreed betweene Attalus and Sulpitius, that the Romanes should give the assault  from the sea side, and the king with his forces on the land. Foure daies after the fleete was arrived, they presented themselves before the citie to assaile it. For, that time betweene was spent in secret talke and conference with Plator, who was appointed by Philip governor and provost of the citie. The citie had within it two Citadels, the one commaunding the sea, the other situate in the very hart and mids of the towne. From thence there is a way under the ground that leadeth to the sea: at the end whereof there stood a fabrick or towre five stories high, a singular bulwarke and place of defence. There at the first, began a most sharp and cruell conflict, by reason that the turret was well furnished with all kind of shot and artillerie: and likewise from out of the ships, there was planted much ordinance, and many engins bent to impeach and assault the same. Now when every mans mind was amused, and eye fixed upon this hote and eager fight, Plator received  and let in the Romanes at the gate of the other citadell that stood over the sea, and so in the turning of an hand it was surprised and won. The townesmen being expelled and chased from thence, retired and betooke themselves into the middle of the citie unto the other fortresse. But certaine shouldiers were set of purpose there, to shut the gate upon them: and so being excluded, they were killed and taken prisoners in the mids betweene. The garison of the Macedonians stood round together under the castle wall, and neither fled openly a maine, nor yet began to fight, as if they ment to stick to it unto the end. For whom, Plator obteined pardon of Sulpitius, and having embarked them, brought them to Demetrium of Phthiotis, and there set them ashore, and himselfe returned to Attalus.
Sulpitius bearing himselfe bold for this so good and speedie successe, immediatly sailed with  his victorious armada against Chalcis. Where the event in the end aunswered nothing unto his hope and expectation. The sea lying broad and large on both hands, gathereth in that place to a narrow roume, so as at the first fight it maketh a shew of a double peere or haven, opening upon two divers mouths, but in very truth, ther is not lightly to be found a worse harborogh, and a more daungerous rode for ships. For not only for the exceeding high hils on both sides of the maine, the winds arise suddainly and blow blusterous, but also the verie streight it self of Euripus ebbeth not and floweth, seven times in the day, as the voice goeth, at certaine set and ordinarie houres; but without all order, as the winds drive, the sea turneth and rolleth hither and thither, working up and downe, and like a flowing stream runneth forcibly and with great violence, as it were, down a steepe hill: so as neither night nor day, the ships there riding, have any rest and repose. As the  Romane armada was thus engaged within so daungerous a rode: so the towne of the one part was environned with the sea, and on the landside surely fortified; besides the defence of a strong garrison there, and the assured loialtie of the captaines and principall heads and rulers; whereby it was chiefly guarded, which at Oreum was but vaine, fickle, and unsteadfast: by meanes whereof it was tenable and imprenable. The Romane Generall in this case, considering how hee had

begun a rash enterprise, and seeing many difficulties on every hand, wrought wisely yet in this one  point, that he soone gave over, because he would spend no time in vaine, and passed over with his fleet from thence to Cynus of Locris (a towne of marchandise belonging to the citie of Opus, situat a mile from the sea.) Philip had warning by the beacons on fire that appeared from Oreum: but by the fraud of Plator, the other were with the latest set a burning from the watch-tower abovesaid. And forasmuch as he was not strong enough at sea, hee could not with his navie have easie accesse into the Iland. So that service was delaied and altogither neglected. But hee bestirred himselfe quickly to the succour of Chalcis, so soone as ever hee espied the fire from the beacon For albeit Chalcis it selfe be a citie of the same Iland, yet it is divided from the continent by so narrow an arme of the sea, that there is no more but a bridge between it and the land: and on that side it hath more easie accesse than by water. Philip having disseized the garrison there, cast downe the fort, and discomfited the Aetolians who kept the streight passage of Thermopyiae, came from Demetrias to Scotusa, from whence he departed at the third watch: and when he had driven and chased the enemies in great feare to Heraclea, himselfe in one day reached to Elatia in Phocis, a journey above 60 miles. The very same day in manner, the cittie of the Opuntij was taken by K. Attalus and put to the ransacke. The whole pillage thereof, Sulpitius had granted to the king, in regard that Oreum a few daies before was spoiled and rifled by the Romane souldiours, and the kings men had no share with them. Now was the Roman armada retired to Oreum: and Attalus not ware of Philip his comming, spent time in exacting monies from the chiefe and principall citizens. But so suddaine and unexpected was this accident of his approach, that had not certaine Cretensians by good hap, gone forth a foraging farre from the cittie, and descried the  march of the enemies a great way off, he might have bene overtaken and surprised. Attalus unarmed and out of order as he was, made hast and ran amaine to the sea side, for to recover the ships. And even as he and his men were losing from the land and launching into the sea, Philip came, and from the verie shore put the mariners and sailers in great feare. From thence hee returned to Opus, crying out upon God and man, and blaming his ill lucke, that he bad missed so narrowly the opportunitie of so great an exploit, and let it go, as it were, snatched out of his very eye. In the same fit of anger, he reproved and rebuked the Opuntians, for that being able to hold out the siege untill his comming, so soon as they saw the enemie, they presently had yeelded themselves in a manner voluntarie into his hands. When he had set things in order at Opus and thereabout, he tooke his journey to Torone. Attalus at first retired himselfe to Oreum: but upon the newes  arrived, how Prusias the king of Bithynia, had invaded the frontiers of his kingdome, he left the Romane affaires and the Aetolian warre, and from thence sailed over directly into Asia. Sulpitius also retired his navie unto Aegina, from whence in the beginning of the spring he had departed and taken his voiage. And Philip forced and wan Torone, with as small adoe as Attalus before had taken Opus. That foresaid cittie Torone, was inhabited by certaine that were fled and driven out of Thebes in Phthiotis. For when the cittie was taken by Philip, and they fled for protection unto the Aetolians, (to whome they recommended and committed themselves) the Aetolians gave unto them that place to seat themselves in, being a cittie wasted and in manner desolate by the former warre of Philip. Then Philip having recovered Torone againe, as is aforesaid, departed from thence, and wan Tritonumand Dry mas, two small and base townes of no account in Doris. From whence he came to Elatia, where he had given commandement, that the embassadors of Ptolomeus and the Rhodians, should give attendance until his comming. Where, as they were treating about the making an end of the Aetolian warre (for as much as those Embassadours to the same effect, had lately presented themselves at Heraclea, in the counsell and assembly of the Romanes and Aetolians) tidings came, that Machanidas purposed and determined to let upon the Eleans, as they were preparing to exhibit the solemne Olympian games. Philip supposing it good to prevent that, courteously aunswered the Embassadours and gave them their dispatch: saying, that as himselfe was not the cause of that warre, so he would not hinder and stay the conclusion of peace, upon any equall and reasonable condition. And so with a power lightly appointed, he marched through Boeotia to Megara, and from thence went downe to Corinth: where having  furnished himselfe with victuals, he marched forward to Phlios and Phaneus. And being now come as farre as to Erea, and hearing there, that Machanidas upon the rumour of his comming, for feare was fled backe to Lacedaemon, he returned to Aegium, unto the generall Diet and councel of the Achaei: supposing withall, that he shuld find ther the Punick armada, which he had sent

 for to come thither, because he might be able to do somwhat also by sea. But some few daies before, the Carthaginians had sailed over into Phocaea, and from thence were gone to the havens of the Acarnanians, so soone as they heard once, that Attalus and the Romanes were departed from Oreum, fearing that they would make out after them, and least they should be overtaken and surprised within Rhium, which is the very mouth of the Corinthian gul^e. Philip verily grieved hereat, and was wonderfully troubled in mind, seeing what hast soever he made himselfe in all his emprises, yet he came too short and effected nothing in due time; as if fortune in taking all things out of his very eye-sight, had deluded, disappointed, and mocked all his speedinesse and expedition.
Howbeit in that solemne Diet and assembly, hee dissimuled his griefe, bit in his passionate affections, and thus with an hauhtie mind he spake and said, That hee called both God  and man to witnesse, that he had forlet no opportunitie of time nor vantage of place, but when and wheresoever hee heard but any inckling of the enemie, and the least rustling of armour, thither he had made all hast that possibly he might: but he could hardly devise and conceive, whither himselfe were more venturous in seeking warre, than the enemie nimble and quicke in avoiding the same. So Attalus at Opus, so Sulpitius at Chalcis, and so the other day Machanidas escaped out of his hands and gat away. But surely (quoth he) this running away will not alwaies prosper and speed well: neither is that to be connted a daungerous warre, wherein a man may be sure (if he but meet his enemie once) to have the upper hand. That which is the principall point of all, thus much have I gotten yet at the enemies hands, that they confesse thereby, how they are not able to make their parts good with us: and I doubt not, but shortly I shall atchieve the  victorie of them, and the event and fortune of their fighting with me, shall bee no better than their present hope. The kings allies were glad to heare him speake thus. Then he retired unto the Achaeans, Erea, and Triphylia, and delivered againe Aliphera unto the Megalopolitanes; for that they proved by good evidence, that it belonged by right to their territorie and confines. Thus having received of the Achaeans certain ships, to wit, three Galleaces or Caravels of four banks of ores, and as many gallies of two rankss, from thence hee cut over to Anticyrae. And then with seven Caravels of five rankes of ores, and more than twentie barkes besides, which hee had sent into the gulfe of Corinth to joyne with the Carthaginian navie, he made saile to Erythrae in Aetolia, neere unto Eupalium, and there disbarked and landed his men. But the Aetolians were advertised aforehand of his arrivall and comming ashore: for all the people that inhabited either  the countrie townes and villages, or the castles neere to Potidania and Apollonia, were fled into the mountaines and woods. As for the cattaile, which in that hurrey and hast that they made could not be driven away with them, those they preied upon and brought them to the ships. With these and all the rest of the bootie, he sent Nicias the Pretor of the Achaeans to Aegium, and so went forward to Corinth: and from thence he commanded that the land forces should be conducted and march by land through Boeotia: whiles himselfe sailing from Cenchraea along the coast of Attica, above the point or cape of Sunium, passed even though the mids of his enemies armadaes, and arrived at Chalcis. Then after he had commended the cittizens there for their fidelitie and vertue, in that neither feare nor hope was able to change and turne their resolute minds, and exhorted them for the time to come, to continue stedfast in their alliance and  alleageance, if they made more reckning of their owne fortune, and loved it better than the condition of the Oritanes and the Opuntij; hee sailed from Chalcis to Oreum. And when he had committed the government of the State, and the guard of the citie, unto those principall citizens, who chose to flye when the citie was lost, rather than to yeeld themselves unto the Romanes, himselfe passed over from Euboea unto Demetrias, from whence at the first he tooke his voyage to the aid and succor of his friends and allies. After all this, having appointed and set out at Cassandraea keeles for an hundred long ships of warre, and taken up a number of shipwrights to finish out the rest of the worke: seeing that all Greece was now in quiet, both because Attalus was departed from thence, and also for that himselfe had in good time succored his allies and confederates, who were in some trouble and distresse, he returned back againe into his owne  realme, for to make warre upon the Dardanians.
In the latter end of that summer, wherein these affaires thus passed in Greece, when Q. Fabius Maximus the father, being sent as Embassadour from M. Livius the Consull unto the Senate at Rome, had brought word and made report, That the Consul judged L. Porcius with his legions to be sufficient for the province of Fraunce, and that himselfe might well be spared, and depart

from thence, and the Consular armie withdrawne out of those parts: the Lords of the Senat gave  order and determined, that not onely M. Livius, but C. Claudius also his Colleague, should returne to the cittie. This difference onely betweene the one and the other appeared in the decree, in that they gave direction, that the armie of M. Livius should bee brought home, but the Legions of Nero should remaine still in the province, and be opposed against Anniball. The Consuls by entercourse of their letters passing betweene, agreed thus together, That like as they had with one mind and consent made warre and managed their affaires, so, albeit they were in divers parts farre asunder, yet they should meet in one place, and at one time make repaire to the cittie of Rome: and that whether of them twain came first to Preneste, he should there attend the comming of his Colleague. And it fortuned so, that they arrived both upon one and the same day at Preneste. From whence they sent an edict before, that the third day after the Senat should generally assemble  together in the temple of Bellona: and so they were met upon the way with a multitude of people, who accompanied them as they returned into the cittie. And they were not content all of them in generall to salute them and welcome them home, but every man was desirous particularly to take the Consuls by their victorious right hands: some with congratulations, wishing them joy, others with thanksgiving, acknowledging that by their good meanes and vertue, the Commonweale was preserved and set upright. Now when they had related in the Senate house (as the manner was of all Generals) what acts they had atcheeved, and withall demaunded, that for their valiant and faithfull service to the Commonweale, first, due honour should bee rendred to the almightie gods, and then, they themselves allowed to enter the citie in triumph: the LL. of the Senate made answere, That they for their parts were readie and willing to consider first and  principally of the merites and goodnesse of the gods, and next and immediatly of the good deserts of the Consuls: and as they decreed divine processions and supplications in the name of them both, so they granted triumph, as well to the one as to the other. But the Consuls, because they would not devide their triumph (since that they had managed the warres with one accord and common consent) thus agreed betweene themselves, That for as much as the battel was fought within the province of M. Livius, and the very day of the field fought, it fortuned to be his turne to take the signe of birds, and to have the entire rule; and besides, the armie of Livius was brought backe and came to Rome alreadie, but that other of Nero could not be removed out of the province: therefore M. Livius should ride in a chariot drawn with foure steeds into the citie, with his soldiers following after, and C. Claudius presentlycome after mounted on horseback without his soldiers.
Thus the triumph was communicate to the one and the other, and encreased the glory of them both; but especially of him, who the more that he exceeded his Colleague in desert, the more he yeelded and gave place unto him in honour. Lo, said every man, He there on horseback, travailed in sixe daies space the whole length of Italie from one end to the other, and fought the very same day with banner displaied against Asdruball in Gaule, when as Anniball thought verily hee lay encamped against him with his armie in Apulia. See, how one and the same Consull, in the defence of the one part of Italie and the other, against two captaines, nay, against two noble Generals of two armies, in one place emploied his advise and counsell, and in another opposed his bodie and force of armes. Behold (say they) the very bare name of Nero was sufficient to keepe Anniball within his camp: and what was it els, that discomfited and defeated Asdrubal, but even  his onely comming? Let the other Consull therefore bee set up on high, and ride in a chariot drawne with as many horses as he will; all while that the true triumph indeed passeth through the citie upon one horse onely. Nay, if Nero went but on foot, hee would be memorable for ever hereafter, as well for the refusall of glorie in that triumph, as for the winning of honour in that warre. With these and such like speeches they entertained Nero as they beheld him, and so accompanied him even to the very Capitoll. They brought into the Treasurehouse of the cittie in coine(...). thirtie hundred thousandSe^^^^^. A small peece of silver coine among the Romans, the fourth part of Denarius. cont^^ning (...) and a halfe, and is of English monie three halfe pen^e (...), cue. Sestertij, and 80000 Asses. Among the soldiors, M. Livius devided3 (...). six and fiftie Asses to them a peece. And C. Claudius promised as much to his soldiours that were absent, upon his returne to the armie. This was noted and observed in the triumph, that the souldiours uttered more ditties and rimes ful of pleasant conceits and jests (as their manner was) upon C. Claudius, than their owne Consull: and that the gentlemen and horsemen highly extolled and magnified above all the rest, L. Veturius, and Q. Cecilius the two Lieutenants, and exhorted the Commons to create them Consuls against the next yeare: likewise, that the Consuls for the time being, confirmed this prerogative choise and election of those gentlemen, with their

 owne assent and authoritie the morrow after, in a frequent assemblie before the people, giving honourable testimonie of the valiant and faithfull service of those foresaid lieutenants in that warre.
Now the time drew neere of election of new magistrates: and when it was thought good by the Senate, that a Dictatour should call that solemne assemblie for the said election; C. Claudius the Consull nominated for Dictator his colleague M. Livius. And Livius named Q. Cecilius Generall of the horsemen. So there were created Consuls by M. Livius the Dictatour, L. Veturius, and Q. Cecilius, even he who then was Generall of the Cavallerie. After this, they went to the election of the Pretours, and chosen there were, C. Servilius, M. Cecilius Metellus, T. Claudius Asellus, and Q. Manlius Thurius, who then was Aedile of the Commons.
 When these elections were finished, the Dictatour having resigned up his office and dismissed the armie, by vertue of an act of the Senate tooke his journey into the province of Tuscane, to sit in commission and make enquirie, what States either of the Tuscanes or Vmbrians, intended and plotted to revolt from the Romanes, and to turne unto Asdruball at his comming into those parts: and who they were that had assisted him either with auxiliarie souldiours, or with victuals, or with any aid and helpe whatsoever. And these were the acts for that yeare, as well at home as abroad in the warres.
The great Romane Games were wholly renued and set out againe three times by the Aediles of the chaire, Cn. Servilius Caepio, and Serv. Cornelius Lentulus. Likewise the pastimes and plaies called Plebeij were once fully renued and exhibited againe by M. Sempronius Matho, and Q. Manlius  Thurinus, Aediles of the Commons.
In the thirteenth yeere of the second Punicke warre, when L. Veturius Philo, and Q. Caecilius Metellus were Consuls, both of them were appointed by the Senate to make warre upon Anniball in the province of the Brutij. Which done, the Pretors cast lots: And to M. Caecilius Metellus fell the jurisdiction of the citizens; to Q. Manlius, of the foreiners. C. Servilius his lot was to governe Sicilie, and T. Claudius Sardinia. As for the armies, they were devided in this manner: one of the Consuls had the conduct of that which was under C. Claudius the Consull of the yeare before. The other Consull had the leading of that (namely two full legions) which C. Claudius the Propretour before commaunded. M. Livius as Proconsull, whose governement was prorogued for another yeare, received the charge of the two legions of voluntaries in Hetruria, at the hand  of C. Terentius the Propretour. And Q. Manlius was appointed by a decree of the Senate, to deliver over his jurisdiction to his Colleague, and to take the charge of Gallia with the forces there; whereof L. Percius the Propretour was captaine: and hee had in commission to wast the lands of those Gaules, who were revolted to the Carthaginians upon the comming of Asdruball. C. Servilius was assigned with the power of the two Cannian legions, to defend Sicilie, like as P. Manlius had before. Out of Sardinia the old armie was withdrawne, which was under the governance of A. Hostilius: and the Consuls enrolled one new legion, for T. Claudius to saile over with. Quintus Claudius, and C. Hostilius Tubulus, had both of them their commissions newly sealed for one yeare longer, the one to governe Tarentum, and the other to rule Capua. M. Valerius the Proconsull, who also was Admirall for the sea coast and river along Sicilie, was commaunded to give up  thirtie of his saile unto C. Servilius, and with all the rest of the navie to returne to the cittie of Rome.
As the citie was in suspence and stood doubtfull for the variable event of so great a war, attributing the causes of all weale and woe, of prosperitie and adversitie, to the gods; behold many prodigious tokens were reported to have happened. Namely, That in Tarracina the temple of Iupiter, and at Satricum the chappell of the goddesse Matuta, were blasted with lightening from heaven. And the inhabitants of Satricum were no lesse terrified, with two serpents that were crept into the temple of Iupiter, at the very dores. From Antium there was word brought, that the harvest folke as they were reaping, spied certaine eares of come bloudie. At Caere there was a sow that farrowed a pig with two heads, and an eaw yeaned a lambe both male and female. It was  reported also, that at Alba there were two sunnes seene: and at Fregellae by night, the day-light appeared. Also in the territorie of Rome, by report, an Oxe spake: and the altar of Neptune within the Cirke Flaminia, brake out into much sweat: and the temples of Ceres, Salus, and Quirinus, were blasted and smitten from heaven. The Consuls were commaunded to expiate and purge these fearefull sights with sacrificing of greater beasts, and to make supplication one day. Which

was done according to the decree of the Senate. But above all the wonderous signes, either reported  from abroad, or seene at home, the minds of men were put in feare, for the going out of the fire in the chappel of Vesta. For which cause the Vestall virgin who had the charge that night to looke unto it, was by the commaundement of P. Licinius the Bishop well and throughly skourged. And albeit this hapned by humane negligence, and that the gods portended nothing thereby, yet it was thought good, that an expiation thereof should be made with greater sacrifices, and a solemne supplication held in the chappell of Vesta.
Before that the Consuls went forth to the warres, they were put in mind by the Senat to take regard and order for the commons, and to procure their reducing againe into the country, and pl^cing them in their lands and fermes. For seeing that by Gods goodnes the warre was removed farre from Rome and Latium, the country townes might be without feare of danger inhabited  and frequented againe: neither was it a meete thing, that they should have more care to inhabit Sicilie than Italie. But the matter was not easily to be compassed and effected by the people, for that many of the free-holders were consumed up in the warres: and great scarcitie there was of servants and hines to till the ground: besides, the cattaile was driven away in booties, and the manor houses were either ruinate or burned. Howbeit, a great sort were compelled by the authoritie of the Consuls to repaire againe into their country habitations. The motion hereof was first occasioned by the embassadors of Placentia and Cremona; who made complaint, that their territories were much damnified and wasted, by the incursions and rodes of the Gauls their next neighbours bordering upon them: and that many of their owne naturall inhabitants were fled and gone away, so as their cities were not well peopled, and their countrey lay wast and desert. Whereupon Manlius the Pretour had commission to defend and guard the colonies from the enemie. And the Consuls by vertue of an Act of Senate made an edict and proclamation, that all citizens of Cremona and Placentia, should by a certaine day returne into their colonies. And then, they themselves in the beginning of Spring tooke their journey, and set forward to warre.
Q. Caecilius the Cos. received the armie of Cl. Nero: and L. Veturius of Q. Claudius the Propretour, and made up the full number of all the companies with those new souldiers whom he himselfe had enrolled. The Consuls led their armie into the territorie of Consentia, and having forraied and spoiled here and there, and being heavily laden with good booties, they were in a narrow and streight passage much troubled by the Brutij and the Numidian archers: in so much  ^s not only their prizes were in danger to be lost, but they themselves that were armed, in some jeopardy. Howbeit, the alarme was greater than the skirmish, and the bootie being sent before, the legions escaped safe into places of securitie. And so from thence they went into the Lucanes country. All that nation without any fight returned under the obedience of the Romane empire. With Anniball that yeere was nothing done: for neither he himselfe made offer of warre, upon the fresh hurt and losse received as well in publike as private, nor the Romanes provoked him as long as he was quiet. For they were all of this judgement, that there was such mettall and valor in that one commaunder, although all things els about him went to wreck, that they held it no good polli^ie to provoke him, and wake a sleeping dog. And verily I wot not what to make of him; whether he were more to be wondred at in adversitie than in prosperitie. For why? war^ing  as he did in his enemies land for the space of thirteene yeeres, so farre from home, in much varietie of fortune, with an armie not consisting of naturall citizens and subjects, but mingled of a confused riff raff and medley of all nations, having neither the same lawes nor manners and customes, nor language; differing in fashions, in habit, in apparell, in armour, in rites, in religion, nor serving as it were the same gods: he had so knit and united them in one linke and straight band, that they mutined neither among themselves, nor against their Generall, notwithstanding oftentimes there wanted money for pay, and victuals in their enemies countrey: for default whereof, in the former Punick war, many outrages were committed both among captaines and souldiours. But when Asdruball the Captaine togither with his armie was diffeated and overthrowen, in whom they reposed all their hopes of victorie; and when they were faine to quit as  it were all Italie besides, and to retire themselves into an angle and corner of Brutium; who would not thinke it a mervailous matter, that there was no stirre nor commotion in his camp? considering that over and besides all other difficulties, he had no meanes nor hope els to mainteine his armie, but out of the Brutians country? And say, that it were all wholly tilled, sowed, and well

 husbanded, yet a finall thing it was to find and feed so huge an host. Moreover, a great part of their youth was set away from the tillage of the fields and grounds, and wholie employed in warfare: to say nothing of the naturall guise and corrupt usage of that nation, which in time of war was wont to live and mainteine the same by robbing and theeving. Neither had he any succour at all sent from home out of Carthage: whiles they all there were studious and carefull only to keepe Spaine, as if all had gone well with them in Italie.
In Spaine the fortune was in some respect all one and the same, in other far unlike and different: the same, in regard that the Carthaginians being diffeated in a foughten field, and having lost their captaine, were driven to the utmost coast of Spaine, even as farre as to the Ocean sea: different, in that Spaine is a countrie more apt and commodious to the reparation of new war,  not only than Italie, but also than any land in the world, as well for the site of the region, as for the nature of the people. For although it were the first nation of all the maine and continent, that the Romanes went first in hand withall to reduce into the nature of a province; yet it was the last of all others that was subdued, and but lately in our daies even under the conduct and happie fortune of Augustus Caesar. There at that time Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, the greatest and noblest Captaine in all these warres (next after the Barchine house) returned from Gades; and hoping by the help of Mago the sonne of Amilcar, to wage warre afresh, tooke musters throughout the farther part of Spaine, and armed to the number of fiftie thousand foote, and 4500 horse. And as for the Cavallerie, all writers in manner do agree: but for the Infanterie, some write, there were 70000 brought unto the citie Silpia. There upon the open plaines fate these  two Carthaginian captaines downe, because they would not seeme to fall off and refuse battaile.
Sci^io, when newes came unto him of so puissant an armie levied, supposed that neither with the Romane legions he was sufficient to march such a multitude, unlesse he opposed the aids of the Barbarous nations, if it were no more but for shew and outward apparance: nor yet was to repose such assured confidence in them, as in the fundamentall strength of his armie, that in case they should give him the slip when the time came, (the onely occasion of the overthrow of his father and unckle) they might doe much hurt to the maine chaunce and totall summe of all. And therefore he sent Sylianus before, unto Colcas, (a lord over the signorie of eight and twentie towns) for to receive of him those horse and foot which he had promised to levie in the winter time. Himselfe departed from Taracon, and gathered some small aids of his allies that inhabit along the way  as he marched, and so came to Castulo. Thither Syllanus brought also certaine auxiliaries, to the number of three thousand foot, and five hundred horse. From thence he went forward to the citie Baetula, being in all of cittizens and allies, with footmen and horsemen togither, one with another, 45000 strong. As they were pitching their tents and encamping, Mago and Masanissa, with all their Cavallerie set upon them: and no doubt, had troubled them mightily as they were making their defences, but that certaine troupes of horsemen hidden behind an hill, whom Scipio fitly for the purpose had there bestowed, suddainly at unawares ran upon them and recharged them, as they were losely ridden forward without order and array. These had not well begun skirmish with them, but they discomfited the forwardest of them, and such especially as engaged themselves neere to the trench, to impeach and annoy the pioners and laborours  at worke: but with the rest that kept to their colours, and went orderly in their rankes, the fight was longer, and for a good while continued doubtfull. But when the squadrons which stood readie appointed in their guards and stations, were first brought forth; and after them, the soldiors also from their worke and fortifications, were willed to take armes; and still more and more continually came fresh and in hart, in place of those that were wearied, so as now from all parts of the campe, there was gathered togither a full power, and ran to the battaile; then the Carthaginians and Numidians turned their backs plaine and fled. And at the first they went away by troupes and companies, keeping their order and array still, and not disbanded for hast or feare. But afterwards, when the Romanes began once more eagerly to play upon the hinmost of them, so as now their furious violence could no longer be resisted; then without all regard of rankes or files,  they forgat their array, and ran on all hands by heapes, seeking every man the next way he could to escape. And albeit by this skirmish, the Romanes were more encouraged a good deale, and the enemies hearts much daunted: yet for certaine daies ensuing, there never ceased excursions and bickerings mainteined by the horsemen and those that were lightly armed. Now when by these small skuflings they had made sufficient triall on both sides of their strength, Asdruball first lead

forth his forces into the field, and then the Romans likewise came forward readie to receive them. But when both armies stood without their campe, arranged in battaile array, and neither of them gave the charge: when the day drew toward sun-setting, Asdruball first retired with his men into the campe, and after him, the Romane Generall likewise. Thus continued they for certain daies togither. Astruball was evermore the first that came abroad, and the first againe that sounded the retreat to his souldiours, wearied with long standing. But of neither side they made out to skirmish, or discharged any shot, or gave alarmes, and set up a crie. Of the one part the Romans, on the other the Carthaginians togither with the Africanes, stood in the maine battaile: and the allies of either side kept the wings, and those were Spaniards, as well in the one armie as the other. But in the front of the Carthaginian battel, were the Elephants placed, who afar off made a shew as if they had bene castles. And throughout both armies this word went for currant, that when  the time came, they would so fight as they stood day by day arranged: namely, that the maine battailes of the Romans and Carthaginians, between whom was the quarell and occasion of the war, with like courage of heart and force of armes would encounter and cope togither. Scipio perceiving this once to go for good, and to be stifly setled in their opinions, altered all for the nonce against the day that he minded indeed to give battaile. And overnight hee gave a watch-word and token throughout all the campe, that both horse and man should take their dinner before day, and that the horsemen in armes readie appointed, should hold their horses sadled and bridled. Now before it was broad day light, he sent out all the Cavallerie togither with the light armour, to charge upon the Corps de guard and standing watch of the enemies. And himselfe straight after, advanced forward with the whole strength of the legions armed at all peeces. And  clean contrarie to the conceived opinion and persuasion, both of his own men, and also of his enemies, he strengthened the wings with Romanes, and marshalled the maine battaile with the allies. Asdruball raised with the clamour and shout of the horsemen, leapt forth of his pavilion, and perceiving a tumultuous alarme and fearfull stirre of his owne men before the rampiar and trench, and seeing afarre off the glittering ensignes of the legions, and all the plaines over-spread with enemies, presently made forth all his Cavallerie against their foresaid horsemen. Himselfe with the battaile of footmen issueth out of the campe, and made no chaunge nor alteration at all in the marshalling of the battailons, otherwise than he had used the daies past. The horsemen continued the fight along time doubtfully: neither could it bee determined by it selfe, because evermore, as any of them were put backe (which hapned on both parts in manner by turnes) they retired  safely into the battaile of footmen. Now when as the battels were not past halfe a mile asunder one from another, Scipio sounded the retreat, and opened his ranks, and received all the horsemen and light armed souldiours within the middle ward: and having divided them in two regiments, hee bestowed them for succours and supplies behind the wings. Now when the time was come to joyne in medley, hee commaunded the Spaniards (and those were the maine battaile) to take sure footing and go steedily togither: faire and softly himselfe out of the right wing (for, that point he commanded) dispatched a messenger to Syllanus and Martius, willing them to stretch out that wing on the left hand, like as they saw him to draw it a length on the right: with direction also unto them, that they togither with the light horsemen and light appointed footmen, should encounter and close with the enemie, before that both battailes might meet and joyne  togither. Thus having enlarged out at full their wings, they with three squadrons of footmen, and as many cornets of horsemen, togither with the light armed skirmishers, advanced with full pace directly afront the enemies, whiles the rest followed sidewaies a crosse. Now there was a void peece of ground in the mids between, by reason that the Spaniards ensignes went but slowly forward: and the wings had bene in conflict alreadie, when the floure and strength of the enemies battaile, consisting of old beaten Carthaginian and Africane souldiors, were not yet come within the darts shot, neither durst they put in to succour them that were in fight, for feare they should open the main battaile, for the enemie that came directly against them. Their wings were much distressed in the fight on every side. For the horsemen, the light armed souldiours, and the skirmishers, having wheeled about and set a compasse to environ them, ran upon them on their  flanks. The cohorts of footmen charged upon them afront, and al to break off their wings from the bodie of the battell. And as now in every respect the fight was unequall, so the rable of camp-followers, Baleare Ilanders, and raw untrained Spaniards, opposed against the approved Romane and Latine soldiors, pulled down a side. The day went on stil, and Asdrubal his armie began to faint: and

 no mervaile, for they were surprised and taken of a sodain, betimes in the morning, and wer forced in hast to enter into the field and go to battel, before they had refreshed and strengthned their bodies. And to that purpose Scipio had drawne the day on length, and trifled out the time, that the battell might be late. For it was the seventh houre [or one a clocke after noone] before the ensigne of footmen charged upon the side points. And a good deale later it was, ere the maine battailes fought and joined together: so that the heat of the noone sunne, the paine of long standing in armour, and hunger and thirst came all together to enfeeble and spend their bodies, before that they came to handstrokes and to buckle with their enemies: which was the cause that they stood leaning and resting themselves upon their shields. And over and besides all other troubles, the Elephants also affrighted and madded with this tumultuous and disordered manner of fight of  horsemen, skirmishers, and light armed souldiours together, ran from the wings, upon the main battell. The captaines therefore themselves, being thus tainted, as well in courage of heart, as in bodily strength, gave ground and reculed. Howbeit, they still kept their arraies, as if the whole battell had retired whole and sound by the commaundement of their Generall. But when the winners and conquerours on the other part, were so much more forward to charge upon them more hotely on every side, because they saw them to lose their ground and shrinke backe, so as their violence could not well be endured; then albeit Asdruball held them still together, and did what he could to stay their flight, crying eftsoones alowd unto them, that there were hils behind them, and places of safe retreat, if they would retire in good sort, moderately, and in orders; yet when they saw their enemies presse so hard upon them, killing and hewing in peeces those that  were next unto them, feare was above shame, and so immediately they shewed their backe parts, and ran away all at once as fast as they could. Yet at first, when they came to the root and foot of the hils, they began to make a stand, and rallie the souldiours againe into order of battell, seeing the Romanes to make some stay of advauncing their ensignes up the hill. But afterwards, when they perceived them to come lustily forward, they began againe to flie afresh, and so in feare were forced to take their campe. Neither was Scipio himselfe farre from their trench and rampier, but in that very brunt had beene maister thereof, but that immediately upon the hote gleames of the sunne, when hee shineth in a waterie skie full of blacke and rainie clouds, there powred downe such store of showers and tempests, that hardly could he himselfe after his victorie, recover his owne campe. And some there were also that made it a scruple and matter of conscience,  to attempt any more for that day. The Carthaginians, although they had great reason to repose themselves, and take their necessarie rest, so wearied as they were with travell, and sore wounded, especially seeing the night was come, and the stormie raine continued: yet, because their feare and present daunger wherein they stood, gave them no time to loiter and slacke their businesse, against the next morning that the enemies should earely assaile their campe, they gathered up stones from out of the vallies neere about them, and piling them one upon another, amended the height of their rampier, purposing to defend themselves by the strength of their fence, seeing small helpe and remedie in force of armes. But the falling away of their Confederates, was the cause that their departure and flight from thence, seemed more safe, than their abode there, would have beene. This revolt was begun by Altanes, a great lord of the Turdetanes: for  he with a great power of his followers and retrainers fled from the Carthaginians to the adverse part. Whereupon two strong walled townes, together with their garrisons, were yeelded by the captaines unto Scipio. Asdruball therfore, fearing least this mischeefe might spread farther, now that their minds were once set upon rebellion, dislodged about the midnight following, and removed. Scipio so soone as he was advertised at the breake of the day, by those that kept standing watch in their stations, that the enemies were gone; having sent his horsemen before, commanded the standerds and ensignes to bee advaunced, and led so speedie a march, that if they had gone streight forward, and followed their tracks directly, they had no doubt overtaken them: but beleeving certaine guides, that there was a shorter way to the river Baetis, they were advised to charge upon them as they passed over. But Asdruball seeing the passage of the river stopped  against him, turned to the Ocean: and even at the first they departed in great hast, as if they fled, which was the cause that they gat the start of the Romane legionarie footmen, and
 wan a good space of ground before them. But the horsemen, and light appointed footmen, plaied one while upon their tailes, flanked another whiles their sides, and by this meanes with charging and recharging, they wearied them and staied their march. And when as upon many of these troubles by

the way, their ensignes were faine to stand, and forced to maintaine skirmish, some time with the  horsemen; and sometimes with the light javelottiers and auxiliarie footmen, behold the legions also came on apace and overtooke them. Then there was not so much fighting and resistance, as massacre and slaughter of them: downe they went with them and killed them like sheepe, so long, untill their leader himselfe began to flie, and escaped into the next mountaines, together with 7000 halfe naked and unarmed. All the rest were either slaine or taken prisoners. Then the Carthaginians began to encampe and fortifie in all hast and tumultuous sort, upon the highest mount they could find: from whence (by reason that the enemies had assaied in vaine to get up the hill, having so difficult an ascent) they had not so much adoe to defend themselves. But, the place being bare and naked, and disfurnished of all commodities for their releefe, they were not able to hold out the siege for a few daies. And thereupon the souldiours fell apace to forsake  their owne captaine, and to goe to the enemie. So that at the length the Generall himselfe, in the night season abandoned his armie, and having got shipping (for the sea was not farre off) he embarked and fled to Gades. Scipio being advertised that the captaine of his enemies was fled, left with Syllanus tenne thousand footmen, and a thousand horsemen to continue the siege of the campe. Himselfe in person with the rest of his forces, within seventie daies returned to Taracon, for to examine and heare incontinently upon his arrivall, the causes of the princes and States: that upon the true estimate of their deserts, they might be rewarded or chastised accordingly.
After his departure, Masanissa having had secret conference with Syllanus, about inducing his people also to bee pliable and to hearken unto a chaunge, passed over into Affricke with some  small retinue. At which present time verily, the occasion of his suddain alteration was not so evident and apparent as afterwards, his most constant truth and fast alleageance observed unto his dying day, was a good proofe and argument, that even then he entred not into this designement and action, without good and important cause. Then Mago in those ships that Asdrubal had sent backe, passed over to Gades. The remnant, thus forlorne of their captaines, some by way of voluntarie yeelding and raunging themselves to the adverse part, others by flight, were scattered among the next cities, and no troupe remained of them behind, of any marke and reckoning to speake of, either for number or strength. In this manner, and by these means especially were the Carthaginians driven all out of Spaine, by the conduct and happie fortune of P. Scipio, in the thirteenth yeare of the warre, and in the fixt of Scipio his government in that province and commaund  of the armie. And not long after Syllanus returned to Taracon unto Scipio, and brought word, that the warre in Spaine was fully ended. And L. Scipio was sent with many noble persons captives, as a messenger to carrie tidings to Rome of the conquest of Spaine. And when al other tooke full contentment and infinite joy at these newes, and abroad in all places highly magnified the glorie of this service, he alone who was the man that did the deed (as one who had an insatiable desire of vertue and true honour) made but small reckoning of the recoverie and winning of Spaine, in comparison of those matters that hee hoped for, and conceived in that high and magnanimous spirit of his, which he carried with him. For now hee cast in his mind and aimed at the conquest of Africke and great Carthage: and therewith, to make persite and consummate that glorious warre, to his owne immortall honour and renowme. And therefore, supposing it  was now a good time to begin the way to those high exploits, and to lay plots, to prepare aforehand, yea, and to win unto him the hearts of the princes and nations, hee determined first of all other to found and assay king Syphax. This Syphax was king of the Masaesyli, a people bordering upon the Mores, and abutting upon that part of Spaine especially, where new-Carthage is situate. At the same time the king was in league with the Carthaginians: which Scipio supposing that hee would observe no more surely and precisely, than commonly the Barbarians use, (whose fidelitie dependeth upon Fortune) sent C. Laelius with rich gifts and presents, as an Orator to treat with him. The barbarous prince was glad hereof, both because the Romans then prospered every where; and also the Carthaginians in Italie, lived by the losse; and in Spaine went downe to the ground, where they had nothing left: and therupon he condescended to entertaine the friendship  of the Romanes. But for the confirmation of this amitie, he neither would give nor take assurance, but onely in the personall presence of the Romane Generall himselfe. So Laelius having obtained the kings roiall word and warrant, that Scipio might come unto him with safe conduct and securitie, returned unto Scipio. Now for him that aspired to the conquest of Africke, it was a

 matter of great consequence and importance in all respects, to make himselfe sure of Syphax, the most mightie and puissant king of all that land, who had aforetime made proofe what the Carthaginians could doe in warre, and the confines and marches of whose kingdome lay fitly upon Spaine, and but a small arme of the sea betweene Scipio thinking it therefore to be a matter worth the adventure with great hazard, (for otherwise it might not be) leaving for the defence and guard of Spaine L. Martius at Tarracon, and M. Syllanus at new-Carthage, (whether hee had travelled by land from Tarracon, and taken great journies) himselfe and Laelius together, losed from Carthage with two great Caravels of five bankes of oares, and passed over into Africk, through the calme and still sea most-what rowing, and other while also making saile with a gentle gale of wind.
 Haply it so fell out that the very same time, Asdruball driven out of Spaine, was entred the haven with seven gallies of three course of ores, and rid at anker neere unto the shore for to be set a land. When he had a kenning of the two Carvels aforesaid, which albeit no man doubted but they were enemies, and might have bene bourded by them being more in number, before they could gaine the rode; yet hereupon ensued nothing else but a tumult and hurrey among the mariners and souldiours together, in vaine preparation of their ships and their armour. For the wind being somewhat big and high, drave the Carvels with full saile out of the maine sea into the haven, before that the Carthaginians had any time to wey anchor: neither durst any of them proceede to further dealing within the kings Rode. So Asdruball first set ashore, and within a while Scipio and Laelius landed, and went all to the court. Syphax took this for a great honor  done unto him (as indeed it was no lesse) that there were come unto him at that time, and in one day two Generall Captaines of two most mightie and puissant States, to sue for peace and amitie with him. He invited both of them friendly, and gave them enterteinmet: and since that it was their fortune to enter under one rouse and the same house for to be lodged in, he indevoted to draw them to a parley, and to make an end of all quarels, grudges, and controversies betweene them.
But Scipio denied flatly, that either there was any private malice or hatred between him and Asdruball, that should need an end with conference and speech: and as for State-matters, he might not treat with a professed enemie, as touching them, without expresse warrant and commission from the Senate. But when the king laboured greatly with him, that he would find in his hart and not thinke much to beare Asdruball companie at meate and meale (because he  would not seeme to exclude either of them from his bourd) he yeelded thereunto, and was content. So they supped both twaine together with the king, and Scipio and Asdruball sate both at one table in one mesie, and upon one bed, for so it was the kings pleasure. But so courteously Scipio behaved himselfe (as he was a man that naturally knew how to carrie himselfe with a grace and dexteritie, in all things, and in every place wheresoever he came) that by his faire language and eloquent speech, he wan not only the favour of the barbarous prince Syphax (who before was not acquainted with the Romane fashions) but also the goodwill and love of Asdruball, a most malicious and mortall enemie: who seemed to have him in more admiration upon this one meeting and communication in presence personall, than for all his feats of armes atcheived in warre: and made no doubt but reckened fully that king Syphax and his realme would presently  be at the devotion of the empire of Rome. Such a singular gift had that man to win love and favour. And therefore the Carthaginians were not so much to seeke how Spaine was lost, as to consider and thinke, how they might keepe and hold Africk. For thus they conceived, That this noble knight and worthie Romane Captaine was not come thither wandering at aventure, nor as a traveller to see countries, and to solace himselfe with walking along the pleasant and delectable coasts, leaving the province which hee had newly subdued, leaving his armies which hee commaunded, sailing thus with two ships onely into Africke, and committing himselfe unto an enemie countrie, and into a kings hands, of whose fidelitie and protection he had no experience: but no doubt upon some great hopes to compasse the conquest of Affricke. And this was it that long since Scipio had in secret purpose and designement, this was it that openly he fretted and stormed  at, namely, that he warred not himselfe as well in Spaine, as Anniball in Italie. Well, Scipio having concluded a league with Syphax, departed out of Affricke; and notwithstanding hee was tossed upon the sea with variable winds, and those for the most part boisterous and raging, yet upon the fourth day he arrived at new-Carthage.
As Spaine generally was at peace and rest, for any Carthaginian warre, so it was well known,

that certaine particular States, in regard that they were touched with the guilt of trespasses committed, were quiet for feare, rather than for any loiall alleageance. Of which the most notorious, as well for their owne greatnesse and power, as for their fault and transgression, were Illiturgum and Castulo. The Castulonians who had bene Romane confederates in time of prosperitie, were revolted unto the Carthaginians, upon the diffeature of the two Scipions and their armies. The Illiturgitanes besides their revolt and rebellion, added this wickednesse, in that they betraied and murdered the Romans who fled unto them for succour after that overthrow. These two nations, if Scipio at his first comming had proceded in rigor to revenge (whiles the States of the countrie stood in suspense) he should have regarded their desert more than his own good and commoditie. But when all troubles were composed and reduced to quietnesse, he thought it then a convenient time to punish and chastise them accordingly. And therefore he called L. Martius from Taracon, with a third part of his forces, and sent him to assaile Castulo. Himselfe with the rest of the armie, marched toward Illiturgum, and within five daies presented himself before it. The gates he found shut against him, and all preparation and furniture for defence and to withstand the assault. For their conscience bare them witnesse what they had deserved, and there needed no other defiance or intimation of warre against them, than the privitie of their wicked fact.
Heereupon Scipio tooke occasion to exhort his souldiours,Scipio to his souldiours. and began in this wife, The very Spaniards themselves, quoth he, by shutting their gates, declare plainly what they justly are to feare: and therefore ye ought to war with them in more hostile malice and deadly hatred than with the Carthaginians. For with them the quarell was mainteined, as it were, without anger and rankor, only for soveraigntie and glorie: but of these men ye are to take vengeance for their disloyall treacherie, for their crueltie and wicked villanie. And now the time is come, to revenge not only the unworthy death of your fellow souldiers, but also the like falshood prepared for yourselves, in case your hap had bene to have fled for refuge thither at any time: yea, and to shew exemplatie justice, to reach all posteritie, that no man hereafter be so hardie as to wrong any citizen or souldier of Rome, in what poore estate so ever he be, without feare of condigne punishment. Vpon this exhortation and comfortable words of the Generall, they bestirred themselves, and devided the skaling ladders amongst certaine choise men out of every companie. And having so parted the armie betweene them, that Laelius the Lieutenant had the conduct of the one halfe, they gave assault with great terrour unto the citie in two places at once. But neither any one generall captaine, nor many principall citizens encouraged and harmed the townesmen manfully to defend  their citie, but only their owne fearefull and sinfull conscience: for they wist well and remembred, yea and put one another in mind, that it was their punishment and not victorie that the Romanes fought for. And as for themselves, since they were to leese their lives, this was the only point that they were to consider upon, namely, where they were best to die, whether in fight and in the field (where the fortune of battaile was common, and oftentimes lifted up the conquered, and put downe the conquerour) or after their citie burnt and rased, to yeeld up their breath in the sight of their wives and children taken captives, amid the torments of whipping and hard yrons, when they had endured all villanies and indignities. Whereupon not only the serviceable youth for war, not only men I say, but women also and children, even above the bodily strength of that age, or courage of that sexe, were readie and presented themselves to defend the walls. Some brought wepons to the defendants, others caried stones up to the wals unto them that were fortifying and repairing the breaches. For why? they stood not upon their libertie alone, which whetteth the stomacks of valiant and magnanimous men only, but they set before their eies all extremities of torture and punishment, yea and the shamefullest death that could be devised: and their harts were incensed to undergo all paines and peril, by striving avie together, and seeing one another to hazard themselves. Inso much as they stood to it, and fought so resolutely, that even that noble armie which had subdued all Spaine, tooke the repulse often times at the hands of the youth of one citie, was driven from the walls, and smally to their honor received some soile in fight and began to feare. Scipio seeing that, and doubting least upon so many bootlesse attempts the enemies might take heart, and his own souldiers be tainted, thought good to enter himselfe  personally into the action, and to take part in that dangerous service. Having rebuked therefore his men for their cowardise, he commaunded the ladders to be brought and set to, threatning that himselfe would skale the walls, if the rest made hasting and thus drew backe. With that he made no more ado, but approched under the walls in great perill of his person. Whereupon

 the souldiers respecting the daungerous state of their Generall, and fearing greatly on his behalfe, set up a shout on all hands, and began to reare ladders in many places at once. Laelius likewise on the other side plied the assault and gave not over. Then at last the townesmen, for all their resolute resistance, were overcome; the defendants overthrowne and beaten from their standing, and the walls possessed by the enemies. The castle also on that side which was thought imprenable, was in that brunt and tumult taken. For there were certaine Africanes serving then among the Romanes (fled before from the enemie) who whiles the townesmen were wholie turned to defend those places that seemed to be exposed unto danger, and the Romanes climbing and entring where they could, espied one part of the citie much higher than the rest; which because it was compassed about with an exceeding high rock,  was neither fortified otherwise with bulwarks, nor manned with any defendants at all: and being men (as they all are) light and deliver of bodie, and nimble by reason of much practise and exercise, they climbed up the rock where they could meete with any crag thereof to beare out unequally from the rest, and to yeeld them hold and footing: but when they came to a plumbe upright steepe place, and where the cliffe was even and smooth, they fastned certaine great yron spikes and nailes, which they caried about with them of purpose, and stuck them a prety distance asunder, like greeces and staires to climb upon: and ever the formost pluckt him up by the hand that followed next, and the hinmost heaved up those that went before them, until they were gotten up to the top: and then they ran downe with an outcry into the citie, which was already won by the Romanes. Then it was well seene that they forced this citie for very despiteous anger and  deepe hatred. There was not one that thought of taking any prisoners alive, there was none that once minded any pillage, notwithstanding all lay open unto them for to be ransacked and rifted. But downe they went with the unarmed as well as the armed, killing men and women one with another: nay their cruell moode was such, as they spared not the sucking babes. Then they set fire on their houses; and what the fire saved they rased and pulled downe: so cancred a mind they had, and so bent they were, to leave no monument and token of such a citie, and utterly to abolish and roote out the memoriall of those enemies.
After this, Scipio led his armie against Castulo. This citie was defended not only by Spanyards who thether were repaired out of other parts, but also by the reliques of the Carthaginian armie, which were skattred abroad in their flight, and thither fled. But ere Scipio was come  before the towne, they had heard the newes of the wofull calamitie and destruction of the Illiturgitanes; by reason whereof they were all terrified and in despaire of themselves: and as it falleth out in such varietie of causes and deserts, every man sought meanes to shift for himselfe the best he could, without regard of his neighbour. And at first they began to have a secret jelousie and suspition one of another, but afterwards they brake out to open dissention: in so much as the Carthaginians and Spaniards devided themselves, and parted asunder. Cerdubellus openly advised the Spaniards, and persuaded with them, to yeeld. Himilco was the captaine over the Auxiliarie Carthaginians, whom Cerdubellus (upon promise secretly before made, and protection granted) betraied, together with the whole citie besides, into the Romanes hands. This victorie was pursued with lesse crueltie: for neither was the offence on their behalfe committed, so heinous; and  the heate and choler of the Romanes was well cooled and allaied, by reason of their voluntarie surrender. From thence was Martius sent against other of the barbarous people, to reduce unto subjection and obedience, as many as yet were not fully subdued.
Scipio returned to new Carthage to pay his vowes unto the gods, and to exhibit and set out aspectacle of sword-plaiers at sharp, which he had prepared for the honor of his father and unckle deceased. This pastime and solemne shew was not performed by those kind of men, out of which maisters offence use ordinarily to make choise, namely, such as were picked out of bondslaves and freed men, that use to make sale of their bloud for monie: but all those that he emploied im combat, were such as offred themselves and their service voluntarie and without hire. For some were sent unto him from the LL. of the country, to make shew and proofe of the valour  ingraffed naturally in that nation: others of their owne accord professed to fight, for the love of the Generall himselfe, and to shew him pleasure: And some there were againe, who upon emulation of glorie were drawen to make chalenge, whiles others that were defyed refused not, but strove to get the victorie. There were also divers thatdetermined those controversies by the sword, which by arguing and pleading they either were not able or not willing to end: having



agreed betweene themselves that the matter in suite should fall to him that chaunced to have  the upper hand. And those were no meane persons of base degree and parentage, but of noble descent and famous houses: as namely Corbis and Orsua, two(...) [bretheren] cousin germaines by the father side; who differing and being at variance, about the principalitie of a citie and State which they call Ibes, made profession to trie the title at the utterance by dint of sword. Corbis was the elder of the twaine; but Orsua his father had bene the last Prince before, and received that Seignorie after the death of his elder brother. And when Scipio was very desirous to debate and decide the matter with words, and to appease their anger and moode, they both made answere and sayd, That they had denyed that to the common kinsfolke of either partie, and that they would have no other god nor man to be their judge, but only Mars.Both of them were fierce; the elder presuming of his strength of bodie, the yonger bearing himselfe  upon the floure of his fresh youth: wishing rather to die both twaine in fight, than the one to be subject to the dominion of the other. In conclusion, when by no meanes possible they could bee reclaimed from this furious rage of theirs, they became a goodly shew and pageant to the whole armie, and a singular example to prove, what a mischievous maladie among mortal men, the love of lordship is, and the desire of soveraigntie. The elder, through practice of his weapons and cunning slight, soone overcame the foole hardinesse and inconsiderate fiercenes of the yonger. After this pastime of sword-fight, followed the funerall games and plaies: which were set foorth magnificently, according as either the wealth of the province, or the furniture of the armie might affourd.
In this meane time, the Lieutenants plied and sped their businesse neverthelesse, according  to their commissions: for Martius having passed the river Baetis (which the paisants of that countrie call Cirtius) received two most rich and wealthie citties, surrendred into their hands by composition, without any assault. Now, there was another cittie called Astapa, which ever sided with the Carthaginians: and yet it deserved not so much anger and indignation in that regard, as for that, (setting aside the necessities that follow war) it ever bare a spitefull hatred against the Romanes: neither was the towne either for naturall situation so strongly seated, or by mans hand to surely fortified, that the inhabitants therein should take more hart, or presume the rather to be lustie and bold. But the naturall disposition of the people delighting in robberies, moved them to make rodes and invade the territorie of the allies of the people of Rome bordering uppon them: and to catch and take prisoners any souldiours, skullians, lackies, and followers of the  camp, or merchants of the Romans, whom they could light upon ranging abroad. Yea and when there hapned a great companie of them togither, to passe through their marches and confines, (for in no wise might a few travaile in safetie) they were surprised by an ambushment laid for them, and being environned in a place of disadvantage, were slaine every man. When the armie was come before this towne to assault (...), the townesmen carrying a guiltie conscience for offences committed, thought it not the safest course for themselves, to yeeld and give up the place to the enemies whom they had so much provoked against them: and seeing no hope at all to save their lives, either by the strength of their wals, or force of armes, they resolved to execute upon themselves, and those things that were neerest and deerest unto them, afoule, detestable, and cruell fact. They set out and appointed a compasse of ground within the market place, where they bestowed  and laid on an heape the most precious goods that they had. Vpon which they commaunded their wives and children to fit, and then they piled about them billets of wood, and laid faggots upon, of small young twigs.
And after this they gave in charge to fiftie lustie tall fellowes armed, That so long as the battaile continued doubtfull, they should defend and guard all their goods, and the bodies of those persons more deere unto them, than all the goods in the world: but in case they perceived their owne side to goe downe and have the worse, and the cittie at the point to be lost, they should then wote well and bee assured, that all they whom they sawe going foorth to battaile, would surely loose their lives in that very fight and medley. And herewith they besought them in the name of the gods both celestiall and infernall, to bee mindfull of their libertie, which that day was to take an end, either by honorable death or shamefull servitude: and  to suffer nothing to remain, upon which the enemie in his furious anger might excercise his crueltie: and considering they had both fire and sword in their hands to do the deed, to let those friendly and faithfull hands, consume and dispatch the things which were sure to bee lost and perish, rather than the proud enemies insult over them, and make a scorne of them. To these exhortations

 they adjoyned a fearefull and horrible curse, to as many as either for hope of life, or upon timorousnes of hart and fear of death, should alter their mind and resolution. Whereupon all at once they rushed out of the gates set wide open, and with a mightie tumult and shout, made a sallie. Now there was no set guard and station of any force opposed to resist them, because the enemies feared nothing lesse, than that they durst once issue forth of the gates. Some few troups of horse and the light armour, of a suddaine were sent out of the campe to make head, and they encountred them. Betweene whom there was a skirmish hoter and sharper in regard of courage and violence, than well ordered by any skill and good government. And therefore the horsemen were discomfited, that first pesented themselves against the enemie, yea and put the light armed footmen also in great feare. And surely they had proceeded to have fought even under the very  rampiar, but that the maine strength of the legions, who had but very small time to be marshalled and arraunged, put themselves in array and came into the field. And yet for all that, they were distressed for a while about the ensignes, by reason that they ran as blind as mad men in their furious fit, and as bold as witlesse fooles for want offence, even upon the sword and their own deaths. But afterwards, the old experienced soldiours, having stifly stood out against the first rash brunt and violent shock of the enemies, yea and killed the formost, bridled and staied the rage of those that seconded them: and when they assaied within a while after, to enter forward themselves and break in upon them, and saw none of them to give one foot of ground, but every one resolute to die in the very place where he stood, they opened their battaile in the mids (a thing that they might easilie do, considering the multitude of their souldiours) compassed and environned the wings of their  enemies, who fighting round in a ring, unto the last man were slaine everyone. Thus were they that were in armes and made resistance manfully, dealt withall by their enemies according to the rigor of warre, and in the angrie mood of souldiours; and such was their end. But within the citie there was fouler worke, and a more cruell butcherie and carnage committid, when the feeble unarmed and naked multitude of women and children were murdred by their owne neighbours and citizens: who having set the foresaid pile of wood on fire, fell to massacre them, and flung their bodies when they were but halfe dead, into the light fire under them; so as their streames of bloud gushing out of their veines, were readie to quench the flame beginning to breake forth. And in the end, when they themselves were even weried with the pittifull slaughter of their own friends, they cast themselves armour and all into the mids of the said fire. When this massacre was done  and ended, the Romanes entred the cittie with victorie. And at the first sight of this monstrous object, they wondered for a while and stood astonied. But afterwards, when they saw the gold and silver glittering within the heape among other goods, they were readie and desirous (as the nature of man is greedie of such things) to rake and pull the same out of the fire: but some of them were caught with the flame and burnt; others flashed and halfe senged with the hote steem of the vapour and breath issuing from the light fire, such (I meane) as were formost, and could not retire themselves backe, by reason of the exceeding prease behind, that thrust them still forward. Thus Astapa was destroied by fire and sword, and yeelded no pillage to the enemies. And when Martius had all the rest of that countrie yeelded unto him for feare of force, he led backe his victorious armie to Carthage unto Scipio.
About the very same time, there came from Gades certaine fugitive rennegates, promising  to betray the garrison of the Carthaginians lying there, and likewise the captaine of the garison, togither with the navie. Now had Mago rested there after his flight, and having gathered togither the ships in the Ocean, levied and raised certaine aids, as well beyond the narrow seas along the coast of Africke, as also out of the parts of Spaine next adjoyning unto him, and all by the meanes of captaine Hanno. When as betweene the Romanes and those fugitives, there had passed faithfull promise and securitie to and fro, both Martius was sent thither with certaine squadrons and companies lightly appointed; and also Laelius with 7 Triremes [of three banks of ores] and one great galiace of five, for to warre joyntly togither by common counsell, as well by sea as land. Scipio himselfe lay sicke of a grievous maladie, but much worse by report than it was, by reason  that every one (as men commonly have a desire and delight, to softer and multiply rumours for the nonce) made ever somewhat of his owne head, and put it to the rest of the newes that hee heard: which brought the province out of frame and caused great disorder, especially in the most remote parts thereof: wherby it was well seene, what a world of troubles would have ensued upon some calamitie indeed, when a vaine rumour onely, was able to raise such stormes and tempests.

For neither the Allies continued loiall in their alleageance, nor the armie dutifull in their wonted  obedience. Mandonius and Indibilis, who made full account of the whole kingdome of Spaine now that the Carthaginians were driven out and expelled, seeing nothing answereable to their hope and expectation, and themselves disappointed of their designements, raised the peasants and inhabitants of their owne countries (and those were the Lacetanes) and sollicited the youth of the Celtiberians: the countrie also of the Suessetanes and Sedetanes, that were consederate States with the people of Rome, they wasted in all manner of hostilitie. Besides, there arose a civile mutinie and dissention within the campe at Sucro; where there lay eight thousand souldiors, as a guard and garison for all the nations that inhabit on this side Iberus. Whose heads were set aworke, and began to bee busie not at that time when doubtfull and suspicious rumours were spread of their Generall, how he was in daunger of death, but long before, upon a  licentious course of life that they had taken to, (as commonly it falleth out upon long rest and case) and so much the rather, for that now in time of peace they were held in, more streightly and neerely, who before were used in their enemies land, during the warres, to breake out in a more loose manner, and to live upon rapine and robberie. At the first they began to mutter and whisper secretly these and such like speeches: If there be warre still in the province of Spaine, what do we here among peaceable people? And if the warre be ended, and the time of the commission come out and expired, why are wee not had againe backe into Italie? Then they proceeded to demaund their pay very malapertly, and more saucely than might stand with the dutie and modestie of souldiours: yea, and the Sentinels and corps de guara would not sticke to give reprochful terms and taunting words to the Tribunes or Marshals, when they went the round: and some of them  made no bones to enter by night into the peaceable territorie about them, for to fetch in booties and prises; untill at length openly at noone day, they departed from their colours without pasport and licence. All things they did, as transported and carried away with lust and selfe will of souldiours, not guided by the order and discipline of warfare, nor directed by the commaundement and governement of their captaines and rulers. Neverthelesse, there was retained still a forme of Romane campe among them: and that upon this onely hope that the souldiours had of the Tribunes aforesaid; whome they supposed in time would come to the bent of their bow, enter into the same furious courses, and have their hand in their mutinies, and follow them in their rebellion: and therfore they were well content with them to fit judicially in Marshall court, in the usuall place of Principia, to minister law and execute justice: also to call for the watchword and signall  ofthem, yea, and orderly to goe to their watch and ward in their course and due times. And whereas in very deed they had cast off all reverence and obedience of governement, yet they would seeme to shew a kind of loiall and dutifull diligence; in that (forsooth) they would be commaunders of themselves, and keepe some order without constraint. But in the end the mutinie broke out into open sedition: namely, when they perceived once, that the Tribunes misliked and reproved their doings, and endevoured to crosse their designes, yea, and denied flatly and openly to take part with them in their follies and furious outrages. Whereupon they disseized the Tribunes of their judiciall places in the Principia, yea, and dispossessed them quite of all roume in the campe, and by a generall consent conferred the soveraine rule upon two common soldiors, the cheefetains of this their seditious commotion, C. Albius Calenus, and C. Altrius Vmber. Who  not contented with theCertaine officers or sergeants going before them with (...). markes and ornaments of the Tribunes, were so bold as to handle the rods and axes, even the very roiall ensignes of soveraigne rule; never thinking how those knitches of rods, and axes sticking within them, which they caused to bee borne afore them to the feare of others, were readie to light upon themselves, to scourge their backes and sides, and to chop off their owne heads not long after. The supposed death of Scipio, whereupon they vainely built, was it that blinded their wits and minds: upon the rumour whereof, being alreadie noised abroad, they had no doubt, but all Spaine generally would be up in armes. In which garboile and hurliburly, they made reckoning, that they might levie monies of the confederate States, and spoile and pill the cities neere unto them. And amid these troubles, when all were in an uprore, and every man would venture to doe every thing at his pleasure, then they supposed their  owne deeds and actions would bee lesse espied and marked. Now when as they looked every day still to heare fresh newes, not of his death onely, but also of his funerals; and seeing there came none at all, but rather, that the former ridings were checked, and proved but a flying tale without head or foot, then they began to make semblance of enquiring after, and seeking out the first

 authours who raised those false reports: then they seemed to bee angrie also and offended with them, to the end, that they forsooth might bee thought rather to have beleeved things inconsiderately, than to have devised such a matter themselves purposely. These leaders and captains thus disappointed and abandoned, began now to dread and stand in horror of their owne ensignes of magistracie that were carried before them, and in steed of that imaginarie rule which they usurped, they feared greatly, that the very edge indeed of the true and lawfull power of authoritie would bee shortly turned upon them. As the sedition was thus dashed, by occasion, that it was crediblie and for certaine reported, first, That Scipio was living; and within a while after, that hee was recovered and in health: there came seven Tribunes or Colonels, sent from Scipio himselfe. At whose first arrivall at the campe, the souldiours grew more angrie and waspish  than before: but anone upon faire words and speeches, wherewith the Colonels entertained those of their acquaintance, with whome they had communication, they were well contented and appeased. For first they went about to their pavilions from one to another, and afterwards to the Principia and the Pretorium, where they happened to spie some knots of souldiours met together and talking one with another; and so spake unto them, as if they rather questioned with them what the cause should be of their anger and suddaine commotion, than blamed them, or laid any action to their charge. The reason commonly pretended, was this, That their wages was not duly paied at the day.
Besides they alleadged, That whereas at the same time, when upon the trecherous fact of the Illiturgitanes, there followed the losse and death of two Generals, and the defeature of their two armies, they by their vertue had defended the Romane name and honour,  and likewise kept the province to their behoofe, the Illiturgitanes had indeed received condigne guerdon for their offence and trespasse, but there was none that had requited and recompenced them for their good service accordingly. Beleeve mee (say they againe) your complaints are just, and requests reasonable, and wee will make relation thereof to the Lord Generall: and glad wee are in our hearts, that it is no worse, and that the case is no more incurable than it is: for God bee thanked, P. Scipio and the Commonweale, are both sufficient, and also willing to make you amends for all.
But Scipio, a man though used to the wars, yet altogether unacquainted with storms of soldiors mutinies, was much troubled in spirit and perplexed, for feare the armie might exceed measure in transgressing, or himselfe passe his bounds in punishing. For the present, he thought good  to deale gently with them still, as hee had begun, and sent abroad the collectours about the Tributarie cities to gather up the revenues, thereby to put them in good hope of pay, and that with speed. And hereupon there went out an edict and proclamation, that they should repaire to Carthage, there to call for their wages, either by companies apart one after another, or altogether in generall, whether they would themselves.
And now by this time, the suddain pacification of the Spaniards that were about to rebell, stilled the sedition of the souldiours quite, which of it selfe begun to coole and flake alreadie. For Mandonius and Indibilis, after it was reported that Scipio was alive and livelike, gave over their enterprise, and were retired againe within their confines. So as now the souldiours had neither cittizen nor forreiner, to take part with them in their folly and furious rage. And when they had cast al  about what course to take and what shift to make, they found no other evasion, but the most common refuge and retreat of all lewd counsels and bad designments, even to commit themselves either to the just wrath of their Generall, or else to his clemencie and mercie, whereof they were not past all hope, and in utter dispaire. For why? he had pardoned even the very enemies, with whom he had fought in battaile. And as for their mutinie, it was as yet without bloudshed, and nohurt done: and as it selfe was not cruel and outrageous, so it had deserved no extream and rigorous punishment: thus reasoned they and comforted themselves, as naturally men are too too prompt and eloquent, to extenuate, to palliate and cloke their owne faults, more ywis than they should. This was their only doubt, whether they were better to go by cohorts and squadrons, or all at once to demaund their pay. In the end they were of opinion, that the safer way was to go all  in one train. At the very same time, whiles they among themselves laid their heads thus together in the camp, there was a Counsell held at new Carthage about them, and much dispute there was, and varietie of opinions, whether they should proceed against the heads and chiefetaines only of the feditious (who were in number not above five and thirtie) or by cutting off the greater sort, to punish this so odious example and president, of a rebellion rather than a mutinie.

But the milder sentence tooke place, namely, that from whence the offence began, there the  punishment should rest. And for the multitude, some chastisement and rebuke was sufficient for their correction. When the Counsell was dismissed and broken up, to the end that it might be thought abroad that they sate about nothing els but this which they pretended, they published an edict throughout all the armie in Carthage, for an expedition or journey against Manuonius and Indibilis; and gave commandement to make provision of victuals for certaine daies. And those seven Tribunes, who had before gone to Sucro for to appease the mutinie there, were now sent to meet that armie againe: and the names being given them of five of the principall authors of the foresaid tumult, they had a direction unto certaine meet persons for the purpose, to shew them good countenance, to speake faire unto them, and courteously to invite them home to their houses, and affoord them kind and friendly enterteinment; and after they had  made them good cheere and brought them to bed, to take them being fast asleepe upon their liberall drinking of wine, and to bind them sure hand and foote. Now when they were not fame off from Carthage, they understood by those whom they met and encountred upon the way, that all the whole armie, was the next day following to setforth against the Lacetanes: which tidings not only rid them of all feare, which secretly surprised and possessed their minds, but also made them exceeding glad and joyous, for that they supposed their Generall being now left alone without the forces, they might do with him what they would themselves, rather than be at his commaundement and devotion. And about sunne-setting they entred the citie, and perceived the other armie providing and making all readie for the voiage above named. Received they were and welcomed with gentle words, devised and framed of purpose: namely, That the  L. Generall tooke great joy and contentment for their comming, for that they were come so just before the setting out of the other armie: and so they went to repose and make much of themselves. And without any sturre and tumult at all, the ringleaders of the sedition, were by the meanes of those Tribunes enterteined and lodged in the houses of certaine persons of good havior, and meet for that purpose, and there apprehended and imprisoned. At the releese of the fourth watch, the cariages of that armie, whose expedition was pretended, began to set forward on the journey: and somewhat before day the standerds and ensignes advaunced, but the whole armie was deteined and stayed at the gates, and certaine warders sent to keepe all the passages and wayes, that man should go forth of the citie. Then were those souldiours who came the day before summoned to an audience: and they ran boldly into the market place to the Tribunall  of the Generall, as if with their outcryes and clamours they would have put him in some feare anddread of them. And at one time, both the L. Generall himselfe in person ascended up the Tribunall, and with all the armed souldiers were brought againe from the gate, and enclosed round about at their backs the unarmed multitude gathered together to heare an Oration. Then were they daunted, as lustie as they were before, and all their courage cooled: and (as they confessed afterwards themselves) nothing terrified them so much, as the helthfull strength and fresh colour of the L. Generall, beyond all their expectation, whom they thought verily to have found sick and crasy: yea and his countenance and face so vigorous and courageous, as they never remembred to have seene him so lustie in any battaile before. For a while he sate still and said never a word, untill he was advertised that the chiefetaines of the mutinie were brought into  the place, and all things els in readinesse. Then after silence made by ari Oyez of the cryer, in this wise he began and said.
The Oration of P. Sestio to his mutinous s^ald^^^^s. I would never have beleeved that I should have wanted words and proper language unto mine owne armie: not because I have exercised myselfe at any time rather to make eloquent speeches than to manage valiant actions, but for that being alwaies from mine infancie almost trained up in the camp, I have bene acquainted with the natures and humors of souldiers. But in what manner I should speake unto you, neither my wits will give me advise, nor my tongue affoord me uttrance: you, I say, whome I wot not so much as by what name to call. Should I terme you citizens, who have revolted from your native countrey? or souldiers, who have renounced your Generall, refused to be under his commaund, his charge and government, and  made no conscience to breake the oth of your alleageance? Last of all, should I geve you the name of enemies? Now surely, me thinks I agnise the bodies, the faces, the apparell and habit of mine owne naturall citizens: but contrarywise, I see plainely the deeds, the words, the intents and minds of arrant enemies. For what have ye either wished or hoped for els, but the Ilergetes

 and the Lacetanes have done the like? And yet I must needs say, that they had to follow for their captaines in their outrage, Mandonius and Indibilis, two Princes of royall bloud: whereas you imposed the soveraigne commaund and government upon Vmber Atrius, and Calenus Albinus, two base companions. Denie now hardly if you will, that you all either were in the action, or willing in the intention. Verily I can easily beleeve you in so disavowing, and namely, that all this proceeded from the folly of some few brainsick fellows among you. For the trespasses committed are of that qualitie and consequence, that if the whole armie were therein culpable, the expiation and purging thereof could not be procured without great sacrifices and exquisite punishments. Full against my will I touch these points, as sores and gals that will not abide the rubbing: but unlesse they be touched and handled too, they cannot possibly be cured and healed. I assure you, for mine  owne part, I thought verily that when the Carthaginians were driven out of Spaine, there was neither place nor person throughout the whole province, that had envied my life and health: such hath bene my cariage, and so have I demeaned my selfe not onely with Allies, but also with enemies. But see, how much I have bene deceived! Even in mine owne campe, the newes of my death was not onely received with joy, but expected also with a longing desire. I speake not this, that I would have any man to imagin that I conceive, how all in generall are guiltie of this fact (for if I were persuaded in my mind, that my whole armie wished my death, I would heere dye presently before your eyes; for what good would my life doe me, repined of my souldiours and fellow citizens?) But the multitude of every people is like the seas in nature; which of themselves are unmoveable and stirre not: as the winds blow, as the gales  goe and come, so are they either calme or troublesome and unquiet: and even so the cause and source of all this furie and outrage, is in some few heads and leaders. As for you, yee have caught the infection from them, and played the fooles with them for companie. Cerresse, I am thus persuaded of you this day, that yee know not yet, to what enormious height of sollie yee have proceeded; what mischievous act yee were entred, into against mine owne person; what you attempted against your native countrie, your wives and children; what you enterprised against the gods and witnesses of your loiall oath; what ye have done against the sacred auspices and happie fortune, under which yee have served in warfare; what yee have committed against the custome and law of warre, against the discipline of your auncestours; and finally, how prejudiciall and offensive your designes have bene against the soveraigne majestie of the Roman  empire. As for my selfe, I am willing to say nothing: content I am to thinke, that yee rather gave credit to my death rashly and inconsiderately, than hearkened thereto willingly and greedily. And it may be, that I have so behaved my selfe, that no wonder it is, if mine armie bee wearie of me and of my government. But what harme hath your countrie deserved at your hands, which to betray, yee should complot with Mandonius and Indibilis? How hath the people of Rome offended you, that you have deprived the Kn.Marshals and Colonels created by the voices of the people, of their lawfull rule and authoritie, and conferred the same upon private persons? And being not therewith contented, to have and acknowledge them for your Colonels; you, even you the armie of the Romanes, have taken the knitches of rods belonging onely to the General, and bestowed them upon those, that never kept so much as a bondslave of their owne to commaund. Albius and Atrius forsooth, set up their pavilions in that chiefe place of State in the campe, where the soveraigne magistrat ought to quarter: with them the trumpet founded: from them the signall and watch-word was demaunded: they sat as iudges in the Tribunall seat of Scipio the Pro-consull: upon them the lictours and Sergeants attended: for them they made way and voided the place, against they should go forth and march in their state: and before them were the rods borne, and the axes withall. When it raineth stones, when thunderbolts are shot, when lightnings flash from heaven, when beasts bring forth strange, uncouth, and monstrous young ones, contrarie to the course of nature, you take them for prodigious signes and fearefull tokens. Nay, this is a monstrous sight and wonder in deed, which by no sacrifices of beasts, by no supplications and praiers, can bee purged and expiat, without the bloud of them that have committed  so hainous a fact. And albeit no wicked crime can be founded upon any reason, yet wold I gladly know of you (as in a case that indeed should not bee once named and remembred) what was in your mind? what imagined you? and what was your designment? There was in times past a legion sent to Rhegium, there to lie in garrison. Traiterously and villanously they murdered the principall citizens there, and for ten yeares space possessed and kept that wealthie town to their

owne behouse. For this notorius and beastly fact, the whole legion, even foure thousand men  and no fewer, were in the market place of Rome beheaded every one. And yet they at the first followed not for their captaine,Atrius Vmber, one little better than a launder, skullian, and follower of the campe, a man of an unluckie and unfortunate name, but Decius lubellrus a Tribune or Kn.Marshall :neither joyned they with Pyrrhus, nor with the Samnites and Lucanes, professed enemies of the people of Rom. Whereas yee, have plotted in counsell, and ment to have banded in armes togither with Mandonius and Indibilis. Their purpose was to have seared themselves for ever in Rhegium, like as before them the Campanes, who tooke Capua from the Tuskanes, the old inhabitants: and the Mamertines likewise; who possessed themselves in Sicilie of Messana, and never minded to molest and make warre, either upon the people of Rome, or any of their allies and confederates. But tell me I pray you, intended yee to have made your continuall residence, and to have dwelt at Sucro? where if I your Generall at my departure out of this province, when my time and commission was expired, should have left you behind me, yee might have cried out upon me, and called for vengeance to God and man, in regard of hard measure and wrong, offered unto you, in that yee might not be permitted to return home to your wives and children. Butalas, wife and children were clean excluded out of your mind:and ye thought no more upon them, than of me or of your native countrie. Well, I will follow on still, and discourse your plot and designs, wicked and ungracious though they were, yet haply not altogither so foolish and fottish in the highest degree as may be supposed. Imagined yee being eight thousand men in number, (and say that yee were all of better account and reckoning than Albius and Atrius are, under whom ye submitted your selves) to have beene able for to defeat the people of Rome of the province  of Spaine? so long as I lived, and the other armie stood sound and strong: wherewith in one day I forced new Carthage; with which I discomsited, put to flight, and chased out of Spaine, foure brave Generals, and as many puissant armies of the Carthaginians? But let that go by, and to lay aside my name, and to speake of no more abuse but this, that ye were very credulous and quickly beleeved that I was dead. How then? what if I were departed, this life, and gone indeed? Had the common-wealth togither with me yeelded up her ghost? Would the maine state and empire of Rome have fallen to the ground with mee at once? Forfend (o Iupiter, almightie and most gracious) that ever a cittie founded first most happily, with the approbation of the gods, built eternally for ever to endure, should be compared and made but equall with this fraile and mortall bodie of mine. Flaminius, Paulus, Gracchus, Posthumius Albinus, M. Marcellus, T. Quintius  Crispinus, Cn.Fulvius, two Scipioes, my father and unckle both, so many noble warriours and captaines, have bene slaine in this one warre; and they are dead and gone: yet the people of Rome continueth on foot and overliveth them, yea and shall still, when a thousand more of them shall die, either upon the edge of the sword, or upon some sicknesse or other. How should then the state of the people of Rome be enterred and buried with the dead corps of mee, but one man and no more? Even you your selves (to go no farther to seeke examples) here in Spaine, when my father and unckle, two Generals, were killed, chose Septimius, Martius for your captaine, to lead against the Carthaginians, being in the ruffe and jolitie upon their fresh late victorie. I speake now, as though if I had miscarried, Spaine had bene left destitute and without a Commander and Generall. M.Syllanus who was sent with me into the province, joined in the same commission  and of equall authoritie; L Scipro my brother, and C.Laelius, both Lieutenants generall: would these have sit still and done nothing? would these have failed to mainteine and recover the majestie of our empire? What? could yee have compared armie for armie, captaines for captaines with them? was either your reputation and credit, or your quarrell and cause comparable? And suppose that in all these regards, yee had bene superiour and gotten the vantage, would yee indeed with the Carthaginians, have born armes against your native countrie? against your fellow citizens? would ye in very truth, that Africke should have commanded Italie; and Carthage the citie of Rome? And for what demerit and great trespasse, I pray you, that your countrie had committed?Coriolanus long ago, being wrongfully condemned and unworthily banished, seeing himself to live a miserable exiled man, was moved to take armes and to come against his countrie  to assaile it. A private regard of love and naturall kindnesse, reclaimed him from publicke parricide. But what griefe of heart, what fit of anger hath incited and provoked you? Set case your wages was paid later by some few daies, whiles your Generall lay sicke; was that a sufficient cause for you, to give defiance to your countrie, and proclaime open warre against it? was

 that enough to cause you to revolt from the people of Rome, and turne to the Ilergetes? and to spare no lawe of God and man, but to breake all: and make shipwracke of conscience and common honestie? Now surely, souldiours, yee were out of your wits, and fooles yee were in the highest degree. I was not myselfe farther out of frame nor sicker in bodie, than yee were in your mind and understanding. I tremble to thinke upon it and to rehearse, what folke beleeved, what they hoped, what they wished. Let all bee forgotten and buried in oblivion, if it bee possible: if not, let us not speake of it yet, howsoever wee doe, but rake it up in deep silence. I cannot denie, but my words have seemed sharpe and bitter unto you, and all this my speech very rigorous. But how much more cruell thinke yee are your deeds, than my words tart and soure? And if ye deeme it reasonable, that I should beare and put up the things that ye have done; will  ye not abide then, and take in good part, and patiently hear me to tell all that I can say? But these matters I will lay no more in your dish from henceforth; ye shall be checked no more for them. Would God yee could as soone forget them, as I will put them out of my remembrance. And therefore as touching you all in generall, if ye repent and be displeased with yourselves for your fault and folly, I shall be content, and thinke you punished to the full. But as for Albius Calcnus and Atrius Vmber, with the rest of the authours of this cursed and detestable mutinie, they shall make amends for their trespasse and transgression, even with their heart-bloud; and they shall surely die for it. The spectacle of their exemplarie punishment ought not to seeme unto you greevous and odious, but rather a pleasant and delectable sight, if ye have any grace in you, and become again to your right wits. For their intent was to hurt and do mischeefe to no man alive,  more than to your selves.
He had scarce made an end of his speech, when all at once, according to the order given beforehand, there was presented to their eies and eares a terrible and fearefull object on all sides. For the armie which had environned the assemblie round about, clattered their and bucklers together. The common crier was heard to cite byname al those that were condemned there, in the presence of the whole audience. Stripped they were naked, and haled forth in the mids of them all, and every thing brought out at once for to accomplish the execution. Thus were they bound to the stake, whipped with rods, and their heads chopped off. So benummed they were all and astonied for feare, that were present at the sight hereof, that there was not heard amongst them all one shrewd and hard word, in misliking the rigour of the punishment, no nor  so much as one grone or secret sigh. Then their bodies were all drawne atone side, the place was made clean and purged, and all the soldiors were called by name, and before their Colonels and Kn.Marshals, sware alleageance, and to be true souldiors unto Scipio. And every one, according as he answered to his name, had his wages truly paied. This was the issue and finall end of the soldiours mutinie, which began at Sucro.
At the same time, captaine Hanno sent by Mago from Gades with a small power of Africanes, sollicited the Spaniards about the river,Guadalquivir. Baetis for monie, to rebel and put in armes upon a foure thousand able men. But afterwards he was forced by L. Martius to quit his campe, and having lost the greatest part of his men in the very tumult of taking the campe, yea, and some in the flight, whom the horsemen pursued in chase and slew as they ran stragling, himselfe with few  others escaped away. Whiles these things happened about the river Baetis, Laelius in the meane time having passed through the streights into the maine Ocean, arrived with his navie at Carteia. This is a citie standing on the sea coast bounding upon the Ocean, even in the mouth of the river, where it first openeth from the streights into the broad sea. Now there was some hope (as hath bene aforesaid) to gaine the citie of Gades without any assault, by treason, for as much as there came some into the Romane campe, that of themselves made offer and promise thereof. But the treason brake forth too soone, and was revealed before it was ripe, the conspiratours were all apprehended, and sent by Mago unto Adherball the Pretour, for to be conveied to Carthage. And Adherball having embarked those traitours in a Caravell or Gallion of five bancks of oares, and sent her afore, because she was slower of saile than those of three banckes; himselfe  with eight three banked gallies, followed a pretie way after. The said Caravell of five course of oares, was not so soone entred the streights, but Scipio also being embarked in another Caravell of the same sort, made out of the haven of Carteia, with seven gallies of three ranckes of oares, and invested Adherball and the foresaid gallies: supposing verily, that the enemies Caravell being taken tardie in the very current, was not able against the tide to retire. Adherball

being thus surprised on a suddaine, for a while stood in feare and doubt what to doe; whether hee  had best to follow on after his own Caravell, or turn the prows and beaks of his gallies, and make head against the enemie. Thus whiles hee stood at a bay lingering, hee lost the opportunitie of shifting and avoiding a battell: for now they were come within the dart shot, and the enemies on every side were readie to charge. And the current was so strong, that they were not able to rule and manage their ships as they would. And the manner of fight was nothing at all like to a seabattell, for as much as they could doe nothing to their mind, nothing by skill and dexeritie, nothing by counsell and advise. The nature only of the narrow sea, the violence of the current was all in all, and ruled the conflict, driving the ships one against another, as well upon their own fellows as upon their enemies, notwithstanding they rowed and laboured what they could to the contrarie. So as, one while yee should see a ship that fled and scudded away, whirled about back again  with a witnesse by the waves, upon those that had her in chase: and likewise another that seemed to follow and pursue after her enemie, if the happened once into a contrarie course of billowes, to turne top and taile, and seem to flie. And in the very conflict it so fell out, that when as one vessell ran with her beakehead full butt upon another, she was forced by waves to turne her side, and receive in her flancke the push of her enemies. And contrariwise, when as one lay with her flancke opposite to the enemie, suddainely all at once shee should wind and whirle againe upon her prow. As the gallies fought thus doubtfully together, hap hazard, at the pleasure and will of Fortune; the Romane Caravell (were it because of her weight shee was able to standmore stedie against the surging billowes, or by reason that shee had more rankes of oares that cut the waves, and so was more easily ruled) chaunced to sinke two of the smaller gallies of the enemies; and running  fast by one with a forcible violence, wiped away clean all the oares of one side, and had no doubt spoiled and marred all the rest that shee would have invested and charged upon, but that Adherball, with the other five made saile, and got over into Africke. Laelius having failed backe to Carteia with victorie, and heard what had been done at Gades, namely, how the complot of betraying the island was disclosed, the conspirators sent bound unto Carthage, and consequently all their hope frustrate and turned to nothing upon which they came to Gades; dispatched messengers unto L. Martius, giving him to understand, That unlesse they meant still to lie before Gades, trifling out the time and doing no good, the best way was to returne unto Scipio the lord General: and so with the consent of Martius both of them within few daies repaired to Carthage. Vpon whose departure Mago hadnot only a time to breath himselfe, being so frighted as he was  with a duple fear both by land and sea; but also hearing that the Ilergetes were revolted, conceived some hope to recover Spaine again, and addressed his courriers to the Senat at Carthage, who by relating not only the civile mutinie that arose in the Roman campe, but also the rebellion of the confederats (and all by way of amplification and enforcing every thing to the highest degree) should encourage and exhort them to send aids for to regaine the dominion of Spain, lest unto them by descent from their auncestors. Mandonius and Indibilis who were retired for a time into their confines, untill they knew how the sedition sped and what was the issue thereof, rested still in suspence. For if the naturall citizens had their trespasse forgiven, they made no doubt themselves but they might be pardoned also. But when it was published abroad how severely and sharply they were punished, they supposing their own transgression to deserve the like guerdon, sollicited their  owne people againe to take armes: and thus having levied and assembled the same power of aids which they had before, they passed into the Sedetanes countrie, where at the beginning they lay in standing campe, being in all 20000 foot, and 2500 horse strong.
Scipio after he had soone reconciled and woon againe the harts of his souldiours, as well by making true paiment of their wages, to the faultie and innocent alike, as also by shewing a loving countenance, and geving friendly words unto all indifferently; before that he dislodged and removed from Carthage,Scipio to his s^i^io^^s. assembled them altogether to an audience. Where he inveighed bitterly and at large against the falshood and trecherie of the lords of the countrey that rebelled: and protested before them all, that he went not now to be revenged of them for their wickednes with the same mind, wherewith lately before he had cured the folly, and reformed the error of  his naturall citizens: for then quoth he with harts griefe and grone, yea and with teares, like as one that rent and cut his owne bowels, I expiated and purged either the inconsiderate folly, of the wilfull malice of eight thousand men, with the heads of thirtie persons: but now I go with joy andglad hart, yea and with a resolution to execute and massacre the Ilergetes. For neither are

 they borne in the same land with me, nor linked now in any societie at all unto me: the only bond of faith and amitie which was betweene us, that have they themselves first impiously broken. But in mine owne armie, besides that I see they all are either Romane citizens, or els allies, and those not aliens, but meere Latines: this doth me good, and moveth me much, that there is not amongst them so much as one souldier to speake of, but was brought out of Italie either by mine unkle Cn.Scipio (who was the first of the Romane name that came as L. Deputie into this province) or els by my father who was Consull, or last of all by mine owne selfe. They are every one of them well acquainted and inured with the name of the Scipioes, and used to their fortune and goverment: whom I gladly would conduct home safe with me to deserved triumph; and whome I hope to find readie to assist mee with their favour when I stand for a Consulship, as if it were a  matter that concerned the honor of them all in generall, as well as mine particular. And as for the expedition now in hand, whosoever taketh it to be a warre, little remembreth the noble acts by me atcheived: for surely I make more reckning of Mago and his exploits, who is fled with a few ships as it were out of the compasse of the world, into an Iland environed with the Ocean sea, than I do of the Illergetes. For there in that place is not only a Carthaginian captaine, but all the Carthaginian forces and strength that now remaine. Heere are none but theeves and robbers, and their leader; who peradventure may be of some power and sufficiencie to soray the fields, to burne the houses, to drive away some cattaile of their neighbours, but to come to handstrokes in a setfight and raunged battaile, they are of no valor and worth at all: who no doubt will come into the field, trusting upon their good footmanship to run away in the rout, more  than upon any force of armes to maintaine the medley. And therefore I have thought good to put down and suppresse these Ilergetes, before I depart out of the province; not for any present dandanger at all, or feare of greater war that I see may spring from thence; but first and principally, that so ungracious and wicked a rebellion should not remaine unpunished; and next, because it might not be said, that in a province so subdued, as well by singular prowesse as rare felicitie, there was left one enemie behind of the Romanes. And therefore in the name of the gods follow after mee, not so much to make just warre (for yee are not to deale with enemies any way comparable unto you) as to take vengeance of wicked men, and to pusnish gracelesse persons.When he had finished his speech, he dismissed them, with commaundement to be readie the next morrow, to put themselves in the journey: and after that he set once forward, by the tenth day hee  came to the river Iberus, and when hee had passed over, within foure daies more, hee encamped in the sight of his enemies. Now there was a plaine there, environned round about with mountaines: into which vale betweene, he caused the cattaile (and those were for the most part driven out of the enemies countrie) for to be put forth to grasing, and all to provoke the anger of the fierce and savage enemies: and sent out withall, the light appointed archers to guard them: hee tooke order besides, that when these were once in skirmish with the vantcurriers of the enemies, Laelius with his Cavallerie should closely from some covert place give a suddaine charge. And for this purpose, there was a hill that bare out handsomely to hide the ambush of those horsemen. And presently without any delay, they came to a skirmish: for the Spaniards made out to the cattaile, so soone as ever they discovered them afarre off: the archers againe and darters of  the Romanes, ran upon the Spaniards as they were busie in their bootie. And at first they terrified them, and skirmished with their shot: but afterward, when they had spent their arrowes and darts, which were better to begin a fray, than determine a battell, they drew their naked swords, and began to fight close together foot to foot. And surely, the medley of the footmen had been doubtfully decided, but that the horsemen came upon them: who not onely affronted the enemies in their face, and trampled them all under their horsefeet that came in their way, but also some of them having wheeled about and fet a compasse along the hill foot, presented themselves at the backe of the enemies, so as they enclosed and shut up the most part of them in the middle betweene. Insomuch as there ensued a greater slaughter, than commonly upon light skirmishes by way of such rodes and excursions. But the barbarous people by this discomfiture were rather  kindled and enflamed to anger, than daunted any way or discouraged. And therefore, because they would not seeme to have been dismaied and affrighted, the morrow morning by day-light, they shewed themselves in battell array. The streight and narrow valey, as is beforesaid, was not able to receive and containe all their power: for two third parts welneere of the infanterie, and all the horse were come downe into the plaine field; the rest of their footmen besides, stood together

quartered on the side of the hill. Scipio judged that the skantnesse of the ground made for  him, both because it seemed that the Romane souldiours were more fitted to fight in a small roume than the Spaniards: and also for that the enemies were engaged within that place, which was not able to conteine the whole multitude: and therefore he devised a new stratageme besides. For considering that he could not in so narrow a space bring his owne cavallerie about to compasse and charge the wings and points of their battaile, and that the horsemen which the enemies had arranged together with their infanterie, would serve them in no steed; he gave direction unto Laelius to conduct the horse as closely as he could about the hils, and to keepe off the squadrons of the cavallery so farre as possibly might be from the medley of the Infantery. Himselfe directly turned all the consignes of the footemen opposite against the enemies, and marshalled the forefront with foure cohorts only, because he could not stretch out the battaile  any broader: and then without delay he made hast to begin the conflict, to the end, that while the enemies were amused and occupied in fight, they should be withdrawen from espying the horsemen as they traversed over the hils. Neither had they an eye of them at all, whiles they were brought about, before they heard the noyse and tumult of them as they charged upon their backs. So they fought asunder in two severall places: and two battailes of foote, and as many of horse encountred and joyned along the plaine, because the streightnesse of the ground would not admit both horse and foote to fight together in one plot at once. Now when as the infantery of the Spaniards could not help the men of armes, and they againe were as little succored by the Cavallerie, but that the footemen trusting upon the Cavallerie, were without good direction put rashly to fight in the plaine ground, and so beaten downe and slaine; and the  horsemen being enclosed round, could neither abide the enemies footemen afront them (for by this time their owne infanterie was overthrowne and diffeated) nor yet endure behind them the hote assault of their horsemen; they left their horses, cast themselves into a ring, and after they had stood so at defense a long time, were slaine every one to the last man: there was not I say one footeman or horseman left of all those that fought in the valley. As for that third part which stood upon the hill side, rather to behold the fight in a place of securitie, than to take part with their fellowes in the battaile, they had both time and space to shift for themselves and escape. Among whom, were the Princes also themselves in person, Mandonius and Indibilis: who were slipt away in the first of the medley, before all the battailons were environed. The same day was the campe also of the Spaniards forced: and therein besides other pillage, were taken  prisoners almost three thousand men. Of Romanes and allies there died in that fight upon a 1200, and above three thousand were fore hutt. The victorie no doubt had bene obteined with lesse bloudshed, if they had fought in a more large and open peece of ground, where there had bene better scope to flye away. Then Indibilis giving over cleane to thinke any more of warres, and supposing nothing safer, than to have recourse to the approved goodnes and clemencie of Scipio, sent his brother Mandonius unto him: who fell prostrate downe at his feete, blaming much (as the cause of their folly) the fatall rage and furie of the time; wherein not only the Illergetes getes and Lacetanes, but also the Romane camp, as it were by some contagious and pestilent infection, fection, became frantick and beside themselves: and said withall, that the condition of himselfe, his brother, and other their followers and subjects was such, as they were readie if it were so  thought good, either to yeeld up their lively breath unto Scipio, at whose very hands they had once received the same; or else if they might now be pardoned and saved, to devote and employ their lives for ever hereafter wholy in his service, as being now twise due unto him alone, and no other. Once afore they presumed upon confidence in their innocent cause, when as yet they had no experience of his clemencie: but now contrarywise they reposed all their full hope in the mercie of the conquerour, and nothing trusted in the goodnes of the quarrell. Now it was an old custome among the Romanes, not to exercise the absolute authoritie of their government upon any (as they did to peaceable subjects) with whom they were neither confedered in equal and reciprocall covenants, nor linked in the band of amitie; before they surrendred up unto them all rights, as well divine as humane: before I say they had received hostages of them, taken armor  from them, and planted garisons in their townes and cities. Scipio after he had sharply rebukedand roundly shaken up Mandonius there present, and likewise Indibilis that was absent, said, That for their wicked parts and lewd demeanor, they had worthily deserved death: but live they should by his goodnes and the gracious favour of the people of Rome. And moreover he promised

 neither to despoile them of their armour and weapons (the seizing whereof was but a pawne and assurance vnto such as feared rebellion; for as for him, he left unto them their armour freely to use at their pleasure, and their harts and minds secured from feare) nor proceed in rigor and crueltie against the guiltesse hostages, but against their owne persons, if they went out and revolted againe: ne yet would he content himselfe to be revenged of disarmed and naked enemies, but the offenders and transgressors should in their armes suffer for their deserts. And now since they had tried both fortunes, as wel the one as the other, he put unto their choise, whether they had leiffer have the Romanes pacified or displeased, friends or enemies? So Mandonius had a faire delivery: only there was an imposition and fine laid and Indibilis, of a summe of money for souldiers pay. Scipio himselfe after he had sent Martius before into the farther part of Spaine [beyond the river Iberus] and Syllanus back againe to Tarracon, stayed some few dayes untill the Illergetes had made payment of the monies that they were charged with: and then with all his souldieys lightly appointed without cariages, marched in a running camp to overtake Martius, who by that time approched neere unto the Ocean.
The treatie which Masanissa began before time, was upon sundrie occasions put off still and deferred. For the Numidian prince was very desirous to patley and commune with Scipio himself in person, and in his right hand to assure him offealtie: which was the very then, that Scipio tooke so long a journey so far out of his way. Masanissa being now at Gades, and advertised by Martius that Scipio was comming and neere at hand, shewed false semblance to Mago, made many excuses, and found much fault, namely, that their horses being up and pestered within  the Iland, were welncere lost and spoiled: and by their long abode there, not only they made others feele the want and scarcitie of all things, but also tasted thereof themselves: and besides that his men of armes for very cafe and idlenesse, became feeble and unlustie. By which suggestions he persuaded with Mago, and prevailed with him so much, as to suffer him to crosseover into the continent, under colour to wast and spoile the lands of Spaine next adjoyning. When he was passed over, he sent before him three principall Numidians, gentlemen of marke, to appoint both the time and the place of their meeting and conference, and gave order, that Scipio should deteine two of them with him as pledges: the third was sent backe, to conduct Masanissa to the appointed place, according as he was commaunded, and so with a small companie they met for to emparley and commune together.
 Now was Masanissa the Numidian king possessed before with a wonderful admiration of Scipio and his vertue, by reason of the same that was blazed abroad of his noble acts: and had conceived withall and imagined, that he was a man right personable, of a mightie, big, and goodly stature: but when he once saw him in place, he grew into a far greater reverence and honor of his person. For besides the exceeding majestie and port that naturally he caried with him, his goodly long bush of haire well became and graced him; the habite also and attire of his bodie, manly and souldiorlike, not brave nor tricked up deintely and delicately, much adorned and fer him out, And for his age, he was in the best and height of his strength: which seemed upon his late sicknesse, more full, more smug and fresh, as if the very prime and floure of his youth had bene renewed, and himselfe cast againe in a newmould. The Numidian (at their first meeting) almost  astonied, gave him thanks forsending back his brothers sonne unto him, saying, That ever since that time, he sought to espie some occasion and sit opportunitie, which now at length by the goodnes of the immortall gods being presented unto him, he had not neglected and let slip: Protesting, that he was most desirous both to do him savour, and to gratifie the people of Rome in any kind of service: in so much, as there was no one foreiner more earnest and readie to advance and better the State of the Romanes than himselfe: which (albeit he had bene willing unto heretofore) he could not possibly shew in effect, so long as he was in Spaine, a strange country, and unknowne unto him; but in that wherein he was borne and brought up in hope of succession in his fathers kingdome, he would be most forward to performe. For, in case the Romanes would send but Scipio as L. Generall into Affrick, he made no doubt but hoped assuredly,  that Carthage had not long to continue and stand, but soone would come to a finall end.Scipio for his part was glad both to see him, and heare him so speake; knowing this full well, that of all the cavallerie of the enemies, Masanissa and the Numidians went ever away with prick and price, and the yong man himselfe in his very countenance caried with him a good shew of a brave and hautie mind. So after faithfull promise geven and received on both parts, Scipio retired to Taracon:

and Masanissa when he had by the permission of the Romanes haried the coasts next adjoyning, because hee might not seeme to have passed over into the maine land for nothing, returned to Gades.
When Mago now being in utter despaire of Spaine (whereof he had conceived great hopes, and bare himselfe so proudly; first upon the mutinie of the soldiours, and afterwards upon therevolt and rebellion of Indibilis) made preparation to saile over into Africke, there came a message unto him from Carthage, that the Senate there had given order and direction, That hee should transport the armada which he had at Gades, and passe into Italie and there to take up and wage all the able men that possibly he could levie, either of Gaules or of Ligurians; and so to joyne with his power unto Anniball: and not to suffer that warre to quaile and slake now, which was enterprised with greatest force and endevour, and yet with greater favour of fortune. For this exploit, both treasure was brought from Carthage to Mago: and himself also raised as great sums as possibly he could of the Gaditanes, having not onely emptied the common treasure of the yland, but spoiled also their temples, yea and forced all private persons to bring abroad all their gold and silver whatsoever. As hee sailed along the coast of Spaine, hee landed his souldiours not farre from new Carthage: and after hee had wasted and overrun the territories by the sea side, he approached neere with his fleet, and rid at anchor before the cittie: where all the day long he kept his souldiours within their ships, and by night set them ashore, and led them toward that part of the wall, whereas Carthage was by the Romanes woon: supposing that the cittie was not sufficiently defended with a strong guard, and that some of the townesmen, upon hope of a chaunge and alteration, would rise up in armes and rebell. But there were come posts out of  the countrie in all hast beforehand, who had brought newes, as well of the harrying of the countrie and fearfull flight of the rusticall peasants, as of the comming of the enemies. Moreover the armada was descried also in the day time, and it was apparant, that they made not choise to anchor even just in the rode before the citie, for nothing. And therefore the citie soldiors stood readie, well appointed, and in armes, and kept within that gate, which turned toward the lake and the sea. And when the enemies, souldiours and marriners confusedly togither, were come in great disorder under the wals, with more tumultuous noise than forcible violence: the Romans at once suddainly set open their gate, and with a great crie and shout, made a fallie upon them charged the enemies, troubled and disordered them, and at the first onset volie of shot discomfited and put them to flight, yea and with much slaughter chased them to the shore: and but that  the vessels stood close to the strand, readie to receive them abourd as they fled so fearfully, there had not bin one left alive, either in the flight or fight. Nay, they that wer in the very ships were in great afright and peril, whiles for to prevent the enemies of breaking in upon them pel mel with their own companie, they pul'd up the ladders, drew in the planks, cut a two the ropes wherby the ships were fastned to the bankes, yea and the very cables for hast, that they might have no hinderance by weighing anchor: so that many there were, who in swimming to the shippes, because they knew not in the darke night, which way to go or what to avoid, perished miserably. The next day, when the armada was fled from thence backe againe into the Ocean from whence it came, there were found slaine eight hundred men: and of armours and corslets between the citie wall and the sea shore, two thousand.
Mago being retired to Gades, was excluded from thence, and arrived with his fleet at Cimbis, a place not farre from Gades. From whence hee sent embassadours, to complaine that the gates were shut against him, being their allie and friend: and when the Gaditanes excused themselves and said, that it was long of an uprore of the multitude, who were offended and aggrieved for certaine robberies committed, and spoile made by the soldiors at their departure, and when they were readie to be embarked; the trained forth to parlie their head magistrats (whom the Carthaginians call Suffetes) togither with the chiefe Treasurer: and after they were skourged and their skin pitteously torne, he commanded them to be roundly trussed up and crucified. From thence he sailed to Pityusa, an yland distant from the maine an hundred miles, inhabited at that time by Carthaginians, where the fleet was friendly and peaceably received: and not onely provided  for liberally of store of victuals, but also furnished with lostie men, for marriners to serve at sea, yea and with armour and munition for souldiours. Vpon which forces Mago bare himselfe confident and bold, and setting saile, fell with the Balear ylands, that were fiftie miles off. Now there are two of these ylands called Baleares, the one greater than the other, and more mightie both

 in men and munition: having an haven and harbour where Mago supposed that he might commodiously winter in. But the Ilanders withstood his navie with as great hostilitie, as if they had bene Romanes that had inhabited the yland, they could not have done more. And as now adaies they use for the most part slings, so at that time they practised no other kind of weapon at all. And in no nation besides, can yee find one speciall person, so much to excell in that seat, as all the Balears generally do exceed and surpasse others in the cast and slight thereof. And therefore they discharged and levelled among them, as the armada approached the shore, such store of stones flying about their cares as thicke as haile, that they durst not enter the haven, but turned their ships into the maine sea again. Then they put over to the lesser,Minorique, as the greater is called Maiarique. Iland of the Balears, which as it was fertile in soile, so for men and armour it was nothing so strong. Wherupon they disbarked  and came a land, and above the haven in a strong and well senced place they encamped. And having gotten to bee maisters both of the citie and the territorie about it, without any force of armes and conflict, they levied and enrolled there among them two thousand auxiliarie soldiors, whom they sent to Carthage for to winter, and then they drew up their shippes aland into the docke. When Mago was once departed from the Ocean sea-coast, the Gaditanes surrendred themselves to the Romanes.
These were the acts atchieved in Spaine, under the conduct and fortunate government of P. Scipio: who having delivered the charge of the province to L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus, returned to Rome with a fleet of ten saile. He had audience given him in the Senate, assembled in the temple of Bellona, without the cittie: where he discoursed before them, in order from  point to point, of all the affaires and exploits that hee had done in Spaine: Namely, how often hee had fought in set and raunged battailes; what a number of townes hee had forced and woon from the enemies; what nations he had subdued and brought in subjection under the state of Rome; how at first hee passed into Spaine, against foure generall captaines and foure victorious armies; and now had not left one Carthaginian in all those parts. Yet for all these noble deeds, he rather assaied what hope he might have of a triumph, than made any hote and ernest sute therfore: because it was never seen to that day, that any one had triumphed who made war, being himself no principall magistrat. After the Senat was risen and dismissed, he entred the citie: and caused to bee carried before him into the chamber of Rome, of silver in bullion, fourteene thousand three hundred and fortie two pounds weight; and in coine besides, a great quantities. Then L. Veturius  iPhilo, held the solemne assembly for creation of Consuls: and all the Centuries in generall, with exceeding favour and affection, elected P. Scipio Consull: and for to bee his companion in government, P. Licinius Crassus the Archbishop was joyned unto him. But this assembly (as wee find in records) was celebrated with more frequencie of people, than ever any had bin known during this warre. For they repaired and met from all parts, not onely to give their voices, but also to see Scipio: nay they ran in great numbers to his house, and into the Capitoll, when he sacrificed and slew an hundred oxen insacrifice for the honour of Iupiter, according to his vow which he had made in Spaine. And all mens minds gave them, and they were assuredly persuaded in their hearts, that as C. Luctatius finished the former Punick warre, so P Cornelius would make an end of that which was now in hand: and like as hee had driven all the Carthaginians foorth of  Spaine, so would Scipio hunt them out of talie: and every man in his conceit wished and assigned unto him the province of Africk, as if the war in Italie had binfully brought to an end. Then ensued the election of the Pretors. And two were created that were then Aediles of the Commons, to wit, Sp. Lucrecius, and Cn. Octavius: and of private persons, Cn. Servilius Cepio, and L. Armylius Pappus. In the fourteenth yeare of the Punicke war, P. Cornelius Scipio, and P. Licinius Crassus entred their Consulship. And unto the Consuls were the provinces appointed: namely, unto Scipio was Sicilie granted without casting lots, and that with the consent and good liking of his colleague, because he being the Archbishop, was by vertue of that dignitie kept still in Italie, for to see to the sacrifices, divine service, and church matters: and unto Crassus the countrie of Brutij was assigned. Then the provinces for the Pretours were put to the lotterie: and the civile  jurisdiction within Rome sell to Cn. Servilius: Atiminum (for so they called Gallia) unto Sp. Lucretius: Sicilie was alotted to L. Aemylius: and Sardinia to Cn. Octavius.
The Senate assembled in the Capitoll: where Publius Scipio propounded an Act, and it was confirmed by the authoritie of the house, That out of the monie which himselfe brought into the common treasure, he might be allowed to defray the charges of those plaies and games

that hee had vowed in Spaine during the time of the souldiours mutinie. Then hee called the  Embassadours of the Saguntines into the Senate house: and the most auncient man amongst them spake in this wise:
Although ^ight honorable,(...) of ^ it be not possible to find any more miseries and calamities, than we have endured alreadie in the maintainance of our faithfull alleageance unto you even to the end, yet such have your deserts beene to us ward, and so many favours have we received of your captaine Generals, that we thinke not much nor repent of any damage or losse whatsoever, that we have sustained in that behalte. For first, yee entred into the quarrell, and began the warre for our sake; and having once begun it, yee have continued therein for the full space of foureteene years; and that with such resolution, that oftentimes as ye have plunged your selves into extream perill and daunger, so ye have engaged no lesse the State of the Carthaginians. For at what time  as yee had within Italie a cruell and bloudie warre, and Anniball your mortall enemie, yee sent forth your Consuls with armies into Spaine, as it were to gather up the broken reliques of our shipwracke. Pub. and Cneus Corncly the two brethren, from the first time that they came into the province, never ceased to devise and doe, whatsoever might either advauntage us, or endammage our enemies. For first and formost, ^hey restored unto us our towne againe: then having made enquirie throughout all Spaine, where any one of our cittizens were sold as slaves, they delivered and redeemed them out of miserable servitude, and recovered for them their former freedome. But see; When we were well neere come to this good passe, that from our poore and pitifull estate we were raised up to a wished for and desirable fortune, then Pub. and Cn. Cornelij your Generals, suddainely died: whose death happened in manner more lamentable and dolourous unto us  than unto you. For then we thought verily, thus of our selves, That we were reduced from remote and distant places unto our auncient habitation, for this purpose, that wee should perish once againe, and see a second overthrow and destruction of our native countrie: knowing thus much, that for to worke our utter confusion, there needed not a Carthaginian captaine or armie to bee the instrument and the meanes; for even the Turdetanes alone, our most auncient enemies, who were the cause also of our former ruine and undoing, were able with their owne forces to root us out cleane, and extinguish our name. But behold, whiles we were in these perplexities, immediately beyond all our hope and expectation, ye sent among us this noble Scipio here in place. In whose behalfe, we count our selves of all Saguntines most happie, because we have seen him declared Consull alreadie, and shall be able to report the newes unto our neighbors and fellow citizens, that we have beheld with our own eies, even our whole hope, our help, our health and safetie. Who having forced and woon very many cities and townes of your enemies in Spaine, at all times and in all places set the Saguntines apart from out of other prisoners and captives, and sent them home againe into their owne countrie. Finally, as for Turdetania a nation so adverse, and so daungerous enemies unto us, that if it should continue still in prosperitie, Saguntum could not possibly stand upright; he hath by force of armes so quelled and tamed it, that neither we ourselves, nor (bee it spoken without arrogance) any of our posteritie hereafter need stand in feare of any daunger from thence. Wee see before our eies their citie rased, at whose instigation and whom for to gratifie, Anniball before had rased Saguntum: and out of their lands now, we gather rents and revenues: which contenteth our hearts, not so much for profit and gaine, as for  quittance and revenge. In consideration and regard of these benefits and good turnes, which be such, as greater we cannot hope nor wish for at the hands of the immortall gods: the Senate and people of Saguntum hath sent us ten here in Embassie unto you, for to give you thankes in their name, and withall, to rejoice and congratulate in your behalfe for the happie hand ye have made, and the fortunate exploits yee have atchieved these last yeares past, as well in Spaine as in Italie; namely, that yee have subdued, and doe hold in possession all Spaine; not onely so farre as to the river Iberus, but even to the lands end, and the utmost point lying upon the Ocean sea: And as for Italie, ye have left no more ground in it for Anniball and the Carthaginians, than they empale within the compasse of trench and rampier. Moreover, we have in speciall charge, not onely to render thanksgiving therefore to almightie and most gracious ^upiter; the patron of the fortresse  and castell of the Capitoll, but also to offer and present unto him (if it may stand with your good grace and liking) this golden crowne; and to set it up^in the Capitoll, in token and memoriall of Victorie. Which we humbly beseech your HH. or your favour to graunt unto us: and moreover (if it please you) to ratifie and confirme for ever by your authoritie and approbation, all those

 benefits, franchises, and priviledges, which your Generals have of their goodnesse vouchsafed to endow us with.
The Senate made this answere to the Saguntine Embassadours, That both the rasing and also the rearing againe of Saguntum, should be a memorable example to all nations, of the faithfull societie and alliance, observed both of the one part and the other inviolate. And whereas their Generals had re-edified the citie of Saguntum, and delivered the citizens thereof from servitude and bondage, they had therein done well and truly, and by direction, according to the wil and pleasure of the Senat. And whatsoever els was performed by them to the good and benefit of the Saguntines, the Senat stood willing and contented therwith, and gave order therfore. As for their present and oblation, good leave they had to bestow it solemnely in the temple of the Capitoll.  After this, order was given, That the Embassadours should have their lodging appointed them, and presents sent unto them, and all other entertainement at the charges of the cittie, yea, and by way of a reward, an allowance of no lesse than ten thousand Asses apeece.
Then were the other Embassadors admitted into the Senat house, and audience given them. Also the request of the Saguntines was granted to go and see Italie for their pleasure, so far forth as they might with securitie of their persons: and certaine guides were assigned to conduct and accompanie them, with especiall letters also directed unto all cities and townes, for to receive the Spaniards friendly, and give them courteous entertainment.
These things done, the Senators sat in consultation about the state and commonweale, and treated concerning the levying of new armies, and the distribution of the provinces. Now when as the  common brute went that P. Scipio was destined and named to a new province of Astick, and all men gave out with open voice, that he was the man to be sent thither directly, without casting oslots for the matter: and himselfe besides not resting content now with meane glorie, said openly, that he was declared Consull, not onely for to mainteine warre, but also to finish and make an end thereof once for all: which could not be effected by any other meanes, unlesse himselfe in person made a voiage with an armie into Affricke; protesting moreover, That if the Senate crossed and gainesaid this designe of his, he would propound it to the people, and carie it away clear by their voices: whiles the principall LL. and auncients of the Senate were nothing pleased with this resolution of his, but durst not say a word and speak their minds, either for feare, or for courting of him, in hope of preferment; only Q. Fabius being demaunded his opinion, spake to the  matter in question to this effect.
Right honourable and my LL.The Ovation of Q. Fabius. of the Senate, I know full well, that many of you here assembled are of this mind, and verily persuaded, That we are set this day to no purpose, but even to consult and debate of a matter cleerely determined; and that in vaine he shall spend words, who shall deliver his advise of the province of Affricke, as of a point as yet doubtfull and not resolved upon alreadie. For mine owne part, first and formost I cannot conceive, neither will it enter into my head, how Affricke can possiblie now bee accounted as a province, and assigned certainely unto your Consull (let him be a man right hardie, and of as much valour as may be) considering, that neither the Senate unto this day hath judged it, nor the people ordained and assigned it to any person in the nature and name of a province. Furthermore, if it were so indeed without all peradventure;  then in my judgement, the Consull hath done amisse, who in making semblance to put a matter for to be debated, which is alreadie agreed upon, hath deluded and mocked the whole Senate, and not the Senatour, who in his course delivereth his opinion of the thing in question. But I am assured, that in gainesaying and crossing this hastie voiage into Affricke, I shall incurre the sinister opinion and surmise of two things: the one is, of my usuall lingering and slow proceeding in all mine actions (a course that naturally I am given unto) which yong men may terme at their pleasure, timourousnesse and lazinesse; but so long as I have no cause to repent therfore, I passe the lesse. For surely hitherto, the advises of others have ever at the first fight made a goodlier shew, and seemed more honourable; but by experience, mine own waies have sped better, and beene found in the end more effectuall. The other is, of backbiting, detraction, and envying  at the glorie and reputation of the Consull, a man of singular prowesse (I must confesse) and whom I see to grow from day to day in greatnesse and honour. From which jelousie and suspition, if neither my life passed and the carriage of my selfe; if neither my Dictatorship with five Consulships, nor so much glorie which I have acquired, as well in managing the affaires of warre abroad, as of civile pollicie at home (that a man would thinke I should rather bee

glutted therewith than desire any more) bee able for to cleere and assoyle mee; yet my  yeeres at leastwise, may free mee verie well. For what concurrence and emulation can there bee betweene mee and him, who is not of equall age with my very sonne ? When I was Dictatour, in the vigour and floure of my strength, in the very course and traine of my greatest and bravest exploits, no man either in Senate or in the assemblie of the people, heard me to refuse and denie, That my own Generall of Cavallerie, who could not affourd mee a good word but ever railed at me, (a thing that was never heard before) should be made equall with my selfe in commaund and government. And yet by good deedes rather then by faire words, I effected and gained thus much in the end, that he, who in the judgement of others was matched with me and made my fellow, confessed within a while himselfe to be my inferior. Lesse reason have I then now, after I have gone through all degrees of honors and dignities, to enter into contention  and emulation with a yong gentleman, of all others at this day most flourishing in the eies of the world: unlesse forsooth it be a likely matter that I (a man weary not only of managing affaires, but also of this world, and of this life) should looke to have the province of Affrick offred unto me, if it were once denied him. Nay verily, I have enough alreadie: in that glorie I am content to live and die, and seeke for no more. It was sufficient for me to hinder Anniball from atcheiving the victorie; to the end that by you, who now are gallants in the best of your strength, he might be vanquished and overcome. Meet it is then and great reason, o P. Cornelius, that you should beare with me, and hold me excused, if I (who never in regard of mine owne selfe set greater store by the fame and opinion of people, than of the good of the common-weale) prefer not now your glorie before the weale-publike. And yet I will not say, but in case there were no war  at al in Italie; or the enemie of that qualitie, as by conquering of whom, there were no credit and honor to be gotten: then he that would seeke to keepe you still in Italie, were it never so much for the good of the State, might seeme to go about to disappoint and frustrate you (in putting you by the charge of the warre) of the very meanes and matter of your glorie and renowne. But seeing that Anniball is your object, seeing he is our enemie, who with an entire armie still holdeth Italie as it were beseeged now these foureteene yeeres; will you not, o P. Cornel. hold your selfe well contented with this honour and reputation, That you being Consull, should drive that enemie out of Italie, who hath bene the cause of the death of so many brave men of ours, and of so many foiles and overthrowes that we have received? that, like as C. Luctatius had the name of finishing the former Punick warre, so you may win the title of ending this other also. Vn^esse a man would say that Amilcar was a warrior and captaine worthie to be preferred before Anniball; or that war of more importance than this; or that victorie greater and more honorable than this is like to be, in case it happen that we may be conquerours under your conduct, and whiles you are Consull. Whether would you chuse rather to have drawne Amilcar away from Drepanum and the mountain of Eryx, than chased and hunted the Carthaginians and Annibal out of Italie? Nay surely even your owne selfe (howsoever you embrace glorie alreadie won, than hoped for hereafter) would not take more joy and contentment, and triumph rather for freeing and delivering of Spaine than Italie, from the warres. Anniball iwis as yet is not come to that low ebb, nor so downe the wind, but that he which hath made choise of another war, may seeme well in so doing to stand as much in feare and dread, as in contempt of him. Why then addresse  you not your selfe to effect this imprese, and leave building these castles in the aire, and hope by fetching these reaches and this compasse, and going the longest way about, that when you are passed over into Affrick, Anniball will follow you thither; and not rather go the next way to worke, and fight with Anniball where he is, and make no more ado? Are you willing indeed and desirous to win this honor, of dispatching quite the Punick warre? Why, it is the very course of nature to defend and make sure your owne, before you go in hand to assaile the dominions of others. Let us have peace first in Italie, before we make warre in Affrick: and let us first rid our selves of feare, or ever we take occasion to put others in feare; unlesse we had some greater quarrell. And if by your conduct and fortunate government, both these may possibly be effected; conquer Anniball here, and then go thither to assaile Carthage a gods name. But if the one or  the other of these victories must needs be left for new Consuls to achieve: as the former of the twaine will be the greater and more memorable, so it will open the way, and give the overture unto the other ensuing upon it. For at this time, over and besides that our treasure, and all the revenues and finances of our state, are not able to mainteine and wage two sundrie armies both in

 Italie and in Affrick: besides I say, that we want the meanes to keepe two Armadacs aflote, and have nothing left sufficient wherewith to furnish them with victuals and munition: who seeth not I pray you, how farre we engage our selves in perill and danger by this enterprise? P. Licinius shall warre in Italie, and P. Scipio in Affrick. What wil ye say if Anniball, (which God forfend, and my heart even dreadeth to bode the osse, but that which once hath hapned, may happen ful wel again) upon the traine of some new victorie, fortune to go forward and assault the citie of Rome? Where are we then? Shall we have time then to send for you our Consull out of Affrick, as we did for Q. Fulvius from Capua? And what say you to this besides, That the fortune of war is doubtfull and uncertaine even in Affrick, as wel as in other places? Call to mind, and be taught betimes by the examples of your owne house and familie, by your father and unkle; who  within 30 daies were slaine, and their armies defeated; even there, wheras for certain yeeres space they had performed both by sea and land most noble exploits: and highly renowmed among foreine nations both the Romane people, and also your owne name and familie. The time will not serve, if I would all this day long do nothing els but recken and recount unto you, how many Kings, Emperours, and Generall Captaines there have bene, who have entred rashly into their enemies countries, and received many foiles and overthrowes thereby, as well in their own persons, as in their whole armies. The Atheniens, a most prudent and politick State, having left the war at home in their own countrey, and following the counsell and suggestion ofHe meaneth Alcibiades. one yong man, as hardie and valiant in armes, as noble in birth and parentage as your selfe (none dispraised) sailed into Sicilie with a brave and puissant navie; and there in one battaile fought at sea,  overturned and ruinated forever their most flowring citie and common-weale. But why seeke I forraine examples of strangers, and old stories of times too far past, and over-long ago. Let even this same Affrick (to go no farther) and M. Atilius, serve as a notable example of both fortunes, for our instruction and learning for ever. Now certes, P. Cornelius, when you shall once discover Affrick within your kenning from the sea, you will thinke then that your provinces of Spaine were matters of sport and pastime in comparison of it. For what semblable proportion or likenesse is there betweene them? When you were in your voyage for Spaine, you sailed in the calme sea peaceably along the coast of Italie and France, and arrived at Emporiae, a friend citie and confederate: and when you had landed your men, you led them in securitie through all places to the friends and allies of the people of Rome, even as farre as Tarracon. From thence, ye journeyed  all the way by cities and townes, furnished with Romane garisons. About the river Iberus, you found the armies of your father and unkle, which remained upon the losse of their Generals, more fierce and fell for the calamitie that they had received, than before. You met there L. Martius their captain and leader, chosen (I must needs say) I know not how in a hurrey, by the souldiers themselves for the time: but otherwise I assure you, if nobilitie of birth and the titles of dignities which he justly deserved had graced him, he was in all feates of armes and martiall knowledge, comparable to the very best warriors and noblest Captaines. After this you assaulted Carthage without any empeachment, and tooke your time at your own pleasure, even when there was not one of the three Carthaginian armies to aid and defend their associates. As for all the exploits besides (without offence be it spoken, and not to debase any good service there) they are in  no respect to be compared with the Affricane warre: where wee shall finde no haven open to enterteine our Armada, no countrie peaceable, no citie confederate, no king friendly, no place at all either to sojourne and rest in, or to march forward and passe through with safetie. Which way so ever you cast your eyes, nothing but hostilitic threating danger and perill unto us. Do you in deed trust Syphax, or relie upon the Numidians? Well, let it suffice that once ye trusted them. Rash adventures speede not alwayes best. And oftentimes wee see, that fraude seemeth faithfull, and maketh way of credite in small things, that in matters of great importance, and when the time serveth, it may pay home and worke a mischiefe with a witnesse. The enemies overcame not your father and uncle by force of armes, before that the Celtiberians our Allies overraught them by falsehood and treacherie: neyther  were your selfe in so much daunger from Mago and Asdrubail the chiefe Captaines of your enemies, as from Indibilis and Mandonius, your new friends and confederates. Can you repose any confidence in the Numidians? you, I say, that have experience of your owne souldiours mutinie, and have seene them rise against you? As for Syphax and Masanissa, as they had rather themselves be the soveraigne and most mightie in Affricke, than

the Carthaginians should; so surely they wish the Carthaginians to be the highest, above  all others besides their owneselves. Now at this time there is some emulation and heartburning among them, and all occasions of quarrell whet them on to mainetaine sides and factions, so long as feare of forraine enemie is farre ynough off. Shew them once the Romane armes and forces, let them see an hoast of straungers once, they will runne I warrant you, altogither then, as it were to quench a common skarefire. You shall find that the very same Carthaginians, will farre otherwise stand to the defence of the walles of their countrie, their citties, the temples of their gods, their altars and private houses, when going to battaile they shall have their fearfull wives to beare them companie, their final children to go afore them in their eye; you shall find them I say, stick better to it, than they did in the quarrell and defence of Spaine. But what and if the Carthaginians, finding themselves strongenoughupon the confidence  of the generall concord of Africke, of the fast fidelitie of the confederate kings, of the strength of their owne wals, should fortune themselves, when they shall see Italie destitute of your helpe, and disfurnished of your forces, either to make out a fresh armie from Africke and send it into Italie, or else give order and direction to Mago (who as it is well knowne for certaine, is departed with his navie from the Baleare Ilands, and lyeth floting and riding continually upon the Alpine Ligurians) for to joyne his power with Anniball? It is a cleere case, that we shall be in as great trouble, and as much affrighted then, as we were of late, when Asdruball mounted over the Alpes, and came down into Italie. Asdruball I say, whom you (that will with your armie compasse not only Carthage but also all Affricke) let go out of your hands, and suffered to passe over into Italie. But you will say, that you have vanquished him. Say you so? I would not for anything, not onely in regard of the love I beare to the common-weale, but also of the affection that I carrie toward your selfe, that a vanquished man could find the way by you into Italie. Be content and suffer us to attribute all things that have gone well with you or the common-weale, during the time of your government, to your wisedome and pollicie; and contrariwise, whatsoever hath fallen out crosse and adverse, to impute and assigne the same to nothing else, but to the variable events of warre, and to fickle fortune. The better and more valiant that you are, the more need hath your native countrie, yea and all Italie besides, to keepe you still at home with them, so brave a captaine, so rare a Protectour. You cannot your owne selfe dissemble the matter, but confesse, That wheresoever Anniball is, there is the very head, the fort and strength of all this warre; for as much as you pretend, that the only cause why you would passe into Africke, is to draw Anniball thither after you. Well then, be it here or be it there, with Anniball you must have to deale. Tell me then, whither are you like to be stronger in Africke your selfe alone, or here where your own forces and the power of your Colleague shall be joyned togither? Is it possible that even the late example of Livius and Claudius so freth in memorie, should not enforme and teach us, what difference there is between the one and the other? In whither place I pray you, will Anniball be more strong in men and munition; here in the utmost corner and angle of the Brutians countrie, where this long time he hath waited in vaine for aid from home, where hee hath sent for succour and gone without; or nere unto Carthage, and in the mids of Affricke among his friends and allies? What kind of pollicie is this of yours, there to decide the quarrell and trie the whole matter, where your owne forces are lesse by a halfe moitie, and the power of your enemies much greater  and stronger; rather than here, whereas you may fight with the power of two armies against one, toiled out of heart in so many battailes, and wearied with long warfare, so tedious and grievous withall? Consider with your selfe, what conformitie and resemblance there is, betweene your dessignes and your fathers. He, as Consull having made a journey into Spaine, to the end that he might encounter Anniball as hee came downe the Alpes; returned out of his owne province into Italie: and you, when Anniball is in Italie, purpose to abandone and leave Italie. And why? forsooth not because you judge it good for the common-weale, but because you thinke it an enterprise that may emport you in great honour and glorie: like as when you being captaine Generall of the people of Rome, left your province at randon, and your armie at sixe and seven, without warrant of law, without order or act of Senate, hazarded in two bothomes the whole state  and majestie of the Empire of Rome; which at that time togither with the daunger of your life, incurred the perill and jeopardie of the maine chance. To conclude, for mine own part (my lords of the Senat) I am of this mind, and this is my conceit, That P. Cornelius was not created Consull privately for himselfe and his owne behouse, but for the good of the common-weale and us all:

 and that the armies were levied and enrolled, for the guard of the cittie and defence of Italie; and not for the Consuls, in their owne proud selfe-conceit and overweening of themselves, after the manner of absolute KK. to transport and lead into what parts of the world they list themselves. When Fabius by this Oration (premeditate and framed to the time) had through his authoritie and the long setled and confirmed opinion that men had of his wisedome, drawne unto his side a good part of the Senate, and specially the auncients; insomuch as the greater number commended the grave counsell of the old man, above the lustie and youthfull courage of the other gallant:The ars^^e of Scipio to the former Orali^^s. then Scipio by way of answere made these remonstrances, and spake in this wise. My lords of the Senate, even Fabius himselfe in the beginning of his Oration, said very well, That his opinion which he was to deliver, might be suspected of detraction and envie. Of which note, verily  I durst not my selfe taxe and accuse a man of his qualitie and reputation so much, as me thinkes is not so well cleered as it ought to be the very suspition it selfe: and I wote not whither it bee by a default of his speech and oration, or that the thing it selfe is so pregnant. For in such manner he extolled with goodly words, and magnified his owne dignities and renowmed deeds, and all to quench the jealousie and crime of envie: as if my selfe were to feare the danger of emulation and concurrence of some companion of the basest degree and condition, and not of him; who because he farre surpasseth other men, (which height and pitch of honour I denie not, but I endevour my selfe to reach unto) would not in any hand, that I should compare with him. So highly hath hee advanced himselfe in regard of his old yeares, considering that hee hath gone through all rankes of honour: and so low debased me, and put me downe even under the age of his own  sonne; as though the desire and love of glorie, should passe no farther than the length of mans life, and the greatest part thereof extended not to the memorie of posteritie and the future time. This I hold for certaine, that it is a thing incident to the most magnanimous men and of greatest spirit and courage, to have a desire for to match themselves not onely with them that live in their daies, but with the most famous and excellent personages, that ever were or might be in any age. And certes for mine own part, o Q. Fabius, I will not make it goodly, but frankly bewray my mind that way, namely, that I would full fain not only attain unto your praise-worthie acts and commendable vertues: but also (with your good leave be it spoken) if possibly I can, even to excell and surmount the same. And therefore let us not carrie this mind, either you toward mee, or I to those that are younger than my selfe, To be unwilling and thinke much, that any one cittizen among  us, shouldprove equall to our selves: for in so doing, wee should offer wrong and doe hurt not onely to them whom we have envied and maligned, but also prejudice the common-wealth, and in manner the whole state of all mankind. And thus much to your selfe. He hath now (my lords) recounted, to what great perils I should enter into by the Africk voyage: in such sort, as he would seem not only to have a carefull regard of the common-wealth and the armie, but also to pitie me and tender my case and fortune. Whence commeth it, that you shuld al on a sodain take so great care for me? when my father and unckle both were slaine; when their armies both twaine, were utterly almost diffeated and put all to the sword; when Spaine was lost; when foure armies of Carthaginians, and foure Generals, held all in feare by force of armes; when there was a captain sought for to undertake that warre, and no man durst bee seene to put himselfe forward, no  man so hardie as to present and offer his service, but my selfe; and when the people of Rome had committed the charge and government of Spain to me a yong man, but foure and twentie yeares old: how hapned it that no man then tooke exception of my age, made mention of the enemies force, discoursed of the difficultie and daunger of the warre, or laid abroad the late and fresh defeature and death of my father and uncle? I would demaund and gladly know, Whither we have susteined now lately, some greater calamitie and losse in Affricke, than we received at that time in Spaine? or if the armies at this present in Africke be more puissant, or the captaines more in number, or better in valour, than they were in Spaine at that time? or whither mine age then, was more ripe and sufficient to mannage warres, than now it is? Last of all, whither it be better, more commodious and easie, to mainteine warre with the Carthaginian enemie in Spaine, than in  Africke? After that I have discomfited and put to flight foure hoasts of Carthaginians; after I have either forced by assault, or reduced under mine obeisance (for feare) so many citties; after I have vanquished and subdued all, even as far as to the Ocean sea, so many princes and potentates, so many fierce and cruell nations; after I have so fully recovered Spaine, as there is not remaining to be seen there, so much as the sooting and bare token of any war: an easie matter it is, and all one

to elevate and depresse the acts past that I have atchieved: as also par-die it will be, when I returne  with conquest out of Africke, to debase and make nothing of those very things, which now to keepe me backe from thence, and to make them appeare strange and terrible, are amplified with great words, and stretched upon the tainters to the full. He holdeth, That there is no accesse, no entrance into Affricke, nor havens open to receive an armada. Hee telleth us and alleageth, That M. Atilius was taken prisoner in Affricke: as if M. Atilius forsooth at his first arrivall in Affricke, had caught that harme and heavie misfortune. But hee never remembreth and calleth to mind, how that even the very same captaine, as infortunate as he was, yet found the baies open ynough into Affricke: and the first yeere, bare himselfe right valiantly and victoriously; and for any hurt from Carthaginian captaines, continued invincible unto the end. You shall never therefore feare mee with this example so much, (were it so, that the calamitie you speake of, happened  in this warre, and not in the former; of late, and not fortie yeeres agoe) that I should give over my intended purpose, and not saile into Affricke now, because Regulus there was taken prisoner: as well as I passed before into Spaine, whereas the Scipions chaunced to bee killed. Or that I should suffer, that Xanthippus the Lacedemonian was borne into this world more happie for Carthage, than my selfe for Italie: but rather, that thereby I should think the better of my selfe, considering that the vertue of one onely man can be of such consequence and so great effect. But we ought (you say) to consider the example of the Athenians, who leaving the warre at home in their owne countrie, passed over into Sicilie unadvisedly. Seeing you are atso good leisure to tel tales and report the fabulous stories of Greece; why discourse you not rather of Agathoclu the king of the Syracusians? who seeing that Sicilie a long time was troubled and vexed with  the Punicke warre, sailed over into the selfesame Affricke whereof wee speake, and withdrew the warre thither from whence it came? But what need I to instruct and teach you by rehearsing old and forraine examples, how materiall a thing it is and important, to begin with an enemie first, and put him in feare; and by bringing another into danger, to remove the perill from our selves? Can there bee a president found more pregnant, more present and fresh in memorie to prove and enforce this point, than Anniball himselfe? A great difference there is betweene the wasting and pilling the lands of others, and the seeing of our owne burnt and destroied. And he which giveth the assault to endanger another, is ever of more courage than hee that standeth upon his owne guard and at defence onely to save himselfe. Moreover, the feare and dread is alwaies greater of things unknown unto us: but so soon as a man is entred into the confines of aforrain countrie, he may behold and see at hand (as well the good as the bad) what may advauntage and what may endommage the enemies. Anniball would never have thought and hoped, that so many States in Italie would have revolted unto him, as they did upon the overthrow at Cannae. How much lesse account then may the Carthaginians make of anything in Africke, to remaine fast and assured unto them; who are fickle allies to strangers, without all truth and fidelitie; proud lords and intollerable tyrants over their owne subjects, full of wrath and crueltie? Over and besides, we (albeit we were forsaken and abandoned of all our confederates) stood alwaies upon our owne forces, and maintained our selves with meere Roman soldiours; whereas in Carthage they have no strength of natural citizens: the soldiors that they have, are mercenaries al and waged for monie; partly Africanes, and partly Numidians, the most unconstant nations of all others by nature, and  aptest to entertaine changes and innovations. Let me have no stay and hinderance in this place onely; ye shalt heare newes at one time, That I am set over in Affricke, that all the countrie there is up in a broile; that Anniball is readie to dislodge and remove out of these parts; and also that Carthage it selfe is besieged. Expect you daily out of Africke better and luckier tidings, yea, and oftener than yee heard out of Spaine. These hopes of mine, I ground upon the fortune of the people of Rome; upon the justice of the gods, witnesses of the league broken by the enemies; upon Syphax and Masanissa, both kings, whose truth and fidelitie I will trust so farre forth as I find them, and ever stand in feare and doubt of their falshood and trecherie. Many things there are now, that by distance of place appeare not, which warre once begun will soone discover. And this is a speciall point of a man indeed, and of a good captain, in no case to be wanting  unto fortune when she offereth her selfe, but to take all vantages that she giveth: and those accidents and occurrences which fal by chance, to make use of them: yea and by wisdome and counsell to frame them to his owne purpose and designes. True it is, o Fabius, I shall have Anniball to beard and to match mee; a souldiour, I contesse, as good every way as my selfe: but I will rather

 draw him after me, than hee shall keepe mee backe at home. Force him I will to fight in his owne countrie, and Carthage shall bee the price of my victorie, rather than the decaied peeces, and halfe ruinate petie castles of the Brutij. Only provide, o Q. Fabius, that in the meane time whiles I am at sea in my voyage, whiles I am landing mine armie in Affrick, whiles I approch Carthage with a running camp, the Common-weale susteine no harme and domage heere at home. See to this, I say, and be well advised, that it be not a shamefull reproch to say, That P. Litinius the Consull, a man of singular valour (who because he is the high priest, and by vertue therof, not to absent himselfe from the solemne celebration of sacrifices and divine service, was content and willing, that the charge of so distant a province should not befall unto him by casting lots) is not able to performe that, now when Anniball is halfe defeated, and his heart almost broken, which  your selfe was sufficient to effect, when Annibal squared it out, and braved all Italie like a conquerour. But set the case, and suppose and say, that by this course which I meane to take, the warre be never the sooner brought to an end: yet surely it were for the honor of the people of Rome, and for the reputation and name which they have among forrain princes and States abroad, that they may see and know, that our hearts serve us, not onely to defend Italie, but also to offend Affricke. And that it might be neither thought and beleeved, nor spoken and noised abroad in the world, how no Roman captaine durst adventure that which Annibal hath alreadie dared and done: and when as in the former Punicke war, when all the quarrell was for Sicilie, our armies and armadaes so often assailed Affricke; now that Italie is in question, Affrick should lie still, and be at rest. Nay rather let Italie be at repose and quiet now at last, after so long travell and affliction, and let Affrick  in her turne bee fired and forraied another while. Let the Romane campe bee pitched, rather under the very walls and gates of Carthage, than we see once againe from our walls the trench and rampier of our enemies, to invest our cittie. Let Affricke be the set place and seat of the war, let fright and flight, forraying and ^arrying of countries, revolt and rebellion of allies, and all other inconveniences and enormities that follow war, which have lien heavie upon us these fourteene yeeres, turne from us thither. It shall content and suffice mee to have spoken as touching Statematters and the Commonweale, of the warre presently in hand; and concerning the provinces and their goverment, now in question and consultation. For it would require a long and tedious discourse, and the same impertinent altogether unto you, if as Q. Fabius hath defaced and depraved mine acts in Spaine, so I likewise should disgrace him and diminish his glorie, and set out  my selfe and mine owne reputation with goodly and magnificall words. But my LL. I will do neither the one nor the other. And if in nothing els, yet at leastwise, yong man as I am, I will in modestie and government of my tongue, goe beyond him as old and auncient a personage as he is. Thus have I lived, and thus have I carried my selfe in all mine actions, that without blasing of mine owne praises, I can soone content my selfe with that good opinion which you of your selves have conceived and entertained of me.
Scipio had audience given him, with lesse indifference and patience, because it was commonly voiced abroad, That if the Senate would not graunt him to have the province and emprese of Affricke, he would immediately propound and put it to question before the people. Whereupon Q. Fulvius, a man that had beene foure times Consull and Censor besides, required the  Consull to speake his mind openly before the Senate, whether he would referre it unto the LL. there assembled, to determine of the provinces, and stand to that which they should set down, or preferre the thing unto the people. When Scipio had made answere againe and said, That hee would doe that which might be good and expedient for the service of the Commonweale; then Fulvius replied upon him and said: I demaund not this question to you, as ignorant what either you would answere, or what you meant to doe. For I know full well, and you pretend no lesse your selfe, that you doe but found the Senate, and feele rather how they are enclined, than to stand to any advise of theirs in good sadnesse. And in case wee doe not presently graunt you the province according to your desire, you have a bill framed alreadie to present unto the bodie of the people and Communaltie. And therefore (quoth he) my maisters, yee that are Tribunes, I require your  aid and assistance, in that I forbeare to speake unto the point and deliver mine opinion; in this regard, because I know that the Consull will not approove and ratifie the same, howsoever the whole house should go with me, and allow my sentence. Hereupon arose some braule and debate among them, whiles the Consull urged and enforced this point especially, and said, It was against all reason and equitie, that the Tribunes should enterpose their authoritie, and not permit every Senatour

being requested to speake in his turne, for to deliver his mind and opinion. Then the Tribunes  made a decree in this manner, If the Consull be content that the Senate shall determine of the Provinces, we will and commaund, that all men rest in that which the Senate shal ordeine and judge: neither will we suffer the same to be propounded unto the people: but if he be not content nor yeeld thereto, then we will assist him who shall refuse to speake to the matter. Then the Consull requested a daies respite to conferre with his Colleague, and so the morrow after he condescended to put all to the censure of the Senate. And in this wise were the provinces distributed and appointed: Vnto one of the Consuls Sicilie was assigned, and thirtie ships of warre, with brasen beake heads (even the same that C. Servilius the yeere before had the charge of) with commission also to passe over into Affrick, if he thought it were for the good of the Commonwealth. The other Consull had the government of the Brutij, and the managing of the warre against  Anniball, with the power of that armie which L. Veturius or Q. Cecilius had under their hand: and decreed it was that they two, namely, L. Veturius and Q. Cacilius, should either cast lots, or agree between themselves who should remaine still in the Brutians country, to follow the warres there, with those two legions which the Consull left: and that whether of them chaunced to have that province, his goverment should be prorogued and continued for another yeere. The rest of the Pretors also and Consuls, who were to governe any province, or to have the conduct of armies, had their commissions renewed and sealed againe for a longer terme. Now it fell to Q. Caecilius his lot, to make warre together with the Consull, against Anniball in the Brutians countrey.
After this, ensued the games and playes of Scipio: which were exhibited and set forth, with  great concourse of people, and exceeding applause and affectionate favour of the beholders. M. Pomponius Matho, and Q. Catulus were sent as Embassadors unto Delphos, to cary thither an offring and stately gift of the bootie and pillage of Asdruball: ^ho presented there a crowne of gold weighing two hundred pound: also certaine counterfeits resembling the spoiles, which were made of silver, amounting to a thousand pound weight. Scipio when he could not get leave graunted to levie souldiers and take musters, which he greatly forced not of, obteined thus much yet, that he might have with him in his traine voluntarie souldiours: as also receive whatsoever the Allies would contribute and geve toward the building of new ships, because he had passed his word, that the citie should not be charged with setting out an Armada. And first and formost, the States of Hetruria promised to help the Consull, every one according to their abilitie. The Caerites came off, and graunted to purvey corne and all kinde of victuals for the mariners and sailers: the Populonians to provide yron: the Tarquinians to finde saile-cloth: the Volaterrans to send all tackling and furniture belonging to ships, and also corne: the Aretines to conferre thirtie thousand targets; as many murrions or head-peeces, besides javelins, darts, faulchions, launces and pikes, to the full number of fiftie thousand, as many of the one sort as of the other: also axes, spades and mattocks, bils, sithes, hookes, and sickles, meales, troughs and querne mils, as many as would serve to furnish fortie long ships or gallies: of wheate 120000 Modij, and all voyage provision for the Decurions, petie-captaines, Mariners and Ore-men by the way. The Perusines, the Clusines, the Rusellanes offred firre trees for the framing and making of the ships, and a great quantitie of corne. But for this worke, he occupied only the firre  hewen out of the publike forests and wasts. All the States of Vmbria, the Nursines also, the Reatines, and Amiternines, and the whole country of the Sabines, made promise to help him to souldiers: the Marsi, the Peligni, and Marrucines, in great umber came of their owne free wils, and were enrolled to serve at sea in the navie. The Camertes, being allies and confederate to the Romanes, but not tied to any service, sent a brave companie of sixe hundred men well armed. And when as there were set out the keeles or botomes for thirtie ships, twentie Caravels of five course of ores, and ten of foure; himselfe in person plied the carpenters and shipwrights so, and set forward the worke, that 45 daies after the timber was brought out of the wood, the ships were finished, rigged, armed, and furnished with all things, and shot into the water. So to Sicilie he sailed with thirtie long ships of warre, having embarked therein almost seven thousand of voluntarie  servitours. P. Licinius also for his part, came into the Brutians country unto the two consularie armies, of which he tooke unto him and chose that which L. Veturius the Consull had commaunded: and suffred Metellus to have the leading still of those legions, which had bene under his conduct before: supposing that he should more easilie employ them in service, because

 they were acquainted alreadie with his manner of regiment and governance. The Pretours likewise went into their sundrie provinces. And because money was wanting for to deffray the charges of the warres, the high Treasurers were commaunded to make sale of all that tract of the Campane countrey, which from the Greeke Fosse extendeth toward the sea. And there was graunted out a commission to give notice of those lands: and looke what ground so ever belonged to any citizen of Capua, it was confiscate to the use of the people of Rome: and for a reward to him that gave such notice, there was assigned the tenth part of the monie, that the land was rated and prised at. Also Cn. Servilius the citie Pretour, had geven him in charge to take order that the Campanes should dwell where as they were allowed to inhabite, by vertue of a decree graunted forth by the Senate, and to punish those that dwelt elsewhere.
 In the same summer Mago the sonne of Amilcar, being departed from the lesse Baleare Iland, where he abode the winter season, and having embarked a chosen power of yong and lustie men, sailed over into Italie with a fleete of thirtie ships headed with brasen piked beakes, and many hulks of burden: and there he set aland his souldiours, to the number of twelve thousand footemen, and welneere two thousand horse: and with his sodaine comming surprised Genua, by reason that there lay no garisons in those parts to guard and defend the seacosts. From thence he sailed along, and arrived in the river of the Alpine Ligurians, to see if he could by his comming raise some commotion and rebellion. The Of Albenga. Ingauni (a people of the Ligurians) fortuned to warre at that present with certaine mountainers the Epanterij. Whereupon Mago, having laid up and bestowed safe all the prizes and pillage that he had won in Vuada, or Savona. Savo, (a towne upon  the Alpes) and left ten ships of warre riding in the river, for a sufficient guard, and sent away the rest to Carthage for to keepe the sea coasts at home, (because there ran a common rumor, that Scipio would passe the seas, and over into Affrick) himselfe after he had concluded a league and amitie with the Ingauni (whose favour he more affected and esteemed than the others) set in hand to assaile the mountainers. Besides, his power increased dayly: for that the Frenchmen flocked unto him from all parts, upon the noyle and voyce of his name. Intelligence here of was geven to the Senate by the letters of Sp. Lucretius: who were with these newes exceedingly troubled and perplexed, for feare least they had rejoyced in vaine for the death of Asdruball, and the defeature of his armie two yeare before; in case there should arise from thence another warre as great and dangerous as the other, differing in nothing els but the exchange of theGenerall.  And therefore they gave order and direction both to M. Livius the Proconsull, to come forward with his armie of Voluntaries out of Tuskane, into Ariminum: and also unto Cn. Servilius the citie Pretour, (if he thought requisite and expedient for the Common-wealth) to commit the two legions of citizens attending about Rome, to whomsoever he pleased, for to be commaunded, and led forth of the citie. So M. Valerius Laevinus conducted those legions to Aretium.
About the same time, certaine hulks of the Carthaginians to the number of fourescore, were bourded and taken about Sardinia, by Cn. Octavius, governor of that province. Caelius writeth, that they were loden with corne and victuals sent unto Anniball. But Valerius reporteth, that as they were carying the pillage taken in Hetruria, and certaine prisoners of the Ligurian  mountainers, into Carthage, they were intercepted and surprized by the way. There was no memorable thing that yeere done in the Brutians countrey. The pestilence raigned as well amongst the Romanes as the Carthaginians, and they died thereof alike on both sides. Mary the Carthaginian armie, besides the plague, were afflicted also with famine. Anniball passed all that sommer time neere unto the temple of Iuno Lacinia, where he built and reared an alter, and dedicated it with a glorious title of his worthie acts, engraven in Punick and Greeke  letters.



THE XXIX. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the nine and twentith Booke.
CAius Laelius being sent from Scipio out of Sicilie into Africk, brought from thence a huge bootie, and declared unto Scipio the credence and message that hee had from Masanissa, who complained of him, that he had not as yet, passed over with his fleet into Africk. The warre in Spaine which Indibilis had raised, was dispatched: himselfe slaine in the field: and Mandonius was delivered by his owne men into the Romanes hands that demaunded him of them. Mago who was in France  and Liguria, had out of Africke sent unto him, both a great power of souldiours, and also money to wage aida: with a commission and precept to ioyne himselfe, unto Anniball. Scipio crossed the seas from Saracose into the Brutii, and ecovered the cittie Locri, after he had discomsited the garrison there, and put to flight Anniball. Peace was concluded with Philip. The goddesse Dame Idas was brought solemnely to Rome from Pessinus, by occasion of a prophesie found in the bookes of Sybilla to this effect: That then the forreine enemie might be driven out of Italic, when Dame Cybelic of Ida was brought to Rome. And to the Romanes she was delivered by Attalus king of Asia. A thicke stone it was, and nothing else, which the inhabitants called the mother of the gods. P. Scipio Nasica, the sonne of that Cneus who was killed in Spaine, iudged by the Senate a right good man, one that was very young, and had not been yet so much as Questor, was he that received her: for it was by the Oracle imported, that the said goddesse should bee received by the best man of the cittie, and so dedicated. The Locrians sent their Embassadours to Rome, to complaine of the outrage and crueltie of Q. Pleminius the Lieutenant: (...) that he had uniustly taken away the money consecrate to Proserpina, and vilanously forced their wives and children. Pleminius was brought bound with chaines to Rome, and there died  in prison. There ran a false rumour of Pub. Scipio (Pro-consul in Sicilie) and spred as sarre as to the citie, That he should spend his time there in riot. Where upon there were sent certaine messengers from the Senate, for to enquire and see whether those reports were true. And Scipio being cleared from all infamie, by the permission and good leave of the Senate, sailed over into Africke. Syphax affianced and wedded the daughter of Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo: and thereupon renounced cleane the amitie which he had contracted with Scipio. Masanissa the king of the Massylians, whiles hee served in the wars in defence of the Carthaginians quarrel within Spain, after he had lost his father Gala, was withal, disseazed of his kingdome. And when he had often times sought to recover it againe by warre, he was in certaine battailes vanquished by Syphax king of the Numidians, and utterly deprived of his totall dignitie. So with two hundred horsemen he ioyned as a a hamfood person with Scipio: and with him, immediately in the first battaile, he slew Hanno the sonne of Amilcar, togither with a great number of his men. Scipio upon the comming of Asdruball and Syphax, who were almost one hundred thousand strong, was compelled to breake up the siege of Vtica: and so be fortified a standing campe for winter bar borough. Sempronius the Consull had a fortunate battaile against Annibal in the territorie of Croton. The Censours held a solemne review and purging of the cittie, and numbred the people: In which survey taken, there were assessed in their bookes 215000 citizens. Betweene the two Censours, M. Livius and Claudius Nero, there sell out a notable discord: for C. Claudius tooke from Livius (companion with him in office) his horse of service: for that hee had beene sometimes condemned by the people of Rome, and driven into exile. And Livius againe did the semblable by him, because he had b^ne false witnesse against him, and not dealt bona fide with him, considering the reconciliation betweene them, where in they seemed to be made good friends againe. The same Livitus left all the tribes but one, disfranchised, and caused them to pay tribute as no denizens, for that they had both condemned him being innocent, and also made him a Consull and Censour afterwards.

SCipio after he was arrived in Sicilie, disposed his voluntarie souldiours in order, and enrolled them by Centuries. Over and besides them, he had about him three hundred lustie tall fellowes, for the floure of their age and strength of bodie, the bravest men of all others: but they wist not themselves for what purpose they were reserved; being neither assigned to any colours under a captaine, nor so much as armed at all. Then he made choise from out of the whole manhood and youth of Sicilie, three hundred men of armes, such as for birth and wealth, were the very principal and best in all the Iland, who were to passe over with him into Affricke: and he appointed them a day, upon which they should all present themselves in readinesse, furnished  and appointed in the best manner with horse and armour. This warfare so farre from home, was like to be yrkesome unto them, and to bring with it much trouble, many difficulties and daungers, as well by sea as land. The consideration and feare hereof, mightily disquieted not onely the parties themselves, but also their parents and kinsfolke. Now when the day appointed was come, they shewed their horses and armour. Then Scipio made a speech unto them and said, That he was given to understand, that certeine Sicilian horsemen stood in great feare and dread of this soulderie, as being a sore and painfull peece of service: In case then (quoth he) there bee any of you so minded and disposed indeed, I had rather you would now presently be known thereof unto me, and confesse at once, than hereafter to whine and complaine, and so to prove lazie lubbers and unprofitable souldiours to the common-wealth. And therefore utter your minds in  plaine tearmes, and I will be content to heare you without offence. Whereupon, when as one of them tooke a good hart and said flatly, That if it lay in his choise freely to do what he would, he was altogither unwilling to serve: then Scipio answered him again in this manner, For as muchas (my youth) thou hast not dissimuled thy hearts griefe, but spoken out what thou thinkest, I will soon depute once in thy turne, unto whom thou maist deliver thy armour, thy horse, and other furniture of warfare, and whom thou shalt forthwith have home with thee, there to traine, teach, and exercise him, after thou hast given him thy horse and armour. The young man was glad hereof, and accepted the offer upon that condition: and so he assigned unto him one of those three hundred abovesaid, whom he kept about himselfe unarmed. When the rest saw that horseman in this manner discharged of his service, and that with the favour and good will of the L. Generall:  every man then began to speake for himself, and to make excuses, and tooke others in their steed. Thus for the three hundred Sicilians, were substituted as many Romane horsemen, without any expenses at all of the state. And the Sicilians themselves had the charge of instructing and training them up. For the Generall had made an edict and proclaimation, That whosoever did not so, should serve himselfe in person. This proved by report, a brave cornet of horsemen above the rest; and in many battailes performed right good service to the common-weale. After this, hee tooke a survey of the legions or footmen: and all those who had borne armes longest in the wars he selected forth, especially such as had bene emploied under the conduct of Marcellus. For those he well wist to have bin broght up under the best discipline of warfare, and also by reson of the long siege of Saracose, to be most skilful in assaulting of cities. For now they wer no smal matters that  hee had in his head, but he plotted even the very destruction and ruine of great Carthage. After this, he divided his armie and placed severall forces in sundrie townes. The citties of Sicilie hee enjoyned to provide come; hee made spare of that which was brought out of Italie; the old ships he newly repaired and rigged, and with them he sent Lelius into Africke for to prey upon the countrie and fetch in prizes; the new which rid at Panormus hee drew up to land, that they might all winter long lie upon drie gound, and be seasoned, because they were made in hast of greene timber. When he had prepared all things necessarie for warre, hee came to the cittie of Saracose, which as yet was not in good order and well quieted, since the great troubles of the late warres. For the Greekes made claime for their goods, granted unto them by the Senat of Rome, which certaine of the Italian nation deteined and with-held from them by the same violence,  wherewith in time of warre they had possessed themselves thereof. He supposing it meete and requisite, to mainteine above all things, the credit of the state; partly by vertue of an edict and commaundement, and partly by a civill course and processe of law against such as were obstinate and avowed their wrongs done, hee forced them to make restitution to the Syracusians. This act of his, pleased not onely them, but also all the states of Sicilie; and therefore they were more

willing and forward to helpe him in the warres.
The same summer there arose in Spain great troubles, raised by the meanes of Indibilis the Hergete, for no other occasion or reason in the world, but because in regard of the high admiration of Scipio, all other captaines besides whatsoever, were but despised. Him they supposed to be the onely Generall that the Romanes had left, now that all the rest were slaine by Anniball. And hereupon it was (thought they) that when the two Scipioes were killed, they had no other to send into Spaine but him: and afterwards, when the wars grew hot in Italie, he was the onely man sent for over, to match with Anniball. And over and besides that, the Romans had now in Spaine no captains at all, but in bare name and shew: the old experienced armie also was from thence withdrawn. All things are out of frame, and in great confusion, and none there, but a disordered sort of raw freshwater soldiors. And never they looked to have again the like occasion and opportunitie  to recover Spaine out of their hands. For hitherto they had been ever in subjection to that day, either to the Carthaginians or the Romanes, and not alwaies to the one or the other, by turnes, but otherwhiles to both at once. And like as the Carthaginians have beene driven out by the Romanes, so may the Romanes bee expelled by the Spaniards, if they would hold together. So that in the end Spaine being freed from all forraine warre, might be restored for ever to the auncient customes and rights of the countrie. With these and such like suggestions and discourses, hee sollicited and raised not onely his owne subjects and countriemen, but the Ausetanes also, a neighbour-nation, yea, and other States and citties that bordered upon his and their confines; so as within few daies there assembled together into the territorie of the Sedetanes (according to an edict published abroad) thirtie thousand foot, and fast upon foure thousand  horsemen.
The Romane captaines likewise for their part, L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus, least by neglect of the first beginning, the warre might grow to a greater head, joined their forces together, and marching through the countrie of the Ausetanes, as peaceably as if they had ben friends, (notwithstanding they were knowne enemies) came to the very place where they were encamped, and pitched themselves within three miles of the enemies. At the first they assaied by way of Embassage to deale with them, and to persuade them to lay aside all armes and hostilitie: but they laboured in vaine. Afterwards, when as the Spanish horsemen gave charge suddainely upon certaine Romanes that were a foraging, the Romanes also sent out from their Stations and corps de guard, their Cavallerie to rescue: so the horsemen skirmished, but no memorable  act to speake of, was effected on the one side or the other. The next morrow by sun rising, the enemies all shewed themselves armed and in order of battell, and braved the Romanes within a mile of their campe. The Ausetanes were marshalled in the maine battaile; the Ilergetes in the right point, and certaine other Spanish nations of base and meane account in the left: between both those wings and the battell, of either hand they left certaine wide and void places, whereas when the time served they might put foorth their horsemen. The Romanes having embattailed and put themselves in array after their old and usuall manner, yet in this one thing followed the example of the enemies, in leaving out certaine open waies between the legions for the men of armes to passe through. But Lentulus supposing, that the use of the horse service would be advantageous to that part, which first should send out their Cavallerie into the battaile of the enemies, that lay so open with spaces betweene, gave commaundement to Ser. Cornelius a knight Marshal or Tribune, to will and charge the Cavallerie to set to with their horses, and to enter those open lanes betweene the enemies battaillons. And himselfe having sped but badly in beginning the fight with footmen so rashly, staied no longer, but untill hee had brought the thirteenth legion, (which was set in the left wing opposite to the Ilergetes) out of the rereward into the vaward, for to succour and strengthen the twelfth legion, which alreadie began to shrinke and give ground. After that once the skirmish there was equall and fought on even hand, hee advaunced forward to L. Manlius, who in the forefront of the battell was busie in encouraging his men, and sending supplies and succours into all parts where hee saw needfull: shewing unto him, that all was well and hole in the left point, and that he had sent out Cornelius, who with his horsemen, would  like a tempestuous storme come upon them, and soon overcast and bespread the enemies round about. The word was not so soon spoken, but the Roman horsemen were ridden within the thickest of the enemies, and not onely disordered the arraies and companies of the footmen, but also at once shut up the waies and passages, that the Spaniards could not make out with their

 horsemen. And therefore the Spaniards leaving to fight on horsebacke, alight on foot. The Romane Generals seeing the rankes and files of the enemies disarraied, themselves in fright and feare, and their ensignes waving up and downe every ways fell to exhorting, yea, to entreating of their owne infanterie, to recharge them with all their force, whiles they were thus troubled and disbanded, and not suffer them to come into order, and reenforce the battell againe. And surely the barbarous people had never beene able to abide their violent impression, but that Indibiles himselfe their prince and lord, together with the men of armes that were now dismounted on foot, made head against the ensignes of the footmen in the vaward. Whereupon ensued a sharpe and cruell fight for a good while. At length, when as they that fought about their prince (who first, although hee were halfe dead, yet stood his ground, and afterwards with a javeline was  nailed to the earth) were overwhelmed with darts, and slaine; then they began to flie on all hands: but the greater number were killed in the place, because both the horsemen had no time nor space to recover their horses, and mount upon them againe, and also the Romanes pressed so horely upon them after they were once discomfited, and never gave over, untill they had stript the enemies quite out of their campe. So there died that day thirteene thousand Spaniards, and well neere eight hundred were taken prisoners. Of Romans and Allies, not many more than two hundred left their lives behind them, and those especially in the left point. The Spaniards, that either were driven out of their campe, or escaped out of the battaile, first ran scattered and dispersed over the fields, and afterwards returned every man to his owne cittie where hee dwelt.
 Then Mandonius summoned them to a generall counsell: where they all bewailed their calamities and miseries, greatly blamed the authors of the warre, and agreed in the end to send their Embassadours to give up their armes, and to yeeld their bodies. These having excused themselves and laid the whole fault upon Indibilis and the rest of the Princes who were the stirrers of the war, and were for the most part slaine themselves for their labour in the field, yeelded up their armour and themselves, and received this answere from the Romanes: That they should bee received to mercie, and their submission accepted, if they would deliver alive into their hands Mandonius and the rest that were the breakers of peace. Otherwise, they threatened to lead their forces into the territories of the Ilergetes and Ausetanes, and so forward, of the other nations their complices in that rebellion. With this answer the Oratours departed, and related the same in the counsell  assembled. Where Mandonius and the rest of their lords were apprehended and delivered to the Romanes for to be punished and executed accordingly. So the States of Spaine obtained peace againe: and a double tribute for that yeare was imposed upon them, and they enjoined to provide come to serve the armie sixe months, besides souldiours liveries, short coats, and side cassockes: and they received hostages welneere of thirtie cities. Thus the troubles and rebellions of Spaine being begun and ended after this manner, without any great a do within few daies, all the force of the warre turned upon Affricke.
C. Laelius being arrived in the night at Hippo Roiall, by the breake of day, led forth with banner displaied in order of battell, all his souldiors and marriners, for to harrey and spoile the countrie. And finding the inhabitants there retchlesse and carelesse, and living in securitie as in time  of peace, they did much hurt and annoied them sore. Whereupon the newes went in post to Carthage, set all on a hurrie, and put them in exceeding great feare. For it was reported, that the Romane armada was arrived, and that Scipio the Generall was landed (for the rumor ran before, how he was passed over alreadie into Sicilie.) And because they neither descried the ships, nor discovered certainely what power of men invaded and spoiled the countrie, they thought the most and doubted the worst, as fear commonly maketh everything more than it is. And so at first they were only affrighted and terrified; but afterwards they grew melancholike and troubled in spirit in these tearmes, to think, That fortune should so much be chaunged, that they, who but as while before as noble conquerours, had lien encamped with an armie before the walls of Rome, defeited so many hosts of enemies, and either by fine force or meere love, held all the States of Italie  under their siegnorie, should now themselves see the wheele so turne about, as they were like shortly to behold the wasting and spoiling of Affricke, and the citie of Carthage besieged: a thing that they were never able to endure with that valour and resolution, nor to abide with such strength as the Romanes had. For the Romanes had ever the Commons of Rome; they had alwaies the youth of Latium readie at hand; who still encreased more and more the new frie, and daily

grew in number to make supplie, and to repaire and furnish out so many armies that were defeited. Wheras, their naturall people were neither in towne nor countrie fit for service, their aids were waged and hired for mony from among the Africans, a nation like to turn upon any accident, and to change with every gale and puffe of vain hope, and were besides false and unfaithful in their promise. For now the kings alreadie Syphax and Masanissa, the one upon conference with Scipio is secretly alienated from us in hart, and the other openly revolted in action, and become our most deadly enemie: so that, there remaineth neither help nor hope for us at all in any place. For neither Mago is able in Gaule to make any commotions and rebellion, nor yet to joyne with Annibal: And as for Anniball himself, he weareth a pace, and decaieth dailie both in fame and reputation, and also in strength and forcible meanes. When their minds being thus disquieted upon those fresh and present tidings, they were fallen to bewaile and lament their woful state, the instant danger  recalled them againe to consult by what meanes they might withstand the imminent perils. So they thought good to take musters in all hast both in the citie and the countries by, to send some to levie and wage the aids of the Affricanes, to fortifie their citie, to bring in store of graine, to provide weapons and armor, to rig their navie, and to send it out to Hippo, for to encounter the Romane Armada. Whiles they were devising these courses, there came at last a post with newes, that it was Laelius and not Scipio who was set ashore; that there was landed no greater power than for to make rodes into the country for booties only: and as for the maine strength of the whole armie, it remained still in Sicilie. So they had some respit to breath themselves, and began to addresse their Embassies to Syphax and to other Princes, for to establish and confirme peace and league betweene them. They dispatched others also to Philip, who should make promise unto  him of two hundred talents of silver, in case he would take the seas and passe over either into Sicilie or Italie. Messengers also were sent as farre as into Italie unto their owne Generals serving there, to will them to raise what troubles they could possibly, for to keepe Scipio aworke, and hold him back from comming into Affrick. And unto Mago were sent not only those messengers aforesaid, but also five and twentie long ships of warre, sixe thousand footemen, eight hundred horsemen, seven Elephants, and great store of treasure besides for to hire aides, whereby he might advance forward with his forces neerer to Rome, and joyne with Anniball. These preparations were making, and these courses devising at Carthage, when as Masanissa upon the bruit that went of the arrivall of the Romane fleete, began to start up and rouse himselfe; and accompanied with some few horsemen, came unto Laelius, busy in driving still great booties out of the  country, which he found altogether disfurnished of armour, and unprovided of guards and garisons for defence. He much complained that Scipio was so slack in his affaires, and grieved that he had not passed over ere this time with an armie into Affrick, whiles the Carthaginians were thus affrighted, while Syphax was troubled with the warres of the borderers: of whom he was thus much persuaded, that if he might have resting time to compose his owne affaires to his mind, he would not continue fast unto the Romanes, nor deale in any thing faithfully and soundly with them: willing him to sollicit Scipio, yea and to spur him on and importune him not to stand longer at a bay and make delaies. And for his owne part, notwithstanding he were disseazed of his fathers kingdome, yet he would be readie to assist him with such a power of foote and horse as were worth god amercy: advising Laelius with all not to make any longer stay in Affrick, for as  much as he beleeved verily, that there was a fleete alreadie set out from Carthage, with which in the absence of Scipio, he might not with safetie enter into conflict and battaile. After this communication, Masanissa was dismissed, and Laelius the next day losed from Hippo, with his ships laden with pillage and prises: and being returned into Sicilie, declared unto Scipio the counsell and credence that he had from Masanissa.
About the very same time those ships which were sent from Carthage to Mago, coasting along the Albigannians and the Ligurians, arrived at Genua. It fortuned that Mago at that time, lay with his fleete in those parts: who upon the words of the messengers, and the commission to raise as great forces as possibly he could, immediatly held a counsell of the Frenchmen and Ligurians; for of both nations there were great numbers in those coasts. Where before them all  he declared how he was sent unto them for to set them at libertie: and how (as they might see themselves) to that effect he was furnished with new aid and succour from home. But what forces, and how great an armie was needfull for the managing of the war in hand, it lay in them to determine. As for himselfe, first and formost he knew full well, that there were two Romane armies

 abroad, the one in France, the other in Tuskane: and that Sp. Lucretius would joyne with M. Levius: and therefore they themselves were to put many a thousand in armes, for to make head against two Generals, and two complete armies of Romanes. The Frenchmen made answere again, That their will was good enough, and they had an exceeding desire to compasse and effect the designement entended: but for as much as the Romanes had one camp within their confines, and another in Tuskane neere adjoyning, and in manner within sight; if peradventure they should be seene in the action to aid the Carthaginians; in continently both armies, as well the one as the other would in all manner of hostilitie invade their territories: and therefore they requested him to desire of the Gaules such things, wherin they might stand him in steed secretly under hand. As for the Ligurians, because the Romanes lay far enough off encamped from  their lands and cities, they might dispose well enough of themselves as they list: and therefore it was good reason that they should put their young and able men in armes, and beare a part in the managing of the warre. The Ligurians refused not. Only they craved respit of two moneths; for to take the musters. In the meane time Mago, having sent away the Gaules, closely tooke up and prest souldiours throughout their countrey townes for money. And from this States of France, there was sent secretly provision of victuals of all sorts unto him.
Marcus Livius led his armie of Voluntaries out of Tuscane into France, and having united his forces unto Lucretius his power, was readie to receive and welcome Mago, if haply he removed out of the Ligurians countrey neerer to the citie of Rome: but in case Mago kept himselfe quiet in a corner under the Alpes, he minded also himselfe there to keepe his standing leaguer  about Ariminum, for the guard and defence of Italie.
After the returne of C. Laelius out of Africk, both Scipio was pricked forward by the instigations and persuasions of Masanissa: and also his souldiours, seeing great prizes brought out of the enemies land, and every ship fraight therewith; were mightily incensed and set on fire with a burning desire to be transported over thither with all speede possible. But as they were plotting about this enterprise of greater importance, they thought also upon a lesser that came betweene, namely, the winning againe of the citie of Locri, which in the generall revolt of all Italie, had sided also with the Carthaginians. The first hope that they conceived both to affect and effect this enterprise, grew upon a very small matter: by occasion that in the Brutians countrey, the whole manner of service was performed by way of robbing  and roving, rather than by any ordinarie course of warre. The Numidians first began, and the Britij soone tooke it up and seconded them: not so much because they would keepe the Carthaginians companie, and do as they did; but for that of their owne naturall inclination they were proane, and readie enough to follow that course. At last the Romane souldiours also, infected as it were by their example, tooke delight in robberies: and so farre forth as they might have leave of their captaines, would make inrodes into the territories of their enemies. It fortuned so, that when some of them were gon abroad a boothaling, certaine Locrians were intercepted, and brought away with them to Rhegium. In which number of captives, were some carpenters and masons, who as it chaunced, were hired to worke for the Carthaginians in the castle of Locri. These were discovered and known by certain  great men, and the principall cittizens of the Locrians, who hapned then to live as banished persons in Rhegium; such as by the contrarie faction that banded with Annibal and had delivered Locri into his hands, were driven out of the cittie. These men sell to questioning with them (as commonly their manner is, who have beene long out of their owne countrie) of many matters, and among the rest, how all things fared at home: who told them all accordingly; and therewith, put them in some good hope, that if they might bee ransome, set at large, and sent home againe, they would betray the castle unto them: for as much as within it they dwelt, and the Carthaginians put them in trust of all things there. They therefore, as men that were wonderfull desirous to returne thither, as well for love of their native countrie, as for to bee revenged of their adversaries, out of hand paid their ransome: and after they had given order how to worke  the fear, and in what sort; as also agreed upon the signes and tokens which they should marke from on high a farre off, they were sent backe againe. Then the exiled Locrians repaired unto Scipio at Saracose, with whom also were others of the banished persons of Locri: and there they related unto him the promises of the captives aforesaid, and put the Consul in very good hope that the effect would bee correspondent to their dessignement. With them were sent two Tribunes or Marshals,

to wit, M. Sergius and P. Matienus, with commission to conduct three thousand souldiours  from Rhegium to Locri. Letters also were dispatched unto Q. Pleminius the Viz-pretour, for to be assistant in this action. Who being departed from Rhegium, and carrying with them skaling ladders, proportioned to the height of the castle wall foretold unto them, about midnight gave a token by fire to those that were to betray the castle, from that place which they had agreed uppon: who being in readinesse also, and looking wistly for them, put downe likewise ladders of their owne made, for the purpose; and in many places at once received them that climbed up: so as, before there was any alarme heard, they set upon the watch of the Carthaginians, fast a sleepe as they were, and distrusting no such matter: who first were heard to grone as they lay a dying, but afterwards, to make a noise and keepe a running and much adoe, upon their suddaine starting from sleepe, all the whiles that they wist not what the occasion was. At length, upon the discoverie  of the matter, one man wakened another, and every one called alowd to arme; crying out, that the enemies were within the castle, and the watchmen slaine. And without question, the Romanes had bene put to the worse and diffeated quite, being farre fewer in number than the enemies, but that there was an outcrie and shout set up by them that were without the fortresse; which so long as men knew not from whence it came, put them in great feare: and the tumult besides by night made every smal and vain thing much greater than it was. By means wherof, the Carthaginians astonied (as if all places had bene full of enemies) abandoned all fight, and betooke themselves into the other fortresse (for two there were distant not farre asunder.) The townesmen kept possession of the cittie, as the prise and guerdon in the mids, for the winners. But out of the two castles there were light skirmishes every day. Q. Pleminius was captaine of the fort and garrison  of the Romanes, and Amilcar over the Carthaginians: and both parts increased their strength, by aids that they had comming unto them from the places adjoyning. Vntill at last Anniball shewed himselfe in person: and no doubt the Romanes had never bene able to hold out, but that the whole multitude of the Locrensians sore galled and grieved with the proud government and the covetous polling of the Carthaginians, tooke part with the Romanes. When intelligence came to Scipio, that the Romanes were distressed in Locri, and that Anniball himselfe was advancing thither: for feare least the garison also should be in some hazard (as having no readie means to retire from thence) himselfe leaving at Messana his brother L. Scipio for the guard of the place, passed over from thence with his vessels downe the water, when he espied the current and the ride togither to serve for a fare. Likewise Anniball having sent out a vauntcurrour from the  river Burrotus (which is not farre from the cittie Locri) to signifie unto his men, that by day light they should give a hote charge with all their might and maine upon the Locrensians and Romans both, whiles hee himselfe made an assault upon the towne behind, not looking for him, but wholly turned away and amused upon that other tumutl. Now when as early in the morning hee found the skirmish begun, he was not willing to put himselfe within the castle, for feare of pestering with over great a companie the place so streight and of so small receipt: and for to skale the walls they had brought no ladders with them. So causing all their carriages and packes to bee piled up in one heape togither: hee presented all his footmen in battaile array before the cittie, to terrifie his enemies withall: and with the Numidian horsemen hee made a bravado under the wals, and rode about the cittie. Whiles the ladders and other ordinance meet to give an assault, were in preparing and making readie, hee approached on horsebacke neere to the wall, for to view on which part above the rest, he might give the assault: and there he was shot with a quarell discharged from an engine called a Scorpion, which hapned to be planted next unto him. And being affrighted at this so daungerous an occurrent, he commaunded to sound the retreat, and fortified his campe aloufe without the perill and shot of any dart. Now was the Romane fleet from Messana arrived at Locri, and had the day afore them: so as they were all set a land, and entred the cittie before the sunne setting. The morrow after, the Carthaginians began to skirmish out of the castle: and Anniball being now provided of ladders, and having all things else in readinesse needfull for the assault, came under the wals: with that, all upon a suddaine the Romanes set open a gate and sallied out upon him, who feared nothing lesse than any such accident: and thus  setting upon them at unawares, flew two hundred of them. A
nniball perceiving that the Consull was there, retired with the rest into the campe: and after hee had sent a messenger to them that were within the castle, willing them to shift for themselves, in the night season hee dislodged and departed. They also who were in the sort, after they had set on fire the houses which were in their

 keeping, of purpose by that tumult to cause the enemie to make some stay and tarrie behind, ran away in maner of a rout, and before it was night with good footmanship overtooke their owne companie. Scipio seeing as well this castle quit by the enemie, as their campe also emptie, called the Locrenses to a generall assembly, and gave them a sharpe checke, and rebuked them for their revolt. The principall captaines and authours of that trespasse hee put to death; and gave away their goods to the chiefe heads of the other faction, in reward and consideration of their singular fidelitie to the Romanes. But as concerning the publicke state of the Locrians, hee said hee would neither make nor medle therewith, either in giving to them, or taking ought at all from them. But willed them to send their Embassadours to Rome, and looke what the Senate would award in equitie, that fortune they should abide. This one thing he was well assured of, that how  ill soever they had deserved of thepeople of Rome, yet they should live in better condition under the signorie of the Romanes, provoked to anger as they were, than they had alreadie under the government of Carthaginians, pretending love and amitie as they did.
Then himselfe in person out over to Messana with those forces that he brought with him, leaving Pleminius his Lieutenant, and that power that woon the castle, in garrison for the defence of the citie. The citizens of Locri had been so prowdly misused, and so cruelly handled by the Carthaginians, after they were revolted from the Romanes, that it seemed they could be content to abide any small wrongs, not onely patiently but also willingly, and in manner with a glad heart. But so farre now exceeded Pleminius, Amilcar the former captaine of the garrison; so far went the Romane garrison souldiours, before the Carthaginians in wickednesse and avarice, that a man  would have thought they had strove together who should passe the other in sinful vice and ungodlinesse, and not in fears of armes and prowesse. For neither captain nor souldiour forbare to practise upon the poore townesmen any enormious facts, which are wont to make the great and mightie men odious unto the poore and meaner persons. They wrought and committed shamefull villanies upon their very bodies; upon their wives and children. And their greedie avarice so farre proceeded; that they could not hold their hands from spoiling and robbing the very religious and sacred temples. In so much, as among other holy churches which they polluted, they met even with the rich treasure of Proserpina, which had lien still in all ages, and untouched by all others: save onely it was reported to have beene pilled by Pyrrhus; who indeed carried away the spoile of her, but he deerely bought it, and paid full sweetly for that sacriledge. And therfore like  as before time the kings ships shaken with tempests, and torne and split with the rage of the sea, brought nothing at all in that wrecke safe to land, but onely that sacred monie of the goddesse, which they had stolen and carried away: even so at this present, the very same monie (but in another kind of calamitie and miserie) brought upon all them that were tainted in that wicked action of robbing the temple, a strange and franticke madnesse; which caused captaine against captaine, and souldiour against souldiour, to fare as if they were starke wood, and enraged as mortall enemies one with another. Pleminius had the cheese rule and commaund of all. As for the souldiours, some were under him, such as himselfe had brought from Rhegium; others were commaunded by the Tribunes or Colonels. Now it chaunced that one of Pleminius his soldiors had stolne a silver cup out of a townesmans house, and ran away when hee had done; and the owners  after him with huy and crie, and fortuned to come in the way, and to meet with Sergius and Matienus the two Tribunes or Colonels, full in the face. Wherupon the cup was taken from him by the commaundement of the Tribunes; and thence arose first a braule, and some hard words were dealt between; and from them consequently they went to open clamors and lowd outcries, untill at length there grew a very fray between the soldiors of Pleminius and of the Tribunes: and according as they came still one or other in time to helpe their own side, both the number and the roiot increased at once. In the end, Pleminius his men went away with the blowes, and moned themselves into Pleminius, running to him with open mouth and great indignation, shewing their bloudie wounds: and reporting besides, what opprobrious words to his disgrace had passed against him without spare, in the time of those brawling fits. Hereupon in a great choler and boyling  heate of bloud, hee gat him forth of doores in all the hast; convented the Tribunes before him, and commaunded them to be stripped naked, and the rods to be brought forth readie for to skourge them. But whiles there was some time spent in turning them out of their apparrell and uncasing them (for they strugled and made resistance, and called to their souldiours for helpe) all at once they came thick about them (for very lustie they were upon their fresh victorie) and ran

from all places, as if the alarme bell had bene rung against the comming of some enemies. But  when they saw once the bodies of their Tribunes tewed with rods, then they fell into farre more furious rage and a very fit of madnesse: and thus incensed as they were, without all regard, not only of the reverent majestie of authoritie, but also of common humanitie, they fell upon the Lieutenant himselfe, after they had most pittiously beaten and evill intreated his Lictours and officers about him. Then having singled him out a part from his ministers and sergents, they cruelly mangled him, cut off his nose, cropt his eares, and left him for dead. Newes here of came to Messana, and within few daies Scipio highed him a pace to Locri in a gallie directed with six banks of oares: who after due examination and hearing of the cause between Pleminius and the Tribunes, acquit Pleminius as innocent, and left him governour of the garrison in that place: but hee judged the Tribunes guiltie as malefactours, and caused them to be bound in chaines for to he sent to  Rome unto the Senate: and so he returned to Messana, and from thence to Syracusa. Pleminius not able to over-rule his anger, and thinking that Scipio had dealt but coldly and negligently in the matter, and made too light of the injurie which hee had received, and not punished the offendors accordingly; and supposing that there was no man els able to make true estimate of the cause, but he that in his owne person had felt the indignitie and hainousnesse thereof; commaunded the Tribunes to be haled before him, and after he had put them to all the cruell torments, that any mans bodie is able to abide, he did them to death: and not satisfied either with their dolorous torture whiles they were quick, nor with taking their lives from them, cast their dead bodies forth into the fields, there to lye above ground unburied. The like crueltie he exercised upon the principall Burgesses of the Locrians, such as he heard say went to Scipio for to make complaint of his wrongs and injuries. And looke what soule and shamefull pranks he had plaid afore with his friends and allies, proceeding of lust and covetousnesse; the same now in his fell and furious rage he multiplied and wrought in divers sorts: so as he brought infamie, hatred and obloquie, not onely upon himselfe, but also made the world to thinke hardly, and to speake much shame of the Generall himselfe.
Now drew the time neere of the solemne election of Magistrates; when as there came letters to Rome from Pub. Licinius the Consull, the tenure where of was to this effect: That himselfe and his armie were sore visited with a grievous sicknes: and that he could not possibly have stayed there, but that the violent contagion and influence of the same maladie, if not greater and more grievous, had not assailed the enemies. Seeing that therefore himselfe was not able to come  unto the election, hee was minded, if it might so stand with the good liking of the Lords of the Senate, to nominate as Dictatour Q. Cecilius Metellus, for to hold the foresaid election. And as for the armie of Q. Cecilius, it was for the good of the Common-weale that it should be cassed and discharged, since that there was no imployment of them at this present; considering that Anniball was retired alreadie with his forces into his standing camp, and taken up his wintering harborough: and againe, the pestilence grew so hote in that leaguer of his, that if they were not discharged betimes, there was not one of them like to escape and remain alive. In these points, the LL. of the Senate graunted out their commission unto the Consull, for to doe according as himselfe thought to stand either with his owne credite and trust committed unto him, or the benefit of the Commonweale.
At the very same time there was a certaine religious opinion that had possessed of a suddaine the whole citie, by occasion of a certaine prophesie found in the books of Sibylla. When search was made into them and they diligently perused, about the raining of stones, which happened so often that yeare. The Prophesie ran in this forme: At what time soever an enemie of a strange and forraine countrey, shall happen to make warre upon Italie, hee may bee chased out of Italie and vanquished, if the goddesse dame Cybele of Ida, were brought to Rome from Pessinus. This prophesie found by the Decemvits, moved the Senate the more, for that, the Embassadors also who carried the oblation and present aforesaid to Delphos, related, That as they themselves sacrificed unto Pythius Apollo, all the inwards of the beast killed for sacrifice, appeared good, and shewed prosperitie: and the Oracle besides gave answere, That there was a farre greater victorie  toward the people of Rome than that was, out of the spoiles wherof they brought gifts and offered to the good at this present. And for to make up and fully accomplish these hopes, they alleaged withall, how P. Scipio in demaunding the province of Affricke, did presage (as it were) beforehand in his mind the finall end of this warre. To the end therefore, that they might with more

 speed obtained this honourable victorie thus foretokened, and offering (as it were) it selfe, by all luckie ossings of men and Oracles of the gods, they thought and devised some mean to transport the said goddesses to Rome.
The people of Rome in those daies was confedered with no States of Asia: howbeit the LL. calling to mind, how long agoe, upon occasion of a sicknesse, and to purchase health unto the people, Aesculapius was sent for likewise out of Greece, before it was joined with the cittie of Rome in any league or societie; and considering withall, that there was some friendship and amitie begun alreadie with king Attalus (in regard of the common warre against Philip) and that hee would bee readie to doe for the people of Rome, whatsoever lay in his power, they resolved to send unto him an honourable Embassage, to wit, M. Valerius Levinus, who had been twice Consull,  and had warred in Greece; M. Cecilius Metellus, who had ben a Pretour, and Servius Sulpitius Galba: likewise an Aedile, and two late Questours, G. Tremelius Flaccus, and M. Valerius Falco. For these five, they assigned five Quinqueremes or Gallies of five rankes of oares, that according to the credote and dignitie of the people of Rome, they should make a voiage into those lands; with whome they were to win a reputation and majestie to the Romane name and State. These Embassadours, as they held on their course toward Asia, so soone as they were put a land at Delphos, repaired directly to the Oracle, for to know what good hope it might affourd unto them and the people of Rome, of effecting that businesse and commission, about the which they were sent forth. And this answer by report, was returned to them again, That they should obtain their desire, and effectuate their purpose by the meanes of Attalus the king: advising them moreover,  That when they had conveighed the said goddesse downe to Rome, they should take order, that the very best man of all others in the cittie, should give her lodging and entertainement. But to proceed, to Pergamus they came unto the king. Who having courteously received and welcommed the Embassadors, conducted them into Phrygia to Pessinus, and delivered into their hands that sacred and holy stone, which the inhabitants of the countrie said, was the Mother of the gods; and willed them to carrie it to Rome. Then M. Valerius Falco was sent backe from the other Embassadours to advertise them at Rome, that the goddesse was comming, and that they should seeke out the best man in all the cittie, for to receive and lodge her in his house with all devotion that might be.
Now was Q. Cecilius Metellus nominated Dictatour by the Consull in the Brutians countrie,  against the solemne election of the magistrates. His armie was disbanded and cassed, and L. Veturius Philo created maister of the horse. Then the Dictatour held the Election. In which were chosen Consuls, M. Cornelius Cethegus, and P. Sempronius Tuditanus in his absence, who at that time had the government of Greece. After them were elected Pretors, T. Claudius Nero, M. Martius Ralla, L. Scribonius Libo, and M. Pomponius Matho. When the Election was finished, the Dictatour resigned up his place of magistracie. The Romane Games were thrice renued and set forth, and the plaies Plebey seven times exhibited. The Aediles of the chaire were Cn. and L. Cornelius, Lentuli both. This Lucius governed then the province of Spaine: created he was in his absence, and absent as he was he bare that dignitie. The Aediles of the Commons were T. Claudius Asellus, and M. Iunius Pennus. That yeare M. Marcellus dedicated the temple of Vertue, neere the gate  Capena, the seventeenth yeare after it was vowed by his father at Clastidium in Gallia, during the time of his first Consulship. There died also this yeare a Flamine of Mars, namely, M. Aemylius Regillus.
For the last two yeares, the affaires in Greece had not beene well followed. Philip therefore taking the vauntage, that the Aetolians were forsaken of the Romanes (the onely aid upon which they trusted) forced them both to sue for peace, and to contract the same under what conditions and capitulations himselfe pleased: which if hee had not made the better hast, all that ever hee could to accomplish in good time, P. Sempronius the vice-Consul, sent to succeed Sulpitius in the government, had utterly defeated him whiles he waged warre with the Aetolians: considering that he was ten thousand foot and a thousand horse strong, and had five and thirtie tall ships of war, headed  with brasen pikes before; a power of no small importance, I assure you, to aid and assist his allies. For the said peace was not so soone concluded, but newes came to the king, that the Romanes were arrived at Dyrrhachium; that the Parthines and other neighbour nations, upon hope of chaunge and a new world, began to rise and rebell; and that Dimallum was alreadie besieged and assaulted: for to that cittie the Romanes bent their power (in steed of aiding the Aetolians

unto whom they were sent) upon high displeasure and indignation, that without their advise  and consent, yea and against the tenor of the accord and covenant they had made a peace with the king. Philip upon these advertisements, for feare least some farther troubles might arise among the nations and states there bordering, tooke long journeis, and sped him apace toward Apollonia. Thither Sempronius was retired, after he had sent Lectorius his Lieutenant with part of his forces and thirteene ships into Aetolia, to visit the country, and to see in what termes they stood, yea and to disturb and breake the peace if possibly he could. Philip wasted and spoiled the territories and lands of the Apolloniates, and approching the citie with his whole power, bad battaile to Sempronius the Romane Generall. But after he saw once that he kept himselfe quiet within the citie, standing only upon his guard and defence of the walls; distrusting also his owne strength, as not able to force thecitie by assault: and desirous with all to enterteine peace with  the Romanes as well as with the Aetolians, if he could; if not, yet at leastwise to have truce with them: without effecting any more (seeing he could but only rub an old sore, and renew cankred malice upon fresh contention and quarell) he returned into his owne realme.
About the same time, the Epirotes weery of long warres, after they had first sounded the disposition and mind of the Romanes that way, sent their embassadors unto Philip, to treate about a generall and universall peace: affirming, that they had assured hope of an honorable end and agreement, if his highnesse would vouchsafe to come to a parlie with P. Sempronius the Romane Generall. And soone they obteined thus much of him, as to passe over into Epirus, for the king himselfe was not unwilling thereunto. Now there is a citie in Epirus, named Phaenice: there the king after communication had first with Eropus, Darda, and Philippus, Pretors of the  Epirots, entred into an enterview also with P. Sempronius. At this solemne meeting and conference, Aminander the king of the Athamanes was present, and other Magistrates of the Epirotes and Acarnanes. And first Philippus the Pretour began to speake and request, as well king Philip as the Romane Generall, to make an end of all warres, and likewise to give the Epirotes leave to do the same. P. Sempronius propounded and set downe the articles and conditions of peace in this wise, That the Parthines, Dimallum, Bargulum, and Eugenium, should belong to the Seignorie of the Romanes, notwithstanding that they had obteined of the Senate by their Oratours sent to Rome, to be annexed to the dominion of Philip king of Macedonie. When they were agreed for peace upon those capitulations, there were comprised within the league on the kings behalfe, Prusias king of Bithynia, the Achaeians, the Boeotians, the Thessalians, the Acarnanes, and the Epirotes: and on the Romanes, the Ilienses, K. Attalus, Pleuratus, Nabis the Tyran of the Lacedemonians, the Eleans, the Messenians, and the Atheniens. And hereof were instruments and Indentures ingrossed and sealed, and truce made for two moneths, untill such time as embassadors were sent to Rome, that the people might by their suffrages approve of the conditions in that forme. So all the tribes in generall graunted the same, because the warre nowbeing intended and bent against Affrick, they were willing for the present to be discharged of all other troubles.
P. Sempronius having concluded peace, departed unto Rome for to enter his Consulship. Now when as M. Cornelius and P. Sempronius were Consuls (which was the 15 yeere of the Punick warre) the Provinces were assigned unto them in this manner, namely, unto Cornelius, Hetruria  with the old armie: unto Sempronius the Brutij, with the new legions that he was to enroll. And to the Pretors in this wise were the Provinces allotted, that M. Martius should be lord chiefe Iustice of the citizens pleas, and L. Scribonius Libo have the jurisdiction of foreiners, together with the government of Gallia. Item, that M. Pomponius Matho should rule Sicilie, and T. Claudius Nero sit as L. Deputie in Sardinia. As for P. Scipio, his commission was renewed and continued for one yeere longer, with the commaund of that armie and Armada which he had conducted before. Likewise P. Licinius had his commission newly sealed, for to have the charge of the Brutians country, with the power of two legions, so long as the Consull thought it good for the Common-weale, that he should remaine in the government of that Province. Also M. Livius and Sp. Lucretius, with the assistance of those two legions with which they had defended Gallia  against Mago, continued still in their roume for another yeere. Moreover Cn. Octavius remained in place, with commission, that when he had delivered up Sardinia, and the legion there unto T. Claudius, himselfe should with fortie long gallies skoure the feas, and guard the coasts along the river, within those bounds and limits, for which the Senat had given order. Vnto M. Pomponius

 the Pretor in Sicilie were appointed the two legions of the Cannian armie. And T. Quintius and C. Hostilius Tubulus Viz-pretours, were to governe as they did the former yeere, the one Tarentum, and the other Capua; and both of them were allowed the old garisons. As for the government of Spaine, it was put to question before the people, what two Viz-pretours their pleasure was should be sent into that Province. And all the Tribes with one accord gave their graunt, that the same Proconsuls L. Cornel. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus, should sit as governors in those Provinces as the yeere before. The Consuls began now to muster souldiers, as wel to enroll new legions for to be sent into the Brutians countrie, as also to supply and fulfill the number of the other armies; according as they were directed by the Senate. And albeit Affrick was not yet openly declared a Province, but dissimuled by the LL. of the Senate, (of purpose I  beleeve, that the Carthaginians should have no ynkling and intelligence thereof before hand) yet the whole citie was in good hope, and made full reckning that this yeere the warre would be determined and fought out in Affrick, and so an end for ever of those troubles. This persuasion of theirs had possessed their hearts with much superstition: and very forward men were, both to report, and also to beleeve many prodigious and straunge wonders, which dayly were blowne abroad and divulged more and more: To wit, that there were two sunnes seene; that in the night season betweene whiles it seemed day light; that in Setia there was a burning torch or blasing Starre reaching from the East to the West; that in Tarracina the gate, and in Anagnia, as well the gate as the wall in divers parts were blasted and shaken with lightning; lastly, that in the temple of Iuno Sospita in Lanuvium, there was a noyse and a  rumbling heard, with an horrible crack. For the expiation and purging of these prodigies, there was a supplication holden for one day: and a novendiall solemne sacrifice was also celebrated, because it had rained stones out of the sky. Besides all this, there was some consultation about the receiving of dame Idaea. For over and besides that M. Valerius one of the embassadors was returned and had brought word that she would be very shortly in Italie, there came a new messenger with tidings, that she was now alreadie at Taracina. This deliberation (about no small matter, namely, whom they should geve judgement to be the best man simply in the whole citie) held the Senate much amused: considering that every one for his part was more desirous of true victorie, and preeminence in this behalfe, than of any promotions, honors or dignities whatsoever, awarded unto them by the voyces either of Senators or Commoners. In conclusion,  they judged P. Scipio, the sonne of that Cn. who was killed in Spaine, a very young man, and as yet not of full age to be a Questor, the very bestman without exception in the whole citie. Vpon what motives of his singular vertues they were induced thus to deeme of him, as I could willingly have delivered unto posteritie, what had ben set down in record by the auncient and first writers of those times: so I wil not interpose mine own conceits, in guessing at a thing which hath lien dead and buried so long time. This P. Cornelius was commaunded to go accompanied with all the dames of the citie as far as to Ostia, there to meete the Goddesse, and then to take her forth of the ship, and being once set a land, to deliver her unto the foresaid matrones for to be devoutly caried to the citie. Now when the ship was arrived at the mouth of the river Tyberis, he according as he was directed, went abourd in a pinnace, and launched into the sea: where he took  the goddesse at the Priests hands, and brought her ashore. And the dames which were the noblest and chiefe of the citie, amongst whom, Claudia Quintia was the ladie most renowmed, received her. This Claudia, who before time (as it isreported) was of no better name and same than she should be, now by this religious and devout ministerie, was for her chastitie and continencie recommended better to posteritie. These women caried this goddesse charily and daintely in their hands, and tooke her by turnes, one in course after another. All the citie came forth by heapes to meete her: and along the streets as she was conveighed, they stood at the dores with censers, making sweet perfumes, and burning frankincense: yea and prayed unto her, that she would willingly enter the citie of Rome, and continue propice and gracious unto it. Thus they transported her into the temple of Victoria within mount Palatine, the day before the12.April The Plaiescals led Megalesia. Ides of April, which was  alwayes after kept as a festivall holiday. The people with great frequencie brought gifts unto Palatium, whic
h they offred unto the goddesse, and solemnized a Lectisternium. And those plaies called Megalesia came up then, and were first instituted.
Now when the Counsell were busie and sat about the supplie of those legions which were in the provinces, there were certaine of the Senatours began to whisper and blow into their heads, That

the time was now come, no longer to abide those things which during the troubles and daungerous  daies they made a shift to endure; considering that now at length by the goodnesse of the gods, all feare was past, and the daungers overblowne. At which words the lords of the Senate being in great expectation and attentive to heare out the rest; they went on and said, That those 12 colonies of the Latines, which whiles Q. Fabius and Q. Fulvius were Consuls, refused to set our souldiours, now almost for six yeares had intermitted their service in the wars, as exempted from warfare altogither, and enjoyed that immunitie as an honour and reward for their good deserts: whereas in the meane time, other loyall and obedient allies, were by mustering every yeare continually, wasted and consumed, in performance of their faithfull allegeance and dutifull service to the Empire of Rome.At this speech, the lords called not so much to mind a thing long forlet and almost worne out of rememberance, as they were provoked to anger and grew very hote;  and therefore would not suffer the Consuls to passe any other matter before, but decreed that they should peremptorily convent to Rome the magistrates, and ten principall cittizens out of every of these Colonies, to wit, Nepet, Sutrium, Ardea, Cales, Alba, Carseoli, Sora, Suessa, Setia, Circeij, Narnia, and Interamna, (for these were the Colonies touched in that point abovenamed) and to lay upon them every one a double levie of footmen, to that number and proportion which they were charged with, when they set out most in the service of the Romane warres, ever since that the enemies were come into Italie: besides one hundred and twentie horsemen a peece. And in case any one of those colonies were not able to make up that full number of horsmen, then to allow for every man of armes three footmen. Provided alwaies, that for foote and horse both, such should be chosen and no other, as were most substantiall and of the best haviour, and bee sent to what place soever there was need of supplie, even out of Italie. And if any of them refused thus to do, then the Consuls had commission to stay the magistrates and deputies aforesaid, and not to give them audience in the Senate, (although they should require the same) before they had performed those impositions. Moreover those Colonies were enjoyned to pay every yeare a tax or tribune; and that there should be raised and levied, one Asse in the thousand, of their substance by the month; and be assessed in those Colonies according to the rate and rule that the Romane Censors should set downe; which they gave order to bee the same that was laid upon the people of Rome: and the information thereof to be exhibited and presented at Rome by the sworne Censours of the foresaid colonies, before they went out of their office. By vertue of this Act of the Senate, the magistrates and chiefe men of those Colonies were sent for, and compelled  to repaire to Rome: and when the Consuls demaunded of them, those souldiours and tribute aforesaid, they began all of them (but some more than others) to resuse and gainsay it, yea and flatly to denie, that so many souldiours could possibly bee made: nay hardly were they able, although they should streine themselves, to furnish the bare single number, according to the usuall proportion and old prescript order: requesting and beseeching them, to give them leave to have recourse unto the Senat, and there to make sute for their release: neither have we (say they) so much o^^ended as thus hardly to be used, nor deserved worthily to be undone. And say, we must needs miscarrie and bee cast away; yet neither our offence, nor the wrath of the people of Rome, can force us to find more souldiours than we have. But the Coss. resolute in their purpose, commaunded the Delegates and Committees of those Colonies, to stay stil at Rome, and their magistrates  onely to repaire home and ta
ke musters: for as much as (unlesse the full number of souldiours which was set downe unto them were brought to Rome) there was no Consull there would graunt them audience in the Senat. Thus when all hope was cut off, to haue accesse into the Senate, and to obtaine a release; those twelve Colonies tooke a levie and enrolled the full number. Which was no hard matter to be don, considering how their youth was increased in that time of long vacation and intermission of warfare. There was likewise another matter (by as long silence forlet and well neere quite forgotten) proposed newly againe by M.Valerius Laevinus: who said, That it was meet and good reason, that those private persons which had credited foorth their monies to the common-weale, when himselfe and M. Claudius were Consuls, should now at last be satisfied, contented, and paid: neither ought any man to marvaile why he (notwithstanding  the cittie were bound for the debt) had a speciall care and regard to call upon them for to have it discharged: for, besides that the Consul for that yeare being, when those lones of money were graunted, was in some sort properly obliged, to see that credit were kept; himself moreover was the very man that made the motion of taking up those monies, in regard that the citie

 chamber was so emptie of treasure, and the Commons purses so bare of money, that they were not sufficient to pay the ordinarie tribute. This ouverture made by the Consull, was well taken of the lords, who willed the Consuls to put up this matter to the house: and so they entred an Act and decree, that the said debts should be discharged at three paiments; whereof the first should be made presently by the Consuls then in place; the other twain, by the Consuls that wer to succeed in the third and fifty yeares next ensuing.
But there fell out one new object and occurrence, that drowned all other cares besides, and wholly possessed the heads of the Senate, by occasion of the miseries and calamities of the Locrians; whereof before that day, they had no knowledge nor intelligence, and now were by the comming of their embassadors declared and divulged. Neither wer the people provoked to choller  and anger, so much at the lewd behavior and wicked pranks of Q. Plemnius, as the slacknes and negligence, or else the partialitie and connivencie of Scipio in dealing between them. These Embassadours of the Locrians, ten in number, presented themselves before the Consuls sitting in the open hall called Comitium; clad they were in homely weeds and course apparell, looking pale and poore on the matter; and carrying withall in their hands as tokens of humble suppliants, certaine braunches of the olive, according to the manner of the Greekes, fell downe prostrate upon the ground before the Tribunall, with pitteous weepingand sorrowfull lamentation. The Consuls demaunded who they were: and they made answere againe, That they were Loctians, who had endured at the hands of Q. Pleminius the Lieutenant, and the Romane souldiours, such indignities, as the people of Rome would not find in their hearts, that the very Carthaginians  themselves should suffer and susteine: beseeching them to do them this favour, as to give them leave to have accesse to the lords of the Senat, there to make their mone and complaine of their wofull distresses. Being admitted into the Senate, and audience given them, then the auncientest man of the companie spake in this wise.The pittifull complaints of the Locrians before the Senate of Rome. Right honourable (my LL.) I know full well (quoth he) how important it would be, and available to the due estimat and weight of our complaints and grievances, in case yee were informed sufficiently and knew the truth, as well in what sort Locri
was first betraied unto Anniball, as also after what order the garrison of Anniball was thence expelled, and the cittie restored againe under your obeisance. For, if it may appeare that the trespasse of our revolt, cannot be imputed any way unto the publicke counsell and consent of our cittie; but contrariwise, that our returne under your signorie and dominion was not onely performed  with our good will, but also first wrought and compassed by the meanes of our helping hand and valour: yee have the greater cause to be discontented and displeased with your Lieutenant and souldiors, for of^^ing us (your good and loiall allies) such abuses, so cruell wrongs and unworthie indignities. As for the cause of our double revoltment and chaunge, I thinke it good to deferre the speaking thereof to another time, and that for two reasons: the one is, that the matter might be heard in the presence of P. Scipio, who recovered Locri, and was an eie-witnesse of all that wee have
don, be it good or bad: the other is this, that howsoever we be, yet we shuld not have abiden those calamities in such sort as we have supported them. We cannot dissimule (my LL.) nor conceale, how al the while that we had the Carthaginian garison within our castle, we suffered many soule outrages and shamefull villanies, both at Amilcar his hands (the captaine of the garison)  as also from the Numidians and Africanes: but what are they in comparison of the abuses and indignities that we endure at this day? May it please you (my LL.) to give us the hearing of those things with patience, that I shall utter even against my will with grievance. All the world at this day is insuspence, and standeth in great doubt, whither to see you or the Carthaginians, the soveraigne lords of the whole earth. But if they were to weigh and counterpoise the Roman and Carthaginian Empire, by those injuries which have beene offred to us of Locri, either from them or your garrison: and which at this day,
more than ever before, we still endure: there is none but would rather make choice of them to be their soveraigne LL. than the Romans. And yet consider I pray you, and see how wel affected the Locrians are towards you: when we were nothing so hardly used nor so ill entreated by the Carthaginians, yet we had recourse unto your captaine Generall:  and now that we are misused of your garrison, and put to more sorrow than if we were professed enemies, yet we have run no whither with our complaints but unto your selves. Either shall you (my LL.) vouchsafe to have compassion of our miserable state, or else we see not what wee have left wherein we should pray unto the immortall gods, for to be good and propice unto us. Quintus Pleminius Lieutenant to the General Scipio, was sent with a strong garrison and power of men,

to recover Locri out of the hands of the Carthaginians; and with the very same garrison was he  left there: but this Lieutenant of yours (for, the extremitie of miseries and aflictions whereinto wee are driven, maketh us bold, and putteth courage in us to speake our minds freely) hath nothing at all in him of a man, my Lords, but the bare shape and outward forme; nor of a Romane cittizen, unlesse it bee the habite of apparrell which hee weareth, and the sound of the Latine tongue which hee speaketh. A verie plague hee is and no better, a monstrous and ouglie beast, like unto that, which sometimes (if old tales and fables bee true) haunted the narrow seas betweene us and Sicilie, for to destroy all passengers that sailed by. Who, if he could have been content himselfe alone to have practised and wrought upon us your Allies, all mischeivous acts and pranckes, of wickednesse, of filthie lust, and greedie covetousnesse, we would peradventure in all patience and long sufferance, have filled upthat one gulfe and pit  were it never so deepe, and satisfied one gorge never so unsatiable. But now so great a delight and pleasure hath he taken, that all lewd and licentious parts, all shamefull acts and villanies should be commonly practised, and in every place committed, that hee hath made all your Centineirs very Pleminy, yea, and your souldiours as bad as himselfe. All of them can skill now of robbing, rifling, spoiling, beating, wounding, and killing: they are all good at forcing of dames and ladies of honor, at ravishing and deflouring of young virgins, at abusing (against kind) of yonglings, free borne and well descended, whom they pull perforce from between the armes, and out of the very bosomes of their parents. Daily is our cittie assaulted and taken; daily is it sacked and pilled, night and day, there is no place free, but ringeth againe with the pitteous shrikes and lamentable plaints and cries of women and children, harried and carried away in every place. He  that were a stranger to these things, and knew nothing, might wonder well ynough, how either we can possibly hold out in suffering such outrages, or they which are the doers, not yet be satisfied and full of committing so great wrongs and injuries. For neither will my tongue and utterance serve to deliver, nor needfull is it and expedient for you to heare every thing in particular, what we have sustained. But in generall I will comprise and knit up altogether. I will abide by it, that there is not one house throughout al Locri, I dare avouch there is no person either one or other, exempt from the wrongs that he hath done. I say, and stand to it, that there is no kind of wickednesse, no manner of silthie lust and uncleannesse, no unsatiable avarice besides, that hee hath not assaied to practice upon as many as were capable thereof, and fit subjects to worke upon. Hardly can a man devise and thinke, whether of these two mischeefes incident to a cittie bee more detestable, either when the enemies force it by assault in time of warre, or when a pestilent and cruell tyrant oppresseth it by force and armes during peace. All calamities we endured before, that townes woon and lost are put unto. And now at this houre, more than ever (my LL.) Pleminius hath perpetrated upon us, our children and our wives, all those excessive villanies, that the most inhumane, cruell, and outrageous tyrants can devise to exercise upon those subjects, whom they keepe downe with oppression, and tread under foot. Yet one thing there is (right Honourable) whereof both sense of religion imprinted and engraffed naturally in our minds, constraineth us to make particular complaint by specialtie; and also our desire is, that yee should have the hearing, yea, and to assoile and discharge your Commonweale of the scruple of conscience, in case ye thinke it so meet and requisite. For we have observed and seen with our eies, with what devotion  and ceremoniall reverence, you not onely honour and worship the gods of your owne, but also receive and entertaine those of straungers and forrainers. We have in our cittie a chappell of Proserpina, concerning the holinesse of which house, I suppose verily, that ye have heard some report and same, during the warre of king Pyrrhus: who in his return out of Sicilie, passing along the sea side with his fleet by Locri, among other shameful villanies and outrages which he committed against our citie in despight of us, and for our fidelitie shewed toward you, pilled also and robbed the treasure of this Proserpina, which to that day had never ben touched by any man whatsoever. And when he had so done, he embarked the monie, and sent it away by water, but journeied himselfe by land. But see what happened my LL. hereupon! His whole navie the morrow after, was all to tossed, split, and torn a peeces in a most hideous ghust and horrible tempest, save  only those ships wherein that sacred treasure was bestowed, which were cast upon our coast, and driven ashore. Wherupon this king, as prowd and fierce a prince as he was, being taught by so great harmes and losses, to beleeve that there were gods in heaven that ruled all; made diligent search for all the said monies, and caused the same to bee brought backe againe, and laid up in the treasurie

 of Proserpina. And yet for all that, never sped he well in anything that hee went about, from that day forward. Hunted hee was and chased cleane out of Italie; and comming by chaunce on a night, and entering unadvisedly the citie of Argos, he died an obscure, base, and dishonourable death. And notwithstanding your Lieutenant, your Colonels and knight Marshals heard of this and a thousand more such instances and examples which were recounted unto them (not for to amplisie and set out with the highest the great religion and holinesse of the place; but as we and our auncestours have had right evident proofe, and that full oftentimes, to shew the manifest power and puissance of that goddesse) yet were they so hardie, as to lay their theevish and sacrilegious hands upon those treasures, that were inviolate and not to be touched; and so by that cursed prize and bootie have polluted themselves, their houses, and your souldiors. Whose service take  heed my LL. as ye tender your selvesand your credite, how yee employ either in Italie or in Affricke, in any of your affaires and warres there; before ye purge and expiate this soule and heinous fact: for feare least they make amends, and pay for this detestable forfeit, not onely which their owne bloud, but also with some publicke losse and calamitie of the whole State. And even alreadie my LL. theyre and displeasure of the goddesse hath ben well seen upon your captains and soldiors both, and at this present day continueth still. Sundrie times they have ben together by the ears, and skuffled one against another with banners displaied. Pleminius the captain bare up one side, and two Marshals or militarie Tribunes another. Never fought they more fiercely and sharply with the Carthaginians in the field, than amongst themselves in fraies at the sword point. And through their furious rage they had given Anniball good opportunitie and vantage to regaine  Locri into his owne hands; but that Scipio, whom we sent for, came in the meane time upon him. But peradventure (some will say) this madnesse and furie haunteth and tormenteth the souldiors onely, who are tainted with the foresaid sacriledge, and no power at all of the goddesse hath been shewed in punishing the leaders and captaines themselves. Nay ywis, in them it hath most evidently appeared. The Tribunes have been beaten with rods by the Lieutenant, and the Lieutenant againe, being laid for by the said Tribunes, and caught in a traine, hath not only been mangled all his bodie over, but when they had cut off his nose, and cropt his eares, was left for dead in the place. And afterwards, when the Lieutenant was recovered and cured of his hurts, hee first imprisoned the Tribunes; then he scourged them; and after he had martired them, and put them to all exquisite tortures that might bee devised against bondslaves, he did them to death; and when  they were dead, would not suffer them to bee enterred. Thus yee see how the goddesse hath punished and taken vengeance of them that have pilled and robbed her temple: and never will shee give over to torment and harrie them with all manner of furies and hellish fiends, before the sacred money bee againe bestowed in the chists and cofers of her treasurie. Our auncestours long agoe, in time of greevous and cruell warre betweene them and the Crotoniates, because the temple standeth without the cittie, were desirous to remoove that treasure and money from thence, into the citie. But in the night there was a voice heard from out of the shrine, that they should hold their hands off; for that the goddesse herselfe knew well ynough how to defend her owne temple. And because upon this warning they made it a matter of conscience, and were afraid to stirre the treasure from thence, they would needs cast a strong wall about the said temple: and  when it was brought up to a good height from the ground, behold, suddainely at once all the worke came tumbling downe. But both now, and oftentimes besides, hath this goddesse either guarded her seat and chappell, or else if it hath been any way violated, shee hath been grievously revenged by some fearefull example of them that have seemed to offer violence to the same. Now for the wrongs that we abide, she is not able; neither is there any other but yourselves (my lords) to right us, and revenge our quarrell. You are they whom wee flie unto; unto your protection only in all humble maner, we have recourse. And all one it is to use, whether ye suffer Locri to be under that Lieutenant and that garrison, or yeeld us unto Annibal in his anger, and to the Carthaginians, for to wreke their teene upon us and our throtes. Neither require wee, that you should credite and beleeve our complaint of him that is not now in place, without libertie of  his answere, and pleading for himselfe. Let him come hardly; let him be at the hearing himselfe, and spare not, let him a gods name cleare and acquit himselfe, if hee can. If when all is done and said, it can be proved, that he hath left undone any mischeefe against us, that one man can devise to doe unto another; we will be content to abide and endure all those miseries once againe (if it were possible) which wee have suffered alreadie, yea, and to hold and declare him guiltlesse of

all offences done both to God and man.
When the embassadors had laid abroad those matters, and Q. Fabius demaunded of them whether they had complained unto P. Scipto, and uttered these their griefes before him, they made answere and said, That they had sent embassadors unto him, but he was busied in making preparation for the warres, and was either passed alreadie over into Affrick, or upon his voiage readie to take the feas within few daies: and they had seene by good experience, in how great favour the Lieutenant Pleminius stood with his generall: and namely they were not ignorant how Scipio after he had heard the matter betweene the Tribunes and him, committed them to prison: but as for the Lieutenant, who was as faultie as the other, if not more, him he left there still in his full authoritie. Now after that the embassadors were willed to go forth of the temple where the Senate sate, the chiefe LL. of the Senate began with biting words to inveigh bitterly  against Scipio as well as Pleminius. But above all others, Q Fabius girded at him, and said, That he was borne even to corrupt and marre all militarie discipline. Thus (quoth he) in Spaine also we have lost more by mutinities of our owne souldiours, than by the warres with our enemies: for why? after a strange and forrein maner, and according to the guise of kings, one while he cockered his souldiers and suffered them to have their will and head too much; otherwhiles he would be oversharp and cruell to them. After which rough words, he came upon them both thus with as heavie and sharp a sentence, namely, That Pleminius the Lieutenant by his consent should be had away bound in chaines to Rome, and there clapt up in prison, untill his cause were heard, and judicially determined: and in case those chalenges were true, that the Locrians have commensed against him, he should be put to death in prison, and his goods be confiscate and  forfeited to the chamber of the citie. As for P. Scipio, in that he presumed to depart out of his province withoutcommission and direction from the Senate, he should be called home: and the Tribunes of the Commons dealt with all, to prefer a bill unto the people for his deprivation, and to put him besides his place of government. As touching the Locrians, his opinion was, That the Senate should geve them their dispatch, and returne them this answere: First, as touching the wrong's that they complained of, it was not the will and pleasure neither of the Senate not of the people of Rome that they were done; who wished with all their hearts that they had bene undone: Item, that they acknowledged them to be good men, to be their friends and allies, and so would accept of them and call them. As to their children, their wives, and other goods taken from them whatsoever, their mind was that they should be restored againe: Item, that enquirie  should be made what summes of money were taken out of the treasury of Proserpina, and that two-fold restitution should be made and laid up there in stead of it: Item, that there should be a solemne purgatorie sacrifice celebrated for amends and expiation of that sinne; but so, as the colledge first of the Priests and Bishops should be consulted with, and their advise taken in that behalfe, (considering the sacred treasure was dilquieted, laid open and violated) namely, what manner of expiations and clensings were to be used, to what gods, and with what beasts they should sacrifice: Finally, that all the souldiers which were at Locri should be transported over into Sicilie; and in their roume foure cohorts of allies from out of the Latin nation should be brought to lye in garison there. But every Senatour could not be asked his opinion and sentence that day, by reason of their difference and disagreement of minds so hotely incensed, some  in favour, other in disfavor of Scipio. For besides the lewd part of Pleminius, and the calamitie and oppression of the Locrians, they began to speake against the apparell of the Generall himselfe, how he went not like a souldier and a warriour, no nor so much as like a Romane: walking up and downe, and squaring it out in the schooles and open places of exercise with his mantle and cloke, and in his slippers and pantosles, after the Greeke fashion: And that he was over bookish, and set his mind too much upon reading; and tooke delight to be in the sense schoole and wrastling place: and all his men and gard about him, as idly and wantonly geven as he, tooke joy in the pleasures and delightfull seat of Syracusa. As for Carthage and Anniball, they were quite forgotten: and his whole armie through loosenesse and libertie was spilled and cleane lost, like to that of late at Sucro in Spaine, and all one with them at this time in Locri, more to be  feared of their friends than their enemies. And albeit these matters thus reported, were either true, or mingled with some truths, and therefore sounded all very probable; yet the opinion of Q. Metellus prevailed: who in all other things gave his assent unto Maximus, onely as touching Scipto, he varied from him. For I can not see any reason (quoth he) how this can stand, that whom

 erewhile the whole citie chose at those young yeeres of his, to be the only captaine for to recover Spaine; of whom they made speciall choyse to be their Consull, after that he had gotten Spaine from the enemies, to end at once the Punick warre; and in whom they reposed great hope, that he was the man to draw Anniball out of Italie, and to subdue all Affrick: he now should all of a sodaine be called for home out of his province, as a person almost condemned, without pleading and hearing of his cause, as if he were another Pleminius: considering that eventhose leawd and cruell parts which the Locrians complained of, were by their owne words and confession not committed, whiles he was present in place: neither could he be charged and accused directly for ought els but only for his sufferance and connivencie, in that upon a tender and respective indulgence of his Lieutenant, he was too remisse, and forbare to punish him with  rigor. His advise therefore and opinion was, thatM. Pomponius the Pretour, unto whose lot the government of Sicilie was fallen, should within three daies next and immediatly ensuing, take his journey into his province: and that the Consuls, should elect x. Commissioners or Delegates but of the Senat, such as they thought good of, and send them with the Pretour; likewise two Tribunes of the Commons, and one Aedile: that the Pretour with the assistance of these personages, should sit vpon a commission to enquire and know the truth: and in case they could find that those things wherewith the Locrians found themselves so much grieved, were done either by commaundement and direction from Scipio, or with his will and consent; then to charge him to depart out of the province. But in case that P. Scipio were alreadie passed over into Affrick; then the foresaid Tribunes of the Commons, and the Aedile, joyning unto them two of the Delegates  abovesaid, (such as the Pretor deemed most meet) should saile into Affrick: and the Tribunes and Aedile bring with them Scipio from thence: and the two Commissioners have the charge and government of the armie, until such time as a new L. Generall succeeded and came in place. But if M. Pomponius and the ten Delegates abovesaid, found that neither by the direction, nor with the will of P. Scipio these enormities were committed, then P. Scipio should remaine still with the armie, and go forward with the warre as he intended. When this decree of the Senate was once passed, and an act made thereof, they were in hand with the Tribunes either to agree betweene themselves, or els to cast lots, which two of them should go with the Pretour and the Delegates. And then the colledge of the Bishops were consulted with, about the expiation and making satisfaction for those things which in the temple of Proserpina at Locri were  either handled, polluted, or carried forth from thence. The Tribunes of the commons that went the journey with the Pretor and the Commissioners, were M. Claudius Marcellus, and M. Cincius Alimentius: who also had an Aedile of the Commons to assist them, whom they might commaund, if Scipio would not obey the Pretor, whether he were in Sicily, or gone over into Affrick, to apprehend and attach his bodie; and by vertue of their sacrosanct and inviolable authoritie to bring him home with them. And first they resolved to go to Locri before they went to Messana. But concerning Pleminius, the report goeth two waies. Some say, that when he was advertised what was intended and devised against him at Rome, he purposed to go to Naples into banishment, and chanced by the way to light upon one of the Delegates abovesaid, and so by him was perforce brought back to Rhegium. Others affirme, that Scipio himselfe sent out one of his Lieutenants,  accompanied with 30 of the most noble knights or gentlemen that he had about him, with a warrant to commit Q. Pleminius, and with him the principall authors of the sedition, and to lay them fast in irons. But certaine itis that they all, were it by the commandement of Scipio before, or then by warrant from the Pretor, were put in ward and safecustodie with the Rhegines. The Pretour and the Delegates being come to Locri, first and formost, according to their commission, had a principall care of religion. For all the holy money which they found by diligent search in the custodie either of Pleminius, or of the soldiors, togither with that which they themselves had brought with them from Rome, they bestowed againe in the privie vestries where the treasure was kept: and besides, they made a solemne purgatorie sacrifice for the sacriledge. After this, the Pretour assembled the soldiers togither, and commanded them to carrie their ensignes  out of the cittie: where himselfe encamped upon the plaine; and proclaimed that no souldiour, as hee would answere at his uttermost perill, should either tarrie behind, or bring forth any thing with him but his owne. Then he gave the Locrians leave, that every man should layhold upon that which he knew to be his owne: and if ought were not forthcomming and to be seen, to chalenge and put in his claime for it. And above all things, his pleasure was, that all bodies of free

persons whatsoever, should without delay be restored unto them, and if any made default of restitution, he should abide the smart and be grievously punished. Then he assembled the Locrians to an audience, and pronounced before them all, That the people and Senate of Rome graunted unto them their auncient libertie, and their owne lawes: giving notice unto them, that whosoever had any thing to say against Pleminius, or any other person by way of accusation, he should follow him to Rhegium, and there give attendance. Also if they were desirous to make a publike and open complaint of Scipio, namely, That the facts committed at Locri most impiously and wickedly, against both God and man, passed either under his warrant, or with his leave and liking, then they should send embassadours to Messana, where he togither with his Counsell and assistants would give them audience of all matters, and determine accordingly. The Locrians yeelded great thankes to the Pretours and to the Delegates or Commissioners: as also to the Senate  and people of Rome: and said, they would go to accuse Pleminius. As for Scipio, although he set little to the heart the injuries and wrongs done unto their cittie, yet hee was a man whose friendship they desired rather to embrace, than to entertaine his enmitie. And this they knew assuredly, that so many lewd pranks, and so horrible parts ther plaid, were neither by the direction nor yet with the connivencie and tolleration of P. Scipio: but his onely fault was, that either hee trusted Pleminius overmuch, or credited them too little. And some men (say they) be of this nature, that they will have a carefull regard for to prevent sinne, and earnest desire that no offence be committed, rather than courage and heart to punish and correct faults when they are once done and past.
Hereupon both the Pretours and also the Commissioners with him, thought themselves well cased of no small burden and charge of making farther inquisition and fitting upon the cause of  Scipio. But Pleminius and two and thirtie persons more with him, they condemned and sent bound in chaines to Rome. They themselves went also in person to Scipio, to be eie-witnesses and to make report at Rome of their owne knowledge, as touching the manner of apparrell, the ydle life of the Generall, and the lose, dissolute, and corrupt militarie discipline of his souldiours; so rise and common in many mens mouthes. Against their comming to Saracose, Scipio was provided of deeds to approve his innocencie, and not of words to excuse his follie. He gave order for all his forces there to meet, and for his armada to be in readinesse, as if he were that day to give battaile both by land and sea to the Carthaginians. The very same day that they arrived thither, they were friendly received and courteously entertained by Scipio. The morrow after, he shewed them all his forces, as well as for land as sea service, not onely furnished, well appointed, and in readines;  but the one sort, namely the land souldiours, running and charging one another at turney; and the sea servitours likewise within the haven, representing a navall combat with their shippes. Then he led the Pretour and the other commissioners all about, to see the arsenall and armorie, the store-houses, the garners of corne, and all other provision and furniture for the warre. At the view and sight whereof, they were stricken with such exceeding admiration, both of every thing in particular, and of all in generall, that they were fully persuaded, that either by the conduct of that captaine and valour of that armie, the Carthaginians might be overcome and conqu^red, or by none other in the world: yea, and they willed him in the name of God, without more adoe to passe over into Africke, and withall speed possible to make the people of Rome to enjoy the effect of that hope which they conceived that very day, on which al the Centuries nominated  and declared him with one voice the former Consull of the twaine: and with so joyous harts they tooke their leave and departed from thence, as if they were to bring tidings to Rome of a glorious victorie; and not to make relation and report of a magnificall and stately preparation for warre. Pleminius and all they that were likewise attaint and guiltie, after they came to Rome, were immediately clapt up and laid fast in prison. At the first time when they were brought out before the people by the Tribuns, they could find no grace, no favor nor mercie amongst them, their minds were so sorstalled and possessed aforehand, with the consideration of the wosull miseries and calamities of the poore Locrians. But afterwards, being produced oftner unto them, as the hatred conceived against him, began to weare and decay, so mens anger grew to assuage and soften: besides the pittious plight and deformed hew of Pleminius there present, and the remembrance  withall, of Scipio now absent, gat him some favour with the people. Yet he died in prison, before his cause was judicially tried, and definitive sentence of him passed. Clodius Licinius reporteth in this third booke of the Romane stories, that this Pleminius in the time of the games which Africanus second time Consul, exhibited at Rome, according to a vow by him made; went

 about (by the helpe of some whom he had corrupted and waged for money) to set the citie on fire in divers places, therby to have opportunitie to breake prison and make an escape: but when his wicked purpose was once disclosed and brought to light, he was condemned and awarded by an act of Senat to the dungeon Tullianum. But as for Scipio, ther wer no words made of him, neither came he in question any where else but in the Senate: where all with one accord, both commissioners and tribunes, by extolling and magnifying with glorious words, the navie, the armie and the captaine, brought it so about, that the Senate thought good and were agreed, that with all convenient speed Scipio should over into Africke, and have libertie granted out of those armies which were in Sicilie, to make choise of those whom hee would himselfe transport over with him into Africke, and whom he would leave behind for the guard and defence of the province.
 Whiles these things passed thus amongst the Romanes; the Carthaginians also having spent all the winter time in much suspition and continuall feare, hearkening to all newes, and enquiring fearefully of every messenger, and keeping watch upon all their promontories and high hils by the sea side, bestirred themselves likewise, and procured the societie and alliance of K. Syphax, a matter of no small importance for the safegard and defence of Africke, in hope and confidence of whose amitie and friendship especially, they were persuaded, that Scipio intended to saile over into Affricke. Now there had been alreadie betweene Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo and the king, not onely familiar acquaintance by way of kind welcomming and reciprocall hospitalitie, since the time (as hath ben said before) that Scipio and Asdruball fortuned to meet at one time together in the kings house, when they came out of Spaine; but also some treatie was alreadie begun of  alliance and affinitie, and a motion made, that the king should espouse and wed the daughter of Asdruball. For the assurance of this matter, and the appointment of a certaine day for the solemnising of the mariage (for now the Damosell was readie for an husband, and mariageable) Asdruball tooke a journey, and seeing the king burning in love (as these Numidians of all other barbarous nations are most given that way, and exceeding amorous) he sent for the maiden from Carthage, and hastened the wedding. And among other congratulations that passed betweene, to the end, that besides the private affinitie, there should be also a publicke league, there was an alliance concluded betweene the people of Carthage and the king, by giving and taking their faithfull promise interchangeably, and obliging themselves by a solemne oth one to the other to observe it as wel offensive as defensive, and to have the same enemies and the same friends for ever.  But Asdruball remembring both the friendship begun between Scipio and the king, and also how fickle and variable the natures of the Barbarians are; and fearing if Scipio should passe over into Affricke, that this bond of wedlock would not be strong ynough to hold the king in; took the time whiles this Numidian prince was enflamed with his fresh love, induced him what with reasons, and what with the faire words and allurements of his young spouse, to send Embassadours into Sicilie to Scipio, for to advise him not to passe over into Affricke, nor to relie upon any confidence of him, ne yet to build upon his former promises. For as much as himselfe was not only linked in matrimonie with a citizen of Carthage, the daughter of that Asdrubal whom he saw entertained as a guest in his court, but also joined in a publick league with the people of Carthage. And first he exhorted him that the Romanes would war with the Carthaginians far from Africk,  as hitherto they had done; for feare least he should of necessitie be forced to have an hand, and intermeddle in their quarels; and so whiles hee desired to avoid the daunger and hostilitie of one part or other, be driven at length to side one way: giving him more plainly to understand, That if Scipio would not forbeare Affrick, but needs come with an armie against Carthage, then must he necessarily fight in defence of the land of Affrick, wherein himselfe was borne, and for the native countrie, for the father and house of his owne wife. With this commission and direction were certaine Orators sent unto Scipio, who met with him at Saracose, and there delivered their message. Scipio, albeit he was disappointed greatly of his ground worke that he had laid for his warres in Africke, and put besides his good hopes; gave the Embassadours letters into Africk unto the king, and sent them backe againe in all hast, before the thing were published and come abroad. In  which letters hee requested him earnestly to be advised and bethink himselfe that hee brake not the rights either of friendship and hospitalitie begun with him, or of the league and societie entred with the people of Rome: nor violated justice and faithfull promise made by giving right hands: ne yet beguile and abuse the gods, the witnesses aud judges of all covenants and agreements made. But for asmuch as the comming of those Numidians could not bee concealed (for they

went all about the cittie, and were daily conversant in the Generall his lodging: and if it should have  ben kept secret where about they came, it was to be doubted least the truth the more it was smothered and dissimuled, the more it would break forth and come to light: and so the armie was to stand in feare, that they were to warre at once both with the king and Carthaginians. Scipio therefore buzzed aforehand into mens heads, false devised matters, and so withdrew them from the understanding of the truth indeed. He assembled all his souldiours togither, and said unto them; That now it was no longer staying and trisling out the time: bearing them in hand, that the kings, his allies and consederates, importuned him to set over into Africke with all convenient speed: that Masanissa beforetime himselfe in person came to Laelius, grieving and complaining that the time ran thus on in delaies and doing nothing: and Syphax now sent his embassadours, musing much and wondringwhat the cause should be of so long temporising: and requiring that either the armie  without more a doe, should be set over at once: or else if their minds and purposes were changed, to certifie him so much, that hee likewise might provide for himselfe and his kingdome. And therefore he did them to weere and understand, that hee intended (now that hee was sufficiently provided and furnished of all things; and considering that the imprese might abide no farther stay) to conduct his armada to Lilybaeum, to wait the first good day of wind and weather, to take the seas for a bon-voiage, and with Gods grace and favour to set saile for Africke. His letters hee dispatched to Marcus Pomponius to this effect, That if hee thought so good, hee should repaire to Lilybaeum, to the end they might commune and consult togither, what legions especially, and what number of souldiours he should transport over with him into Africke. In like manner, hee sent all about the maritime and sea coasts, to stayall the carrickes and ships of burden, and to bring  them away at once to Lilybaeum. Now when all the shippes and serviceable men in Sicilie were assembled to Lilybaeum, so as neither the cittie was able to receive the multitude of souldiours, nor the haven conteine the number of the vessels; so earnestly minded they were all, and so hotely set upon their voiage into Africke, that they seemed as if they were conducted not to fight a warre, but to enjoy the assured rewards of a victorie. But especially above all others, the soldiors remaining of the Cannian armie, were verily persuaded, that under this captaine, or else none, by valiantly quitting themselves in the service of the Commonweale, they should be able to end and finish their ignominious and shamefull souldierie. And Scipio himselfe made no base account of those kind of souldiours, as knowing full well that the defeature received at Cannae, was not occasioned by their cowardise: neither were there throughout the Romane armie any souldiours  so auncient and of so long continuance, or so well experienced not onely in many and sundrie soughten fields, but also in the assaulting of townes and citties. And these Legions of Cannae were the fift and six in order. Now when hee had once resolved and given out, that hee would transport them over with him into Affricke, then hee tooke a particular view of them, man by man. And having culled out those, and left them behind, whome hee supposed unmeet and unsufficient, hee substituted in their place those whome hee had brought with him out of Italie: and so fully hee supplied and made up the number of those Legions, that either of them had sixe thousand and two hundred foot, and three hundred men of armes. Hee chose also out of the same armie of Cannae, both horsemen and footmen, of the allies and confederates of the Latine nation. What power of souldiours in the whole were set over into Affricke, writers  differ not a little in the number. In some authours I find, that they were tenne thousand foot, and two thousand and two hundred horse; in others, fifteene thousand footmen, and fifteen hundred horsemen. In some records againe, they were more by one halfe and better, namely, that of horse and foot there were embarked five and thirtie thousand. And others there be, that have set down no number at all, amongst whom, as in a matter so doubtfull and uncertaine, I would my selfe be counted for one. But Calius for his part, as he forbeareth to put down any number at also he seemeth to implie an infinit multitude of them, in that he saith, That with a crie and shout that the soldiors set up, the very foules of the aire fell down to the ground: and he that had seen the multitude of them when they went a shipbord, would have said, there had not been a man left behind, either in Italie or in Sicilie. Well, how many or how few soever they were, Scipio himselfe took the  charge to see the soldiers embarked in good order, and without any tumult. As for the sailers and mariners, who were forced before to shipbord, C. Laelius the Admiral of the navie, kept them stil and quiet within their ships. M. Pomponius the Pretor had commission for to furnish the armada with corn and victuals: who made provision of food and sustenance for 45 daies: of which there was of baked

 meats and other viands alreadie dressed, as much as would suffice for fifteene daies. Now when they were all embarked, he sent about to all the ships, certaine pinnases or cock-boats, and commaunded all the pilots and maisters of every ship, with two souldiours a peece, to come into the market place, there to receive their charge. When they were all met and assembled togither, first hee enquired of them whether they had provided and taken into their vessels fresh water sufficient both for man and beast, to hold out so many daies as their corne would serve? and when answere was made, that they had water in their ships to last five and fortie daies: then he charged and commaunded the souldiours to keepe silence and be quiet during their navigation, and without any strife and contention to be obedient unto the marriners, and willing to helpe in any ministerie and service whatsoever, saying, That himselfe and L. Scipio would keep on the right wing  with twentie strong ships with brasen beake heads, and C. Lelius the Admirall with M. Porcius the Treasurer on the left, with as many of the same fort, to waft over and guard the hulkes and ships of burden: willing and requiring that there should be lights in all their vessels, namely, that everie brasen headed ship should have one; each Carricke twaine; and the Admirall ship, wherein the Generall was, three lights, for a speciall marke, to bee discerned from the rest in the night. And so hee commaunded the Pilots to steere and direct their course for Emporia. [The territorie hereabout is most fertile and fruitfull, whereby the whole countrie aboundeth in plentie of all things: the barbarous peisants (as commonly it falleth out in battell and plentifull lands) are cowards, and unapt for warre, and it was thought they might bee surprised and subdued before any succour could come from Carthage.] When these directions were given,  they were commaunded to retire unto their ships, and the next morrow at the signall, with the helpe of the gods to weigh anchor, hoise up sailes and away. Many Romane Armadaes had aforetime set out of Sicilie, and the very same port: but never any viage all the time of that warre, no nor during the former, made so goodly a shew, and was so much looked on. And no mervaile, for most of their other fleetes were sent out only to rob and to fetch in booties and prises. And yet if a man would esteeme navies by the number and greatnesse of ships: there had bene aforetime two Consuls together, who went over with the power of two complete armies: and in every of those fleetes there were welneere as many warre ships with brasen beake heads, as hulks and carricks in those that Scipio transported over. For besides fiftie long ships of warre, he had not all our foure hundred ships of burden and passage to transport over his armie with. But if wee  will compare both warres together, the second seemed unto the Romanes more sharpe and cruell than the former: both because it was fought within Italie; and also by reason of so great overthrowes of so many armies, together with the losse and death of their Generall captaines. Moreover, great expectation there was of Scipio the Commaunder and Generall of this voiage, a man much renewned and talked of, both in regard of his owne noble acts of chivalrie, and also for a special and singular fortune that followed him in all his exploits; wherby he grew every day more glorious than other, which caused all mens hearts to be set upon him: beside his very resolution and mind that hee carried, to passe over into Affricke, which all the while of that warre entred not into the head of anie captaine before him; in that hee gave it out abroad, That hee meant to goe over, with intent to draw and fetch Anniball out of Italie, and to divert and translate  the warre into Affricke, and there to finish and make an end of it. There came running unto the haven to see the setting out of this Armada, the whole multitude, not onely of the inhabitants of Lilybaeum, but also the traine of all the Embassages out of Sicilie, which were come together for to accompanie Scipio, and to doe him honour, and also attended upon the Pretour of the province M. Pomponius. Over and besides, those legions also which were left behind in Sicilie, went forward to beare their fellow souldiours companie. So that not only the navie was a goodly prospect unto the beholders upon the land, but also the strand so overspread all about with numbers of people, made a brave and pleasant shew unto these passengers that were in the ships. When day light once appeared, Scipio from out of the Admirall (after silence commaunded by voice of the crier) praied in this wise: O ye gods and goddesses al,The praier of Scipio. that haunt and inhabite the  seas and lands both, I beseech and pray you to vouchsafe, That all that ever hath ben done alreadie, is now intended, or shall hereafter bee enterprise
d, during my conduct and governement, may speed well, and turne to the good of my selfe, the people and Communaltie of Rome, our allies, and especially those of the Latine nation; who by land, by sea, by rivers, follow the direction, commaund, governement, and fortune of my selfe, and of the people of Rome, and

that in all our actions yee would bee good, gracious, favourable, and helpefull unto us, and advaunce  all our proceedings: that ye would graunt us the victorie over our enemies: and after we have subdued them, to continue safe and sound: and adorned with their goodly spoils, laden with their rich pillage, to returne home all together with glorious triumph: and geve us the hand and opportunitie to be revenged of our foes and mortall enemies: and deigne me and the people of Rome that power and strength, to execute upon the citie of the Carthaginians those fearefull examples of crueltie, which the people of Carthage intended to practise and bring upon our citie and state. After these prayers thus pronounced, he tooke the raw inwards and purtenance of the beast killed for sacrifice (as the manner is) and flung them into the sea: and with that by sound of trumpet, gave the signall of departure.
Now were they under saile: and having a good great gale of a forewind, they soone lost the  sight of land. In the afternoone, there began to fall a thick mist; by reason whereof the ships could hardly avoid running one upon another. But when they were once in the maine and deepe sea, the wind became more mild: and all the night following, the same darke mist continued still. After the sunne was once up it brake and dispersed, and then the wind againe grew big and high, by which time they might discover land. And not long after, the pilot said unto Scipio, that they were not full two leagues from Affrick; and that he saw well and discerned the cape or point of Mercurius: and if his will and pleasure were thither to direct their course, presently the whole armada should be in the rode. Scipio so soone as he was within view of land, after he had made his prayers unto the gods, to blesse this first discovery of Affrick to his owne good and the benefit of the Common-weale; gave commaundement to saile still, and to  put with the shore and ride at anchar in some bay beneath. So they made way with the same wind. But about that very time as the day before, they were misted againe, and lost the sight of land. And as the fogge increased, the wind fell: the night also that came upon them besides, made all things more doubtfull. Whereupon they cast anchar, for feare that the ships should either hit one upon another, or run aground. When day light arose, the same wind was up againe, but the foggie mist scattered; and then they might see plainly all the coast of Affrick. Scipio then demaunded what promontorie it was that he saw next; and hearing that the name of it was The head Pulchrum, [or The faire Cape] The name (quoth he) pleaseth me, and the presage therof I like full well; even thither put the ships aland: and so the Armada entred the bay, and all the host was set ashore. Thus have I reported that they had a prosperous voyage without any fearefull  danger, or much trouble; geving credit herein to very many writers, as well Greekes as Latines. Only Caelius (setting aside that the ships were not cast away and drowned amid the surging waves) writeth, how all other dangers both of water and weather encountred them: in so much as at last the Armada was driven by temprest from the coast of Affrick,Gaic^^e. and fell upon the yland Aegimurus, from whence they had much ado to recover their direct course againe: and finally when the ships were at hand to sinke under the water, that the souldiers faring like men at point to suffer shipwrack, without licence and commaundement of their Generall, and without their armour, in great feare made shift with boates to recover the shore.
The Romanes thus being landed, pitched their tents among the hils next adjoyning. By which time the terror and fearefull fright of this their arrivall was not entred only into the Maritime  coasts and territories bounding upon the sea, first upon the discovery of the fleete, and afterwards by reason of the rumor and tumult of the armie, as it came ashore; but also spred forward as far as to the good townes and very cities. For not only the high waies were all filled and overspred with multitudes of men, women and children, who went by heapes together one with another; but also the country pezants drave before them whole heards of cattaile: as a man would have said that had seene it, how all Affrick was like to be abandoned at once on a sodaine: in such sort, as they put the cities in deede in greater feare and perplexitie than they were themselves, and especially Carthage above all others: where there was no lesse trouble and hurliburley, then if it had bene surprised and forced by the enemie. For since time that M. Attilius Regulus, and L. Manlius were Coss. for the space almost of fiftie yeeres, they had not once so much as  seene and armie of Romanes, but only certein fleets of rovers and men of warre, who had landed at times, and made some rodes into the lands lying upon the seaside: and when they had harried some prizes, such as came next hand, they ever were retired againe to their ships, before the alarme could be given to raise the countrey. The greater therefore now was both the flight and

 fright within the citie. And to speake a truth, good cause they had; by reason that there was neither at home in readinesse an armie of puissance to encounter the enemie, nor a Captaine of valour to conduct and leade an armie. Asdruball the sonne of Gisgo, for nobilitie and high parentage, for honor and renowne, for wealth and riches, and besides for the new affinitie then contracted with a King, was of all others the greatest personage by many degrees, yea and the only man of the whole State. And him they remembered very well to have bene foiled, discomfited, and beaten out of the field in Spaine, by the selfesame Scipio in divers and sundrie battailes. Also they made accoumpt, that they were no more able to match the Captaines man for man, than to compare and set their tumultuarie power raised in hast, with the staid and experienced armie of the Romanes. Therefore they gave the alarme presently, as if Scipio were readie to assault Carthage  out of hand: the gateswith all speede were shut and made sure: the walls manned with souldiours: the corps de guard set: watch and ward kept: and all the night following the Sentinels duly relieved and mainteined. The next day, 500 light horse were sent out as espials and vantcurriers to discover and scoure the quarters to the sea side; and with all to empeach them that were a disbarking and comming aland: who chaunced to light upon the Romanes corps de guard. For Scipio had sent away the fleete already to Vtica, and before he was gone up into the land far from the sea, had encamped upon the next hils thereby, placed guards of horsemen in convenient places, and put out certaine foragers into the fields and villages for to raise booties. These having entred skirmish with the Carthaginian cornet of horsemen, slew a few of them in the very conflict, but most of them as they fled and were followed in chase: amongst whom was Hanno  also the Provost marshall, a noble young gentleman. Scipio not only wasted the countrey all about, but also wan a citie of the Affricanes that stood neerest, and was of sufficient wealth: where besides other pillage which was presently imbarked in the ships of burden and sent into Sicilie, there were taken prisoners eight thousand polles of free and bond one with another. But the greatest joy and contentment that the Romanes tooke in this new entrance and beginning of their warlike affaires, was for the comming of Masanissa; whom some report to have presented himselfe with two hundred horse and no more: but the most do write that he came with two thousand. But for as much as this Masanissa was of all other kings for his time the greatest Prince and most puissant, and with all, he that stood the Romanes in best steed, and helped their state, none like unto him: me thinks it were worth the labour, and would quit for all the  paines, to disgresse a little out of the way, for to shew and declare in what v
arietie of alternative fortune he was tossed, both in the losse and also in the recoverie of the inheritance of his fathers kingdome.
This Masanissa, whiles hee was employed during the warres of Spaine, in the defence and quarrell of the Carthaginians; his father, whose name was Gala, hapned to dye: and then the kingdome fell by descent, according to the custome and manner of the Numidians, unto Desalces the late kings brother, a man of great yeeres, and very aged. And not long after, when Desalces also was departed this life, Capusa the elder of his two sonnes, (for the other was a very child) succeeded in his fathers kingdome. But for as much as hee the foresaid Capusa mainteined his royall estate and throne, more by reason of the authoritie and  reputation that hee caried among this friendes and favorites, than by power and strength; there arose up in armes one named Mezetulus (who also was descended of royall bloud, but of an house that was ever of the adverse and contrarie side) and contended in much varietie of fortune about the crowne, with those who then swayed the scepter. This Mezetulus having gathered a powre of his tenants, followers, and paisants of the countrey (with whom he caried a great stroke and was highly esteemed, by reason of the hatred that they bare unto the kings race) encamped openly and shewed himselfe in action, yea and forced the king to come into the field, and to try the title of the crowne in a set battaile by dint of sword. In which conflict, Capusa, together with many of his peeres and nobles was slaine, and the whole nation and seignorie of the Massylians, was reduced under the rule and obedience of Mezetulus.  Howbeit he forbare to be called king; and contenting himselfe with the meane name of Tutor or Protector, gave the kings stile unto the child Lacumax, who only remained alive of the kings issue and line. He tooke to wife a noble dame and ladie of Carthage, Anniball his neece by his sister, who had bene lately wedded unto king Desalces; hoping thereby to enter into league and alliance with the Carthaginians: and besides, for to renew the ancient familiaritie and amitie with Syphax,

he sent embassadors unto him of purpose. Thus made he himself strong aforehand against  Masanissa.
Masanissa likewise for his part, being advertised of his unkles death, and also how his cousin germaine was deceased: crossed the seas out of Spaine over to Mauritania, at what time as Bocchar was king of the Mores. At whose hands by humble sute and importunat praiers in most lowly manner, he obtained a power of foure thousand Mores to accompanie him in his journey, for otherwise to imploy them in warre he might not. And after he had dispatched a messenger aforehand to those that were his fathers friends and wel-willers to himselfe, by that time that he was come with them to the confines of his realme, there met him almost five hundred Numidians, Having therefore sent backe againe the Mores from thence unto the king, according to covenant, albeit there was assembled togither a smaller number of people than he hoped and looked  for, and not so sufficient that he durst adventure upon so great an enterprise; and supposing withall, that by entring into some action, and by travaile and endevour, he should gather strength still to performe some greater exploit, he encountreth at Thapsus the young king Lacumax, as he journied unto Syphax. And when the kings companie in great feare fled into the towne, Mesanissa both at the first assault woon the said towne, and also of the kings traine received some that yeelded themselves, and slew othersome that made resistance in their owne defence. But the greatest part with the child himselfe the young Prince, got away in that tumult and escaped unto Syphax, unto whom at first they intended their journey. The same of this small thing, so happily atchieved in the first beginning and entrance of his affaires, caused all the Numidians to revolt and side with Masanissa. So as there flocked unto him from all parts of the countrie, and out of the  villages, the old souldiours of king Gala, and incited the young Prince and set him on to recover his fathers kingdome. Now in number of souldiours, Mezetulus was a good deale superiour: for both himselfe had the same armie still entier, with which he had vanquished Capusa, besides some others that after the slaughter of the king, he had received upon their yeelding: and also young Lacumax the infant, had brought great aids from Syphax: so that Mezetulas was fifteene thousand foot, and ten thousand horse strong. With whom Masanissa, albeit he were nothing so puissant either in foot or horse, fought a battel; yet atchieved hee the victorie through the approved valour of the old souldiours, and his owne politicke wisedome, being a captaine well experienced and exercised both in Romane and Punick warres. The young prince togither with his tutour and protectour, and some small number of Massylians, fled and escaped into the territories  of the Carthaginians. Thus Masanissa having recovered his fathers kingdome, and foreseeing that there remained still behind a farre greater bickerment and encounter with Syphax, and taking it to be the best course and pollicie for him, to be reconciled and made friends with his cousen germaine: addressed certaine messengers both unto the child, for to put him in good hope and assurance, that if he would submit and yeeld himselfe under the protection of Masanissa, he should live in as honourable place and degree with him, as Desalces sometime had done with his father Gala: and also to Mezetulus to give their word and promise unto him, not onely for impunitie of all trespasse, but also for faithfull restitution of all things that were his. By which meanes hee persuaded both of them to take part with him: who made choise of a mean estate at home in their owne countrie, rather than to live in exile: notwithstanding the Carthaginians labored all that  ever they could to the contrarie.
Asdruball hapned at that time when these occurrences fell out, to make his abode with Syphax: who finding the Numidian king Syphax resolved upon this point, and fully persuaded, That it mattered not, not imported himself much, whither Lacumax or Masanissa were king of the Massylians: replied upon him and said, That he was fouly deceived, if he thought that Masanissa would keepe himselfe within those tearmes, that either his father Gala or his uncle Desalces, held them contented with: No, no, (quoth he) there is much more towardnesse in him, and farre greater signes of hautie mind and forward wit and spirit appeare in him, than ever shewed in any of his house and line before him. Full often hath hee in Spaine made good proofe of rare valor and singular prowesse, as well unto his friends as his enemies. And let both Syphax and the Carthaginians  looke as well about them as they can, for unlesse they put out his sparkle of fire betimes, and even at the first beginning, it will be their chaunce to be caught therewith, when it shall burne foorth; and able they shall not bee to helpe the matter and quench the rage thereof. Mary as yet his strength is small and slender, his forces fraile, tender, and feeble, and not well

 united togither to maintaine his state, unsetled as he is in his kingdome. Thus hee importuned him still by reasons and persuasions, untill at length he reduced him to lead forth an armie into the confines of the Masaesylians: and there in that territorie, about the title where of he had oftentimes no^onely contended by plea and words with Gala, but also by armes and dint of sword, to encampe himselfe as in his rightfull and undoubted inheritance: with this direction, That if any came against him to warne him off the ground, then to trie his interest by sword: which was the onely way of necessitie to be taken, and most for the purpose: but in case for feare of him they quit the possession quietly, then to avance forward into the heart of the kingdome; for either the Massylians would without battaile render themselves under subjection, or else in a pitched field not be able to stand out against him. Vpon these suggestions Syphax was incited and pricked  on^ info much as he made warre upon Masanissa, and in the first battaile discomfired and put to flight the Masaesylians. And Masanissa with some few horsmen fled out of the field and escaped unto a mountaine wich the inhabitants call Balbus. Certaine whole families and housholds with their sheds and tents, togither with their cattaile (which is all their riches) went after and followed the king. But all the multitude of the Masaesylians besides, did homage unto Syphax and came under his obedience. This mountaine aforesaid, which these exiles that fled their countrie was possessed of was plentifull of grasse and well watered; and being so good for pasture to feed their cattaile, it yeelded sufficient maintenance and food aboundant, for the people that used to live upon flesh and milke. From hence they began at first to steale out by night and make rodes; but afterwards in open day light to rob and spoise al the countrie about: but above all others to fire and  burne the territorie of the Carthaginians: both because there were more prises to be had from thence, than from the Numidians; and also for that it was more safe robbing and harrying there without daunger. This they practised so long, so licentiously, and in such scornfull manner, that now they would carnie their booties to the sea side, and make markets and sale therof to the merchants: and for this purpose divers ships arrived thither to traffick: yea and otherwhiles there were many of the Carthaginians cut off and came short home, and more of them were either slaine or taken prisoners, than often times in open warres and set battailes. The Carthaginians bewailed and complained of these matters unto Syphax, and spurred him forward (disposed well enough as hee was of himselfe to revenge) for to pursue the reliques of the warre, in his owne person. But for as much as it was not thought to stand with the roiall majestie of a king, to chase and hunt a rable  of vagrant theeves about the mountaines; therefore Bocchar one of the kings captaines, a right hardie and valourous man, was chosen to do the feat, and to performe that service. Who had the conduct of foure thousand foot, and two thousand horse: and was promised besides, great gifts and mightie rewards, in case hee brought away the head of Masanissa: but if hee could take him prisoner alive, that were alone indeed, and a peerelesse peece of work, of inestimable joy beyond all measure. Hee waiting his time when the enemies were stragling rechlessely abroad, came upon them at unawares and charged them, and having singled put from the guard of the armed soldiors, a huge number both of people and cattel, he forced Masanissa himselfe with some few horsmen to take the top of the mountain. From whence after he had sent away unto the king (as if the warre had now ben at point of an end) not onely a great bootie both of people and cattaile,  the which hee had taken, but also part of his forces, as being much greater in proportion, than for to dispatch the remnants of a war: accompanied with no more than five hundred foot, and two hundred horse, he pursued Masanissa being come downe from the hill tops, and there having beset and stopped the passages at both ends, enclosed him within the streight and narrow vallie. Where there was committed a great execution and carnage of the Masaesylians, but Masanissa with fiftie horsemen and not above, got away through the unknowne and hidden crancks of the mountaine, and escaped the hands of the pursuers. Howbeit, Bocshar traced him still, and followed him at heeles so narrowly, that neere to the cittie Clupea hee overtooke him in the plaines, where he so streightly environned him about, that he killed all his companie every one, save only foure horsemen. With whom, in that tumult hee let slip as it were out of his hands Masanissa  also himselfe, sore wounded, and lost him cleane. As he fled, he had still in his eie certain cornets of horsemen dispersed all over the plain, and some of them crossing the waies overthwart to meet the enemie at every turn, and to intercept him. But he and the foure horsemen with him fled forward still, and tooke the great river before them: for their feare and fright was greater than to make any stay at the banke side, but to put their horses to it, and plunge in: where they were caried with

the current of the streame, and borne to a side: two of them in the sight of the enemies, were  swallowed up of the deepe hurlpits; himselfe also was supposed to have perished with them, but he and the other two horsemen besides caught hold of certaine twigs of others that grew under the bankes on the farther side. So Bocchar made an end of farther pursuite, as neither daring to take the river, nor beleeving that hee had any enemie for to chase. And thus returned hee to the king with false newes, that Masanissa was drowned. And divers posts and the courtiers were sent our to Carthage, to report these exceeding joifull tidings. This rumour and same of Masanissa his death, being noised all over Affrick, wrought diversly in the minds of men. But Masanissa keeping himselfe close in a secret cave, whiles hee cured his hurt with certaine hearbes, lived for some daies by the breviting and robberie of the other two horsemen. So soon as the wound was once healed up and skinned over, and that he though himselfe able to abide the sitting and shaking  of his horse, with exceeding courage and boldnesse he set forward againe to claime and recover his kingdome. And having in the way as he passed; gotten together unto him not above fortie horse, by that time that hee was come among the Massylians, and gave out openly who hee was, he prevailed so much with them, that as well in regard of their auncient favour and love toward him, as also for the unexpected joy, that they saw him alive and sound, whom they verily beleeved to have beene dead; within few daies there were gathered and assembled unto him 6000 foot, and 4000 horse. So as not onely hee was restored againe, and put in full possession of his fathers kingdome, but also wasted and spoiled the confederate nations of the Carthaginians, yea, and the frontiers and confines of the Masaesyli, which belonged to the kingdome and dominion of Syphax. Having thus provoked Syphax to war, he set him downe and encamped betweene the  cities of Cirtha and Hippo, upon the ridge of certaine hils, places of advantage and commodious in all respects. Then Syphax supposing it a greater peece of work, and of more importance than to be managed by his captaines, sent part of his forces under the conduct of his sonne, the young prince, named Vermina, and gave order unto him to wheele about with his power, and whiles the enemie was amused upon himselfe one way, to charge upon him behind another way. So Vermina set forth, and tooke his way by night, because he was to give the charge closely, and in secret. But Syphax, who was to shew himselfe with banner displaied, and to bid the enemie battell, marched openly by day light, and advaunced forward. And when the time (as hee thought) was come, wherein they that were sent about to fetch a compasse, might reach to the place appointed, himselfe also trusting as well in the multitude of his men, as in the ambush laid before  at the enemies backe, set his battell in array; directly upon the side of the hill, which with gentle and easie ascent ariseth, and leadeth toward the enemie. Masanissa likewise arraunged his men, presuming most of all in the plot of ground, which served much better for his advauntage to fight. The battell was sharpe and cruell, and for a long time doubtfull. Whiles the site of the place, and valour of the souldiours much helped Masanissa; and the number againe on the other side, which exceeded beyond all measure, and made too great ods, availed Syphax. This multitude devided into two battaillons, whiles the one was opposed affront the enemie, and the other compassed about their taile and backe part, gave the victorie cleere unto Syphax: in so much, as the enemie thus enclosed both before and behind, had no way in the world to escape. Whereupon all the footmen and horsemen both were either killed or taken prisoners. Onely two hundred  horsemen or very neere so many, which were gathered in a ring togither about Masanissa,\`Golfodi Caps. these Syrtes., to well the greater as the lesse, are in the Med^teranaen sea neer Africk, full of shelves and bars: and are called Secche or Baros de Barbaria. hee commaunded to cast themselves by troupes and squadrons into three severall companies, and so to pearce and breake through: but first he appointed them a certaine place before, where they should rallie and meet togither againe after their scattered flight. Himselfe in person, at one side which he had proposed to himselfe before, made meanes to passe through the very pikes and darts of the enemies, and escaped. Two of those squadrons tarried still behind, the one for feare yeelded to the enemie, the other sticking to it, and making more resistance, was overcharged with shot of arrowes and darts. But Masanissa winding in and out, to and fro, deluded Vermina, who preassed hard upon him, and followed him fast at
heeles: and after he had wearied him out at length in tedious travaile and desperate pursute, caused him perforce to give over the chase. Whiles he himselfe  with seventie horse gat away as farre as to the lesse the sea costs (...), as Or relius hath no. Syrets. Where he set up his rest, and quieted his conscience, in that hee had so often right valiantly sought to recover the inheritance of his fathers kingdome: and led his life betweene the sei out of ^oly bius. Punicke Emporia, and the nation of the Garamants, untill the arrivall of the Romane navie, and C. Laelius into Affricke. These presumptions

 induce met to thinke and beleeve, that Masanissa came afterwards also to Scipio with a final power of horsemen, rather than with any great aid. For that multitude was besitting the state of a prince, established in his kingdome, but this small number beseemed the meane condition and fortune of a poore exile and banished man.
Now to return again unto our storie. The Carthaginians having lost the cornet of horsemen aforesaid, together with their captain, and raised another power of horse, by taking new musters, made Hanno the sonne of Amilcar commaunder over them. And first by messengers and letters missive they sent for Asdruball and Syphax one after another, and at last also even by Embassadours and Oratours. As for Asdruball, they required him to succour his native countrey, beset in manner round about: Syphax they besought and requested to provide for the safetie and defence  of Carthage and all Affricke.
At that time Scipio was encamped neere Vtica, within a mile of the citie: for he was removed from the sea side, where some few daies, he kept a standing camp close to the fleet. Hanno having received a power of Cavallerie, nothing sufficient and strong ynough to charge upon the enemie, nor so much as to guard and defend the countrie from wasting and spoiling, first before all other things cast about and devised, how he might augment his number of horsemen by a new levie and enroulement. And albeit hee rejected none of other nations, yet hee levied and waged the Numidians especially, the best horsemen simplie in all Affricke. Now had hee gathered together upon a foure thousand horse, when hee surprised a cittie named Salera, almost fifteene miles from the Romance campe. And when word was brought to Scipio, that so great a Cavallerie  tooke up their summer standing harbour within a towne; Tush (quoth hee) I passe not, if they were more than they are, so long as they have such a one for to be their leader. And thinking with himselfe, that the more slowly the enemies went to worke, the lesse hee was to slacke his businesse, he sent Masanissa before with the horsemen, and gave commaundement to ride up and down before the gates, to brave the enemie, and to traine him forth to fight: with this direction, that when their whole multitude was issued forth, and the skirmish growne so hote, that hee might not well endure the charge, hee should give ground and recule by little and little, for hee would himselfe come in due time to the battell. And staying no longer behind, than whiles he thought Masanissa who was gone afore, had time ynough to traine the enemies forth, he followed after in person with the Romane horsemen, and marched closely under the hills (which stood fitly for the purpose,  opposite, betweene him and the enemie) about every turning of the way. Masanissa for the nones according to the direction given him, one while right courageously gallopped before the gates, as one that would brave and terrifie the enemie, another while as if he had been afraid himselfe, gave backe; and by this counterfeit shew of searchfulnesse, hee made the enemies more bold and venturous, and drew them on to pursue him rashly. But as yet they were not all gone forth, and their captaine was diversly troubled, and had much adoe with them, whiles he was fain to force and compell some that had taken their load of wine, and were heavie headed and sleepie withall, to arme themselves, and to bridle their horses, and to stay others from running out of all the gates at once confusedly, without order and array, and without their colours. Masanissa caught up those, and cut them short, that apart from their companie at the first setting out, rode  venturously forward, and tooke no heed to themselves: but anone when more of them rushed forth at once out of the gate, the skirmish was maintained with equall valour on both sides, and at last, when all the horsemen were abroad and joined in battell, Masanissa was not possibly able to hold out any longer. Howbeit he fled not outright, but as he gave backe leisurely, he received them as they violently charged upon him, so long, untill he had trained them to those hils, under which the Romane Cavallerie lay hidden. Then rose the horsemen from out of their ambush, themselves in heart, and their horses fresh; and environned Hanno and then Africanes, who with fighting and following were tired out and overweried: Masanissa likewise turned his horses sodainely, and made head againe, and returned to battaile afresh: so there were environed, intercepted, and killed in the place together with Hanno himselfe the Generall, fast upon a thousand,  even as many as were in the vaward, and could not well retire themselves backward. The rest affrighted with the death of their leader, fled with bridle on horse necke; whome for the space of three miles the conquerors followed in chase upon the spurre, and either flew or tooke prisoners two thousand horsemen of them besides. Amongst whom there were, as it is for certaine knowne, no fewer than two hundred naturall Carthaginians, men of armes, and divers of them

of good marke, both in regard of wealth and riches, as also of birth and noble parentage.

It fortuned that the very same day when this hapned, the ships which had transported over the bootie into Sicilie, returned back charged with provision of victuals, as if they bodened and foretockened by their arrivall, that they were come for a new pillage and fresh prizes. But all writers do not accord, that two Carthaginian captaines of one name were slaine in two battailes of the Cavallerie: for feare (as I verily take it) least by telling one thing twise, they might seeme to deceive and abuse the reader. Certes, Caelius and Valerius report that Hanno was taken prisoner. Then Scipio bestowed rich gifts upon the captaines and horsemen according to their good service, and as they every one deserved: but above all the rest, he highly rewarded Masanissa. And when he had placed a strong garison in Salera, himselfe with the rest of his armie made rodes; and not only wasted and spoiled the lands and villages all the way as he went, but also forced and  woon certaine cities and borough townes: and so having filled all places farre and neere with the terror of warre and hostilitie, he returned to the camp, the seaventh day after he set forth; bringing with him great numbers of people, much store of cattaile, and prizes of all sorts; and so dispatched away the ships a second time fraight and laden with the spoiles of enemies. After this, he set aside all light expeditions, small rodes and saccage of the country townes, and bent his whole power and all his forces against Vtica: intending if he had once woon it, to settle himselfe there, and to make it his seate from thence forward, and a sure place of defence in all his other exploits that he meant to perform. Thither at one time were the sea servitours brought from the armada, to that part of the citie where the sea beateth upon the walls: likewise the land souldiers advanced from the hill that overlooketh the towne, and joyneth in manner hard to the very walls. As for artillerie and engines of batterie and assault, some they had brought with them, and others were sent out of Sicilie with the victuals: and daily new were made in the common Armorie and Arcenall, where there were of purpose artificers continually kept at worke for the framing of such fabricks and peeces of batterie. The men of Vtica beset thus round about on every side with so great preparation and ordinance of war, reposed their whole hope and confidence in the Carthaginians; and the Carthaginians relied themselves upon Asdruball, in case that he could sollicite Syphax for to set to his helping hand. But all things went but slowly forward, and they bestirred themselves not so quickly, as they should have done who wanted so much aid as they did. And Asdruball when he had with all the meanes and the best shift that he could make, gathered together thirtie thousand foote and three thousand horse, yet durst he  not approach the enemie, before the comming of Syphax to joyne with him. At length came Syphax with fiftie thousand foote, and ten thousand horse: and immediately departing from Carthage, encamped not farre from Vtica and the Romane campe. Whose arrivall yet was so important, and wrought this effect, that Scipio after fortie dayes welneere (during which time he had invested Vtica and tried all mastries but in vain) was compelled to remove his siege and dislodge, without doing any good at all. For now the winter approached, and he fortified his standing leaguer for winter harbour upon a promontorie, which joyning to the continent by a thin and narrow ridge of a banke, lieth out a good way and beareth into the sea. And with one and the selfesame trench and rampier, he empaled both his armie, and also the ships that lay up in the dock. The legions were quartered and lodged in the mids of the said cape: the ships that  were drawen up to land, and likewise the sailers and mariners, kept the stroud on the north side of the hill: the horsemen tooke up the vale toward the south, upon the hanging and side thereof, shooting to the other shore. And these were the acts atcheived in Affricke untill the end of Autumne.
Besides the provision of corne gathered from all parts out of the countries pilled and wasted round about, and other store of victuals brought out of Sicilie and Italie, Cn. Octavius the Vizpretor arrived with a mightie deale of graine out of Sardinia, sent from T. Claudius the Pretor, who had the government of the Iland: so as not onely the old garners alreadie made were replenished, but also those that were newly built. Onely there wanted apparell for the armie. Whereupon Octavius had in commission to breake with the Pretor about that matter, namely, what liveries might be provided out of that province, and sent for the supplie of that defect. Which businesse was not slackly followed, but with all diligence performed, in such sort, as in short space there were sent over 1200 side horsemens cotes, and twelve thousand short cassocks and jackets.
 During the time of that summer wherein these occurrences passed in Affrick, P. Semprenius the Consull who governed the Province of the Brutij, skirmished sodainely in a disordred manner with Anniball upon the very way, within the territorie of Croton: where the fight was mainteined rather by squadrons and companies one to one, than by any set bodie of a raunged battaile. The Romanes were discomfited; and having lost in this conflict (which might more truly be called a tumultuous skuffling than a full fight) upon 1200 of the Consuls armie, they retired in great hast and feare into their camp. Yet durst not the enemies make an assault upon them within their hold. But the Consull dislodged from thence in the dead time of the next night, and having dispatched a courrier before unto P. Licinius the Viz-consull, for to come forward with his legions, he joyned his power unto them. So they returned againe unto Anniball,  being now two Generals, and two entier armies. And without any stay, to battaile they went: whiles the Consull on the one side stood upon this his power redoubled and reenforced, and Anniball on the other side tooke hart for his fresh victorie aforesaid. Sempronius advaunced with his legions into the vaward; P. Licinius with his, kept the rereward. The Consull at the very first shock and beginning of the medley, vowed a chappell to Fortune under the name of Primigenia, in case he might have the honor of that day, and vanquish his enemies. And surely his vow was heard, and he obteined his desire: for the Carthaginians were discomfited and put to flight, and more than foure thousand armed men slaine, three hundred or somewhat under taken prisoners, fortie horse of seruice gotten alive, and eleven ensignes woon and caried away. Anniball disinayed and daunted at this adverse and unluckie battaile, withdrew his forces to Croton.
 At the same time M. Cornelius the Consull, in another side of Italie held in awe Hetruria, not so much by force of armes, as by rigorous processe of law and severe justice: for all that country in manner was turned to Mago, and by his meanes and favor hoped for a change, and were altogether set upon novelties and an alteration of the state. The examinations and judiciall trials of these matters the Consull followed by vertue of commission from the Senate, and not upon his owne motife and secking: and went through therwith, setting aside all partialitie, nothing respective either of favor or displeasure. In such sort, that many of the nobilitie of Tuscane (such as either had repaired themselves in person, or had sent their agents unto Mago, for to treat with him about the revolt and rebellion of the States wher in they lived) were at first, as many as made personall apparance, condemned: but afterwards, such as had guiltie consciences, went into  voluntarie exile: and being condemned in their absence, in stead of their bodies which were gone out of the way, they yeelded and left behind them their goods only, which might be forfeit and confiscate as pawnes to pay for the punishment of their persons.
Whiles the Coss. were thus emploied in divers places one from the other, the Censors in the meane time at Rome, M. Livius and C. Claudius, held a new choise and review of Senators: and Q. Fabius was once againe chosen the principall Senator and President of the Senat. Seaven in number of them were noted with ignominie and disgrace, but not one of all those had fitten in the yvorie chaire and borne office of state. They looked narrowly and most faithfully to the publicanes, that had the charge of the city-buildings to see them kept wind-tight and water-tight, and in sufficient reparations. They publickly gave order for a paved causie to be made,Cybele, or Idea. from the beasts  market unto the temple of Venus, and all about the shops and skaffolds in the shew-places. Also the church of At this time it appeareth by Festus and others that Asses were Sextentarij and not Librales, at Rome: so that sextans which before was the sixth part of As, and a (...) or half farthing english, now was raised to the worth of the whole, and valuid at three farthings, the price of a Modius of salt in Rome, set downe by Livius Salinator. Magna Mater [the great mother of the gods] they caused to bee built in the mount Palatine. They instituted also a new tax and impost out of the provision of salt. And where as both at Rome and throughout all Italie, salt was soldata there Sextant by the Modius, they set and fermed this commoditie, to be served out at the same price still in Rome: but in the market townes and faires, they enhaunsed the price higher, and in sundrie places they rated it at divers prices. This tax was devised as all men verily beleeved, by the one of the Censors, for anger, and an old grudge that he bare unto the people; because he had bene in times past unjustly judged and condemned by them, and therefore in the pension and price of salt they supposed that those tribes were most pinched and charged who were the me
ans of the hard doome that  passed against him. And heere upon it came that this Livius was surnamed Salinator. The Cense and numbring of the citizens was finished the later, because the Censors had sent about into all provinces, that the full number should be taken of all Romane citizens, who were without in the armies, and presentment made accordingly. So there were registred in all, with those abroad, two hundred and seven and fiftie thousand persons. And C. Claudius Nero was he that performed

and accomplished this numbring and assessement. After this there was a Cense or taxation taken  of the twelve Colonies, a thing then brought up and never before. And according to the relation of the Censors they were entred into the subsidie booke at Rome: that at might appeare upon record in the publicke instruments and writings, what number of able men for warre they could make, and what every man was worth in money and goods. Then they began to take a survey of the gentlemen and knights of Rome. And it fortuned so, that both Censors had horses of the citties provision and charges. And when the crier came to cite those of the tribe Pollia, wherin the name of M. Livius was enrolled, and made some stay to call the Censor himselfe by name: Call hardly (quoth Nero) for M. Livius. And whither it were upon the relicques of an olde cancred malice, or that he tooke a foolish pride and vaine delight to seeme forsooth to be severe and precise, hee commaunded M. Livius to sell his horse of service, because hee had bene sometimes  a man condemned by the doome of the people. Semblably M. Livius when the crier was come to the tribe Narniensis, and to the name of his colleague, awarded C. Claudius to sell and make away his great horse likewise; and that for two causes, the one for that he had borne false witnes and deposed wrongfully against him: the other, because he was not foundly and in truth of heart reconciled unto him, when they were made friends. Whereupon there grew a soule jarre and contention betweene them, whiles they passed not to impeach and stein the credit one of the other, even with the touch and hazard of their owne good name and reputation. At the end of the Censureship, when C. Claudius had sworne to keepe and observe the lawes, and was ascended up into the chamber of the citties treasure; among the other names of those that hee left as dissranchised and tributaries, he declared his colleague for one, and gave up his name in the roll. Afterward  came M. Livius into the chamber aforesaid, and setting aside the tribe Metia only (which neither had condemned himselfe, nor elected him a condemned person for Consull or Censor) he declared the whole people of Rome likewise suspended, even foure and thirtie tribes; and le^t them all, no better than meer straungers and alliens, in regard of taxes and tributes: and why? because they had both condemned him, an innocent and guiltlesse man; and being thus condemned, had created him Coss. and Censor notwithstanding: neither could they denie but that they had erred and done amisse once in their judgement, and twise in their elections. And among those foure and thirtie tribes, he pronounced that C. Claudius also should be reckoned for one: protesting moreover, that if he could have found any one precedent, to have led him to the disfranchising of one man twise, he would have left C. Claudius by name, as a noted person by himselfe, in the checkrol  of the cittie chamber.
Surely that reciprocall debate betweene the two Censors, in depraving and disfaming one another, was but a lewd and naughtie part by them plaid: but this chastisement of the peoples levine and inconstancie, was a worthie thing, and beseeming the Censors gravitie of that time. Whiles the Censors stood thus in exceeding disgrace and hatred with the people, Cn. Baebius a Tribune of the Commons, taking his time and occasion hereby to rise and become great, endited them both and commenced an action against them before the bodie of the people. But this dessignement of his was soone dasht and came to nothing, through the generall accord and consent of the lords of the Counsell: to the end that in time to come, no such example might bee extant upon record, that the Censors dignitie should be exposed to the variable and inconstant pleasure  of the people.
The same summer in the Brutians countrie, Petilia had bin alredie forced and woon by the Col. when as Consentia and Pandosia, with other mean and base peeces, willingly yeelded themselves to his devotion. Now when the time drew nere of the election of new magistrats, it was thoughts good that Cornelius should bee sent for to Rome out of Tuscane, where there was no warre at all, rather than the other Consull out of his province: who being come, created for Consuls Catas Servilius Capio, and Ca. Servilius Geminus. After this, the court was assembled for the chusing of Pretours, wherein were elected P. Cornelius Lentulus, P. Quintilius Varus, P. Aelius Patus, and P. Vilius Tappulus. These two last were AEdiles of the Commons when they were chosen Pretors. The Consull after these elections were finished and past, returned to his armie againe into Hetrutia. Certain Priests and Prelars that yeer died, and new were chosen in their roumes. P. Veturius Phila, Flamin of Mars was created, installed, and inaugurated, insteed of M. Aemylius Regillus, who deceased the yeare before. And in place of M. Pomponius Matho; who was both Augur and Decemvir, there was advanced into the dignitie of Decemvir, M. Aurchus Costa: and into the office of Augur,
Tit. Sempronius Gracchus, a very young man: a rare thing to be seene in those daies, in the bestowing of sacerdorall and church-promotions. In that year was set up in the capitoll a chariot drawne with foure steeds, all of beaten gold, by C. Livius and M. Servilius Geminus, AEdiles of the chaire for the time being. The Romane games also were exhibited and renewed againe for two daies: likewise the plaies and pastimes called Plebeij, for other two daies by the AEdiles of the Commons, P. Aelius and P. Villius. And for the greater honour of those games, the feast of Iupiter was solemnely kept and celebrated.




THE XXX. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the thirtith Booke.
IN Asrick, Scipio by the helpe of Masanissa in sundrie battels vanquished the Carthaginians, togither with the aforesaid Syphaxking of the Nunidrans, and Ajdruball. He woon and sacked two camps of the enemies, wherein there perished by fire and sword, to the number of 40000 men. By the means of C. Laelius he tooke Syphax alive. Masanissa when he had taken prisoner queen Sophonisba, the wife of Syphax and daughter of Asdrubal, by and by fell in love with her,  and by way of marriage tooke her to wise: but being chastised and rebuked therfore by Scipio, he sent unto her a cup of poison: which she drank, and therof died. By the manifold victories of Scipio it came to passe, that the Carthaginians driven to despaire, were saine to call for Anniball out of Italie, to save the maine chance, and defend their whole state: Who, in the sixteenth yeare of the warres, departed out of Italie, sailed over into Affricke, and assaied by meanes of conference, to make peace with Scipio. And when they could not agree about the conditions and capitulations thereof, he fought, and was overtbrowne in the plaine field. The Carthaginians at their suite and request, had peace graunted. And when Gisgo dissuaded that peace, Anniball plucked him backe with his hand, and so after some excuse made of his rude rashnesse in that behalfe, himselfe spake for peace. Mago who had fought with the Romanes in the countrie of the Insubrians, was greevously wounded, and being sent for home into Affrick by certaine Embassadors, in the way died of his hurt. Masanissa was fully restored to his kingdome. Scipio being returned  to the citie of Rome, had the glorie of a most honorable and noble triumph: whom Q. Terentius Culleo, a Senatour, followed with a cap [of freedome] upon his head. Scipio was surnamed Affricanus: but doubtfull it is, whether he came by that title through the favour of his souldiours before, or the generall applause and affection of the people. But this is certaine, that he was the first Generall that ever was intitled in his style, with the surname of a nation by himselfe conquered.

WHen Cn. Servilius Capio, and C. Servilius Geminus (Coss. in that yeare, which by computation was the sixteenth of the second Punick war) proposed unto the Senate, concerning the affaires of the State, the managing of the warres, and the government of the provinces: the L.L. ordained and gave order, That the  Consuls should either agree betweene themselves, or els cast lots whether of them should goe into the Brutian land against Anniball: and whether should take upon him the charge of the province of Hetruria and the Ligurians: with commission for him, whose hap it was to rule the province of the Brutij, to receive the armie from P. Sempronius the Consull; and the said P. Sempronius (for he also as Vice-consull was to continue in place of government one year longer) to succeed in the roume of P. Licinius, who was to return home to

Rome. This P. Sempronius among other commendable parts (wherein no citizen in his time was  counted more sufficiently furnished than himselfe) was taken also for a brave warriour and man at armes. For being richly endued with all those good blessings that either nature or fortune can affourd unto a man, he was both noble in birth, and wealthie in substance. In beautifull personage he excelled, for strength of bodie he farre surpassed. Of toung and speech he was thought most eloquent, whether he were to plead a cause at the barre, or occasion offered either in Senat house or before the assemblie of the people to persuade or dissuade, to give counsell one way or other. In the Pontificiall canons and laws, he was singularly well learned and skilfull. Besides all these praise-worthie qualities (I say) his Consulship had given him experience also in militarie affairs, and made him a worthie soldior. The same order that was taken for the Brutians province, was also decreed for Hetruria and the Ligurians. M. Cornelius was commaunded to put over and deliver up  his armie to the new Consull: and himselfe to continue still in government, and to rule the province of Fraunce with the strength of those legions which L. Scribonius the Pretor had under his charge the yeare before. After this, the Consuls cast lots for their provinces. Vnto Caepio fell the Brutij, unto Servilius Geminus, Hetruria. Then the Pretours provinces also were put to the choice of lotterie. And P. Aelius his lot was to have the civile jurisdiction of the cittie of Rome: P. Lentulus to rule Sardinia: P. Vilius to governe Sicilie: and Quintilius Varus to have the charge of Ariminum with two legions, which were commaunded by Sp. Lucretius. And Lucretius had his commission revived againe for a longer time, to the end, that hee might reedifie the towne Genua, which by Mago the Carthaginian had been rased and destroied. As for P. Scipio, his commission and government was not limitted by any expresse time, but onely with the end of the warres, and  to continue untill those wars in Affricke were fully determined. A decree also passed, that there should be a solemne procession and supplication holden to this effect, and in these termes, That whereas he had sailed over into the province of Affrick, this voiage and expedition of his might turne to the safetie and good of the people of Rome, of himselfe, and his armie. In Sicilie were enrolled three thousand souldiours. And for as much as the whole strength and manhood of that province had been shipped over into Affrick: for feare least some Armada should cut over out of Affricke, it was thought expedient to guard all the sea coasts of Sicilie, with a fleet offortie saile. And Villius had with him into Sicilie thirteene ships, newly built; the rest of the old ships in Sicilic were repaired. For Admirall of this armada was appointed M. Pomponius, the Pretour of the former yeare, whose government was prorogued, and hee embarked the new souldiours  brought out of Italie. The like number of ships the LL. of the Senate assigned unto Cn. Octavius the Pretour of the former yeare, with the same commission of government, for to defend the coasts of Sardinia. And Lentulus was commaunded to allow unto the Pretour two thousand soldiours for to man and furnish those ships. Moreover, the sea coasts of Italie, because it was uncertaine to what parts the Carthaginians would make out their navie (and like it was, that where they could espie any place weake and disfurnished of sufficient strength and garrison, thither they would direct and bend their forces) were committed to M. Martius the Pretour the former yeare, that hee should scoure the seas, and keep that side, with as many ships as the other. And for to furnish that fleet of his, the Consuls by order from the Senat enrolled three thousand souldiours, and reserved two legions besides, against all doubtfull chaunces of warre whatsoever. As for the two provinces of Spaine, together with the armies there, and the whole governement, they were appointed to the old Generals, L. Lentulus, and L. Manlius Acidinus. So the Romane warres for that yeare were mainteined with twentie legions in all, and with a hundred and sixtie ships of warre. Then the Pretours were commaunded to take their journey into their several provinces. But the Consuls were charged before they departed from the citie, to exhibit those great Games, which T. Manlius Torquatus the Dictator had vowed against the fift years end, if so be the Commonweale remained in the same good and fortunate estate, during that time.
Now there entred into mens minds new doubts and strange scruples of conscience, by reason of divers prodigious sights and tokens reported out of many places. For beleeved it was that certaine ravens not only pecked and rased with their bils, but also eate and devoured the gold in  the Capitoll. At Antium the mice and rats gnawed a crowne of gold. About Capua, a huge number of locusts (but from whence they came, no man knew for certaine) overspred all the grounds, and filled the fields. At Reate there was a horse-coltsoled with five feete. At Anagnia were seene in the element, at the first, divers fire-lights shooting and flashing here and there; and

 afterwards a mightie blasing comet burning. At Frusino a certaine arch compassed the sonne with a thin course like a line: and afterwards a greater circle of the sonne enclosed the said rundle from without-forth. In the territorie of Arpi, the earth in a plaine champain field setled and sunke downe and made an exceeding great chinke. As one of the Consuls killed the first beast for sacrifice, the liver thereof was found headlesse. These monstrous tokens were expiate and purged with sacrifices of the bigger sort: and the colledge of the priests and bishops shewed unto what gods the sacrifice should bee made. These things once done and performed, the Consuls and Pretours went forth into their provinces: yet so, as all of them had a speciall regard of Affricke, as if it had bene their owne province fallen unto every one of them by lot; either because they saw that therein rested and consisted the whole importance of all affaires,  and the maine state of the warre: or els because they would gratifie and currie favour with Scipio, whom now the whole citie made court unto, and chiefly respected. And therefore not only out of Sardinia as is beforesaid, but also out of Sicilie and Spaine, there was transported thither raiment and corne: yea and armor also out of Sicilie, and all kind of victuals, for the maintenance of the armie. And albeit it was winter season, yet Scipio slaked no affaires and works of war: which being many, amused his mind at once on every side, and kept him continually occupied. For Vticahee besieged and encamped, he lay opposite to Anniball, and even within his sight: the Carthaginians were with their ships aflote, and put to sea, and a navie they had rigged, furnished and trimmed, for to intercept all victuals that came. Amid these cares he forgat not to win againe the love of Syphax, if haply now hee had his fill of love-delights with his fresh wife, since hee had the  plentifull fruition thereof, as much as heart could desire. But Syphax rather tendered conditions of peace betweene the Romans and the Carthaginians, to wit, that the Romans should depart out of Affricke, and the Carthaginians out of Italie; than seemed to give any hope, that he would revolt from the Carthaginians, in case the warre continued still. And for mine own part, I would rather beleeve that these matters were treated upon by entercourse of messengers, as most writers doe report, than that Syphax himselfe in person, as Antias Valerius recordeth, came into the Romane campe to a parle and conference thereabout. At the first the Romane Generall, would scarcely lend his eare to heare those ouvertures: but afterwards, to the end that there might bee some colourable and probable cause for his people to resort unto the campe of the enemies, he seemed not so streight laced nor to denie the same articles so stiffely, but pretended some hope,  that by often debating thereof to and fro betweene them, they should at length grow to some good point and finall agreement. The wintering harbours of the Carthaginians were in a manner all of wood, but built of slender stuffe gathered out of the fields at a venture hand over head, where they could meet withall. The Numidians for the most part lay in cabbins and sheds, watled and wound with reeds especially, and covered and thatched with mats of sedge and such like, here and there scattering without all order: in such sort, as some of them taking up their lodging at their owne pleasure, without direction and commaundement of any officer, quartered without the trench and rampier. Scipio advertised hereof, conceived good hope to find some opportunitie one time or other to fire the campe of the enemies. Vpon a certaine day therfore, he sent in traine of those Commissioners whom he addressed unto Syphax, in steed of pages and drudges,  and disguised in slaves and bondmens weed, the bravest souldiours of a band, (men of approved valor, wisdome, and discretion) who whiles the Commissioners were busie in conference, should raunge about the campe, some one way, some another; to espie and marke all the passages and waies in and out; the site and forme generally of the whole leaguer, and particularly of every part; where the Carthaginians quartered; where the Numidians lodged; what distance there was betweene Asdruball his tents, and the kings pavilions; to observe also and learne with all, the order and manner of their sentinels, their wards and watches, whether by night or by day they lay at more vantage to be surprised by an ambush. And according as there were divers meetings and conferences, so of purpose some were sent at one time, some at another; to the end that more and more still should have the spiall and ful knowledge of all things in the enemies camp. Now when  as the oftener that this matter was treated of, the greater hope of peace both Syphax had and the Carthaginians likewise by his means; the Delegates or Commissioners aforesaid of the Romans, said that they were expressely forbidden by their Generall to returne without a full and resolute answere. And therefore they willed him to make short worke at once, and to bethinke himselfe what to doe, either to stand upon his owne determinant purpose (if he were resolved) or els to consult

with Asdruball and the Carthaginians, and determine accordingly. For now high time it is, say they, either to conclude peace, or to presecure warre freshly, and to go through with it lustily. Thus while Syphax consulreth with Asdruball, and Asdruball with the Carthaginians, both the espials had sufficient time to view and see all, and Scipio also good leasure to provide necessaries for his purpose. Moreover, by this motive and hope of peace, as well the Carthaginians as the Numidians, began (as commonly in such cases it falleth out) to be negligent and slack in forecast, and to provide that in the meane while they came by no harne and detriment from the enemie. At length an answere was returned, and some clauses put in, without all reason, and sounding to much inconvenience, by occasion that the Romanes seemed too too saine and desirous of a peace. Which fell out very fitly for Scipio, whose only desire was to pick some just quarrell for to breake the truce and abstinence of warre: and so the next day (for in the meane time he said he  would conferre with his counsel) he answered the kings messenger in this wise, That besides himselfe alone, who laboured all in vaine and could do no good, there was none liked of the peace: and therefore he willed him to report unto the king his maister, that there was no other hope for Syphax to haue peace with Romanes, unlesse he renounced and cast off quite the friendship of the Carthaginians. And thus he ended the truce, that with free conscience being discharged of his promise in that behalfe, he might go forward in his designements, and bring his enterprise to his desired issue. So having put his ships to sea (for now the prime of spring was come) he embarked in them his artillerie, his ordinance and engins of batterie, as if he meant to assault Vtica on the sea side. And sent out two thousand souldiers, to possesse themselves of the hill that overlooked Vtica, which he had held and kept before: both to withdraw the minds of the enemies  from that which he secretly designed and intended, and amuse them upon the care and regard of another thing; and also to prevent a mischiefe, that whiles himselfe should go against Syphax and Asdruball, they might not sally forth of the citie, and assaile his camp, left with a small guard to defend it. Having made this way, and laid this ground aforehand, he assembled his counsell, where he commaunded as well the foresaid spies to lay forth and utter what they had seene and found, as also Masanissa; who was acquainted with all the manner and fashions of the enemies: and then at last he declared and shewed unto them, what himselfe intended to execute the next night. Then he gave commaundement to the Tribunes or Kn. Marshals, that so soone as the counsell was risen, and the court dismissed in the Generals pavilion, at the first sound of trumpets immediatly they should bring their legions out of the camp. Thus according to his edict, the  ensignes began a little before sunne setting to set forth. About the first watch they put the souldiers in aray readie for to march, and by midnight (for they were to journey seven miles) they going a faire and soft pace, approched the enemies camp. There Scipio gave unto Laelius a part of the forces together with Masanissa and his band of Numidians, with direction to invade the camp of Syphax, and to set fire thereupon. Then calling them by themselves both apart one from the other, Laelius I meane and Masanissa, he earnestly besought them of all love to make up and recompence by carefull industrie and devoir that providence and forecast, which the darknesse of the night disappointed them of. As for himselfe, he ment to set upon Asdruball and the Carthaginian camp: but begin he would not, before he saw the fire amongst the kings tents. And that was not long first ere it began: for so soone as the fire caught hold of the next pavilions  whereupon it was cast, by and by it tooke all that stood neerest, and so forward to those that joyned unto them, untill it speed into all places of the camp. And verily into a great fright they were all put, as they could not choose, but needs must in a night skatefire, which was runne all over in so short a time. Howbeit, they thought it some fire by mischance only, and not the hand of enemie, by occasion and meanes of warre: and therefore unarmed as they were, and lightly appointed without weapons, they ran forth by heapes to quench the fire, and light full upon their armed enemies, the Numidians especially; who by Masanissa that was well acquainted with the manner of the kings camp, were bestowed in convenient places, at the ends of every avenue and passage. Many in their very beds and couches, betweene sleeping and waking, were consumed with the flame: many running headlong in this their hastie flight, one upon an other, were in the  streights of the gates troden under foote, or els thrust and crusht to death. The Sentinels and watch of the Carthaginians, espied at first the fire shining and flaming out: after whom others awakened and raised out of their nests by this nightlie tumult and alarme, might behold and plainly see the same: but they likewise were deceived as well as the other, and beleeved verily

 that the fire began of it selfe by some misfortune, no man wist how. The confused noyse and cry also, which was heard whiles they were a killing, slaying and wounding, would not suffer them to know the truth indeede, whether the same arose upon their affright and sodaine seare by night, or otherwise. And therefore every man naked as he was, and suspecting no practice at all of the enemie, at all the gates as they stood next, did what he could to bring with him such instruments and meanes as were to put out the fire; and happened unwares upon the armie of the Romanes. Now after they were all massacred and put to the sword to the last man, not only upon an ordinarie hatred betweene enemies, but also because there might not escape so much as one to cary newes unto the rest: Scipio immediately entred the gates, beeing not warded, but altogether neglected, as in such a fearefull garboile and hutlyburly it was no mervaile. Then they fell  a flinging of fire upon the lodgings and sheds that stood next, so as the flame brake out and shewed at first as if it had bene dispersed in many places: but afterwards catching and spreading from one tent to another as they joyned close together, they were all at once on a light fire, and burnt every stick downe to the ground. Men and cattaile both, senged and skorched at the first, as they ran in piteous and fearefull sort away: but afterwards as they tumbled one upon another by heapes, stopped and choked up all the waies and auenues of the gates. And looke who escaped the fire, fell upon the edge of the sword. Thus in one day were two camps cleane consumed. Howbeit, both the Generals, and of so many thousands of armed men, only two thousand foote, and five hundred horse armed by halfes, and many of them either wounded or els singed and halfe rosted with the fire, got away, and escaped. There were either slaine or burnt to ashes upon  fortie thousand men: taken prisoners there were above sixe thousand: among whom there hapned to be many gentlemen of the Carthaginians, and eleven Senators. Of ensignes were taken 178. Of Numidian horses for service more than 2700. Sixe Elephants gotten alive, eight perished either with fire or sword: and a mightie deale of armour came to their hands: all which the L. Generall Scipio consecrated to Vulcane, and set on fire. Asdruball with some few Africanes that fled with him, rid away upon the spurre to the next citie: and thither got all the rest, who remained alive, following the tracks of their captaine, and there saved themselves. But afterwards fearing least that citie would be yelded to Scipio; he quit the place and departed. Anon the Romaines were received within the same at the gates standing open for them: and because willingly of themselves they rendred the towne, there was no kind of hostilitie or violence offred unto  them. But two other cities one after another were forced and put to the ransact. All that pillage, as also whatsoever was saved out of the fire in the two camps, was freely geven to the souldiers. Syphax encamped and fortified himselfe in a strong hold, almost eight miles off. But Asdruball made hast to Carthage, for feare least upon the sodaine fright occasioned by this fresh and late ouerthrow, things should go backward, and the Senat resolve upon some unmanly and unworthy course. Thither at the first arrived such fearefull newes, that all men thought verily that Scipio would give over Vtica and forthwith lay siege unto Carthage: whereupon their Sufetes (who are the Consuls as it were, of the citie) called the Senate: where three opinions were delivered amongst them. The first, advised to dispatch embassadors to Scipio to treat for peace: the second, to send for Anniball home to the defence of his owne countrey, against  so daungerous and deadly a warre: the third gave counsell, by example of the Romanes constancie and resolution in their adversitie, to repaire the armie and gather new forces, and to request Syphax not to abandon and give over the quarrell. This opinion, because Asdruball was in place (and all those that sided with the Barchine house and faction, evenmore enclined to warre) prevailed and tooke effect. Heereupon, they began to take musters in towne and countrey: Oratours were addressed to Syphax, who of himselfe with all his might and maine, was busie in levying fresh forces, and preparing for new warre. For his wife now, not as aforetime, by inticing words, flattering speeches, and pleasant allurements, that might serve the turne to winne and moove the heart of an amorous louer, but by way of prayer and pitifull compassion had prevailed so much with him alreadie: yea,  and with plenteous teares besought him, not to betray her naturall father and native countrey, not suffer Carthage to be burnt with flaming fire, like as the campes were consumed alreadie. The Embassadours also brought with them new hopes besides, which were presented unto them in as happie a time as might be; who reported, that they fortuned to meet with 4000 Celtiberians, brave and lustie young men, about the citie named Olba, which had

beene levyed and hyred in Spaine by their Commissioners, of purpose sent to take up new souldiers: and that {iAsdruball} himselfe in person would be present with a power of no small importance. {iSyphax} not onely entertained these Oratours with gracious speeches and courteous answeres, but also shewed them a great number of Numidians, gathered out of the countrey townes, which some few dayes before he had furnished with armour and horses; promising besides, that he would assemble all the young and able men for service throughout his whole realme. For well he wist, that the late losse and deffeiture happened by occasion of fire, and not by fight: and never in warre is a man to be reputed inferiour, before he be vanquished by fine force in raunged battaile. In this wise answered he the Embassadours. And after some few daies, {iAsdruball} and {iSyphax} once againe joyned their forces together: so as in all, their hoast amounted to the number well neare of 30000 armed men.
Now when Scipio was wholly set upon the assault of Vtica, and at the point to bend his ordenance and artillerie against the walles, as thinking verily that the warre was alreadie done with Syphax and the Carthaginians; the same of the warre renewed by them afresh, averted him from his purpose, and caused him to give over that enterprise for a time. So leaving behind him certaine small guards, as well by water as land, onely for a signe and shew of siege; himselfe with all the strength of his armie, set forward to meet the enemie. At the first he sate him downe and encamped upon an hill, foure miles (or verie neere) distant from the kings campe. The next day after, he descended with his Cavallerie, downe into the Great plaines or downes (for so they call them) lying neere the same hill; and spent that whole day in braving the standing corps de guard of the enemies before their campe, and playing upon them with light skirmishes. And so  for two daies together next ensuing, they passed the time in divers tumultuous excursions betweene the one part and the other, without doing any great exploit worth the remembrance. On the fourth day, they entred on both sides into the field, and embattailed themselues. Scipio marshalled his men in this wise: Behind the Principes in the vaward, he placed the form oftensignes of his Hastari, or Speares; and the Triarij he bestowed in the rereward, for to second them, The Italian horsemen heset in the right point: the Numidian horse and Masanissa he raunged in the left. Syphax and Asdruball put their Numidian horse opposite to the Italians, and the Carhaginian to affront Masanissa. In their maine battaile were planted the Celtiberians, to make head against the ensignes of the Romane Legions. Thus ordered and arraunged, they encountered one another, and joyned battaile. At the first onset, both wings at once, as well the Numidians  as the Carthaginians, were put backe and forced to give ground: for neither the Numidians (being for the most part country people and rusticall) were able to receive the Romane horsemen; nor the Carthaginians (raw and untrained souldiers) sufficient to hold out with Masanissa; who (besides all other things) for his late and fresh victorie, was so terrible, as there was no dealing with him. So the battaile of the Celtiberians, (naked and disfurnished of both her points) stood still: for neither saw they any likelihood to escape and save themselves by flight, considering they knew not the coast of the countrey; nor hope to obtaine pardon at Scipio his band, against whome, (deserving so well of them and their nation) they were come into Affricke with a power of waged mercenarie souldiers. So being environed on every side with the enemies, they fell one upon another, and obstinately dyed to the last man. But whiles all the enemies  were wholly employed about them, Syphax and Asdruball gained themselves some time to get away and escape. The victours (wearied rather with continuall killing than long fighting) were overtaken with the night. The morrow after, Scipio sent out Laelius and Masanissa, with all the Romane and Numidian horse, and the nimblest and lightest appointed footmen, after Syphax and Asdruball for to follow the chase. Himselfe with the strength and bodie of the armie, subdued all the cities thereabout that were within the seignorie of the Carthaginians; whome he partly forced by assault, and partly tooke by surrender for feare. Great was the fright yee maybe sure at Carthage: and they thought not other but that Scipio being now in the traine of conquest, would make halt to overrunne the countrey; and when hee had once brought under his subjection (and that with speed) all the other states there bordering, then at once he would come  to assault Carthage. Therefore they sell to repaire and make up the breaches of their walles, and to fortifie them with strong bulwarkes: and everie man did his best to bring out of the countrey all kind of provision, against the time they should abide along and tedious siege. Few words or none at all of peace, but much talke of sending Embassadours to call home Anniball. The
 greatest part were of mind and gave advise, to make out the Armada which stood readie rigged, for to intercept the Romanes victuall, and to surprise and assault the Romane fleete, riding before Vtica retchesly without feare, and distrusting nothing: for peradventure they might also force the navall campe, left with a small guard for the defence thereof. And to this counsell the most enclined: yet they thought it good to send Embassadours to Anniball. For suppose that their navie should speed full well, and haue the happiest successe that they could wish; this onely good would come thereof, that Vtica thereby might be in some sort eased of the straight siege wherewith it was invested: as for the defence of Carthage it selfe, they neither had any other Generall besides Anniball, nor armie left but onely his. Whereupon the next day after, the ships were shot into the water, and set a flote: and withall, the Embassadors tooke  their way toward Italie. All things were hudled up and done in hast; such was their fortune that pricked them forward, and gave them no further time. And looke if any one man slacked his business neuer so little, he was reputed to betray the whole state, and the safetie of all.
Scipio now marching with an armie, loden with the spoile and pillage of many cities; sent the prisoners away, and all the prizes besides, unto the old campe before Vtica. And wholly set upon the conquest of Carthage, he surpriseth Tunes (a citie abandoned of her guard left for defence) situate from Carthage almost twelve miles. The place, both by mans hand was strongly and by nature surely seated: and as it might be easily seene from Carthage, so it yeelded a goodly prospect to Carthage, and also to the sea all about Carthage. From thence the Romanes (as they were hard at worke in fortifying themselues with a trench and rampier) discouered  the enemies fleete, sayling from Carthage toward Vtica. Laying therefore their work aside, they sounded the remoove, and presently in all hast avanced their ensignes, to prevent that their owne shippes which stood close to the shore, bent wholly to the siege, and nothing sitted and furnished for a sea fight, might not be surprised and boorded. For how possibly could ships heauily charged, carrying artillerie, ordenance, and engines of batterie, be ever able to withstand an Armada nimbly appointed, rigged and trimmed for the purpose with all shippe furniture meete for battaile, and manned besides with armed souldiers? How might our ships (I say) withstand the enemie, which either are converted to the use of merchant-shippes of burden; or else so nere set to the walles, that they serve instead of a platforme and banke, or else of bridges enter upon the citie? Scipio therefore, after he was thither come, and had bestowed his  warre shippes with brasen beakes behind in the rereward neare to land, which (as the manner is in sight at sea) might guard and defend the rest: opposed the Hulkes and Carricks in a fourefold ranke and course, in stead of a wall afront the enemie. And because that in the tumult of the sight, those raunges might not be broken and disordered, hee laid the masts and saileyards over-crosse, reaching from ship to ship; and with strong cables he linked and fastened them all in one together, and laid bourds and plankes over them, that men might passe euerie way from one ship to another. But under those verie bridges, he left certaine spaces betwene, from whence the light pinnaces and frigats might make out to charge and recharge the enemie, and retire themselves thither againe in safetie. Having thus in hast (according as the time would give him leave) set these matters in order; there were to the number almost of a thousand elect  and choice souldiers put a boord into those ships of burden, to make head in the forefront, and withstand the violence of the enemies: and furnished they were with offensive weapons, but missive especially, to shoot and fling from them: and such store thereof they had together, as might serve for the assault, were in never so long. Thus appointed and prepared, they waited the comming of the enemies. The Carthaginians, (who if they had made good speed, might have surprised them unawares, and found all pell mell and out of order whiles they were troubled, frighted, and to seeke what to do upon that sodaine occurrence) fearing still, as men out of heart and dismayed with so many foiles by land, and thereupon distrusting themselves even at the sea also: where (no doubt) they were the better and more puissant: and having trifled out all the livelong day, and sailed but slowly; about the sun-set arrived in the haven, which the Affricans call  Ruscinon. And the next morning by sun-rising, they put foorth into the open sea, and raunged their ships in order, as against a set navall battaile; supposing that the Romanes would make out and receive them. When they had stood thus a long time, and perceived the enemies not to stir or once to set forward, then at last they charged upon the foresaid hulkes and ships of burden. The service was nothing like a sea-fight, but resembling for all the world the ships that are to assaile

the wal^^ (...): towne. For the hulks were a good deale taller, and stood alost over the enemies. And the Carthaginians from out of their war-ships armed and breasted with brasen beakes, let the many a (...) vaine, as launcing them from beneath faintly against the higher place; whereas the (...) from above out of the Caricks, was levelled with more strength, and by reason of their owne poise light also with greater force. The light pinnases for spiall, and the other smal barkes, which made sallies from under the bridges aforesaid, framed of plankes upon masts and saile yards, at the first were encountred, overcharged and hidden onely with the violence and greatnesse of those warre-ships: but afterwards they were some trouble to the defendants of their owne side; for that being intermingled amongst the enemies ships, their owne fellowes were forced often times to stay their hands, and neither shoot arrow, nor launce dart, for feare of missing their enemies, and lighting among their owne part. At the last the enemies from out of the Carthaginian  ships, began to cast out certaine loggers, with yron hookes at the end (which the souldiors use to call Harpagones) [Grapples] for to take hold upon the Roman ships. Which when the Romanes were not able to cut in sunder, no more than the very chaines where to they hung, and whereby they were slung, then yee might have seene (as any one of the enemies warre-ships and gallies rowed backe, and towed after it a Romane Caricke hanging by the grapple end) the bourds and ropes cut asunder, by which it was tied and fastened unto others, or else another raunge and course of more ships together, to follow after the taile of the other. By this devise especially were all the bridges torne and rent in peeces, and scarcely had the defendants any time and space to retire and passe into the second ranke of ships behind. Thus there were upon a fix Carrickes of the Romanes drawne away to Carthage, hanging at the poopes of their gallies. Their  gladnesse and rejoicing here at was much greater than the thing it selfe came to, and the more acceptable, in that amid so many continuall losses and plenteous teares of theirs, one onely joy as small as it was, shining upon them beyond their expectation, eased and lightened their harts: considering with all how neere by all likelyhood and apparence the Roman armada was to amischeefe and finall destruction, had not the captaines of their owne gallies foreflowed so much, and Scipio come in time to helpe.
It fortuned about the same time, that Laelius and Masanissa were come within 15 daies into Numidia; the Masaesylians rendered Masanissa the auncient realme belonging to him by inheritance from his father, and received him with joy, as their king whom they had long time desired. Syphax seeing his captaines and garrisons disseized and displaced, kept himselfe within the auncient  limits of his owne kingdome, but was not like to be long at rest and quiet. For this wives father on the one side, and his wife againe on the other, set him on, and pricked him forward continually to take armes against the Romans: and so doted he upon her in excessive love, that needs he must yeeld to her, there was no remedie. Besides, so mightie hee was in numbers of men and horse, that the puissance of a kingdome flourishing so many yeares together, offering and presenting it selfe daily to the cie, had ben ynough to have made a prince proud, that was not so barbarous and uncivile as he, and had some better rule and maistrie of his affections than himselfe had. When he had assembled together as many as were able for service, hee furnished them with horses, and with armour, as well offensive as defensive. The Cavallerie hee sorted and devided into small troupes and corners, the infanterie into cohorts and squadrons, according as hee had  learned long since of the Roman centurions. And thus having raised an armie, equall for number to the former, but standing all together in manner, of new and untrained souldiours, hee put himselfe on his journey against the enemies. And after hee had encamped neere unto them, at the beginning some few light horsemen advaunced forward from before the corps de guard, in espiall, so neere as they might with safetie, but being set backe from thence with arrowes and javelines, they retired unto their companies. After this they began of both sides to make out one against another, and to maintaine light skirmishes; and when of any part they had taken the foile, they would for anger returne againe in greater number, which is the wonted manner to kindle a battell betweene horsemen: for whiles the winners hope still of better, and the loosers chase for having the worse, the companie ever encreaseth on both sides. And thus now, afteer some few  had scuffled and blowed the coales, at length the whole armie of either part, came forth into the field eager of sight, and to strike a set battell. So long as the horse-service lasted, the Masaesylians were so many, as there was hardly any dealing with them, Syphax sent them out in such great troupes: but after that the Romance footmen once had suddainly entred betweene the cornets of

 their horsemen, which gave way as they came, and had gotten sure footing and made head, and so frighted the enemie charging so freely upon the spurre as he did: then the Barbarians began to ride their horses more easily, and within a while gently to stand still, and seeme as it were amased at this strange and new kind of fight; and in the end, not onely to give ground unto the footmen, but also to recule from the horsemen, who now were the more bold and hardie, being flanked with a guard of footmen.
And now by this time the standerds of the legions advaunced forward, and approched neere hand. But then the Massaesyli were so farre from receiving and enduring their first charge, that they might not abide the very sight so much, as of their ensignes and armour, so mightily wrought with them either the remembrance of former over throwes alreadie passed, or the present feare  of imminent daunger. Where Syphax, whiles he rode bravely in the face of the enemies troups and squadrons, if happily for very shame, or for the perill of his owne person, hee might stay his men from running away, had his horse under him sore wounded, and being cast off his backe to the earth, was over pressed with the number, taken prisoner, and brought alive unto Laelius, for to represent unto Masanissa above all others a goodly shew and joifull sight to behold. Now was Cirtha, the head citie of all the kingdom of Syphax; and thither after the flight, be tooke themselves a mightie multitude of people. The slaughter in this battaile was lesse in proportion, than the victorie, because the horsemen onely maintained the medley. Not above five thousand were slaine, and not halfe so many taken prisoners. And when they had made an assault upon the camp whither the frighted multitude, after the losse of their king, had retired, Masanissa came unto Laeius  and said, That for the present there could bee nothing more pleasing and honourable unto him, than upon his victorie to visit and see his fathers kingdome, which he had recovered and woon again after so long a time. But as in adversitie, so likewise in prosperitie (qd.he) tract of time and delaies are never good. In case therfore Laelius would permit him and his horsemen, together with conquered Syphax to goe before unto the citie Cirtha, he would surprise them on a suddain, finding all out of frame and to seeke, by reason of this so suddaine and unexpected feare: and Laelius with his footmen might travell faire and softly, and come after by easie journies. Laelius graunted hereunto. Whereupon, being gone afore unto Cirtha, he commaunded the principall cittizens of Cirtha to bee called foorth unto a parle. But all the whiles that they were ignorant of the kings unhappie fall, and so long as Masanissa uttered nothing of that which was happened, hee  might not prevaile either with threats or faire words and persuasions, until he presented the king before them a bound prisoner. Then at so heavie an object and miserable spectacle, they lift up apittifull crie, and made great lamentation. And so partly for feare they abandoned the defence of the walls, and partly by a generall consent to court the conquerour, and to seeke for grace and favour at his hands, they set the gates open. Then Masanissa, after hee had bestowed about the gates, and in convenient places of the walls, certaine strong guards, to keep that no man should stirre and make an escape, he rode a gallop to the roiall pallace, for to bee possessed of it. As hee entred within the fore-gates therof, even in the very entrance of the porch, Sophonisba the wife of Syphax, and daughter of Asdruball the Carthaginian, met him on the way: and espying in the mids of the armed traine Masanissa full gorgeously dight, as well in his brave armor, as in other goodly  array and ornaments, imagining him to be the king (as he was indeed) she fell downe prostrat at his feet, and spake in this wife: True it is (quoth she) o Masanissa, that the gods above, together with your owne vertue and felicitie have given you full power and puissance, to doe with us according to your pleasure: but if it be lawfull for me a poore prisoner and captive woman, to open my mouth, and make an humble speech unto my Lord, in whose onely hands lieth my life and death; if I may be so bold as to touch your knees, and that victorious right hand of yours; I would beseech and pray your for the honour of the roiall majestie of a prince, wherin we also ourselves erewhile were interessed; in the love and name of the Numidian nation, which now is commune to you and Syphax, by the domesticall gods, protectours of this regall house and princely palace, who vouch safe to receive you into it at this present with better presages and more fortunate tokens,  than lately they sent Syphax out of it; to deigne me a lowly suppliant this savour, and grunt me this petition, as to determine your selfe of me your captive whatsoever pleasant you, and not to suffer me to fall into the prowd hands and inhumane disposition of any Romane. If there were nothing, els but this, that I was sometime wise and queen to Syphax, yet would I rather trie the courtie and humanitie of a Numidian, and one borne in Affrick as well as my selfe, than of a

stranger and alien. But what hard measure a Carthaginian lady, and the daughter of Asdruball, may feare at a Romans hand, you see and know full well. Wherefore once againe I request and intreate your highnesse upon my knees, to regard my suite; and if there be no way els to save and keepe me from the will and appetite of the Romanes, to do me to death out of hand. For beautie she surpassed and was incomparable: for yeeres lustie, and in the very best of her age. And therfore when as now she held him fast by the hand, and requested his protection and honorable word, only for this, That she might not be delivered and betrayed to a Romane; placing and setting her words so well, and couching them so cunningly, that they sounded neerer to speeches for to win love, than prayers to crave pitie: see the fansie and affection of this victorious prince! he enclined presently not only to mercy and compassion, but also (as all the kind of these Numidians are ful of love, and have no stay of their wanton lust) a conquerour otherwise though he were, yeelded  himselfe prisoner to the love of his captive: and so after he had geven her his right hand for assurance to performe her request, he went into the palace. This done, he began to cast about with himselfe how he might make good his promise unto Sophonisba: but finding no meanes els to compasse and bring it about, he borowed foolish, rash, and shamelesse counsell of blind love. He made no more ado, but commaunded in all hast to prepare that very day for the solemnization of a mariage with Sophonisba, because he would give neither Laelius, nor Scipio himselfe, any libertie at all to proceed against her as a prisoner, after she were once the wedded wife of Masanissa. The wedding was no sooner done, but behold Laelius came, a guest unsent for and nothing welcome: who so little dissimuled how much he misliked the thing, that he was once about to have plucked her forth of the bride-bed, and sent her away even with Syphax and  other prisoners to Scipio. But overcome with the earnest prayers of Masanissa, who besought and importuned him to referre the matter over to Scipio, for to arbitrate and decide unto whether of the two kings Sophonisba should be awarded, for to mend their state, and better their fortune; he sent away Syphax alone with the rest of the prisoners, and by the help of Masanissa, wan and recovered the other cities in Numidia, which were held by the garisons of the king. When news came into the camp that they were bringing Syphax thither, all the multitude went forth as it were to behold a triumph. Himselfe went bound before all the rest, and a number of Numidian noblemen and gentlemen followed after. Then every man, to set forth and amplifie this victorie, magnified what he could the greatnesse of king Syphax, and the glorious renowme of the nation, in these termes: That he was the king, unto whose majestie the two most mightie and  puissant states of the world, to wit, the Romanes and the Carthaginians attributed so much, that Scipio the Generall of the one, for to seeke his amitie, left the province of Spaine and the armie there, and with two Caravels or Gallies ruled with five banks of ores, sailed over into Affrick: and Asdruball the great commaunder of the Carthaginians, not only repaired himselfe in person unto him into his kingdome, but also gave him his daughter in mariage: so as at one time he had in his power the two grand-captaines, of Carthaginians and Romanes both. And like as both these nations killed sacrifices unto the immortall gods, and craved thereby their grace and favour, so of both parties at one time was his friendship sought for and desired. And as for his power and puissance, it was so great, that he expelled Masanissa out of his owne realme, and drave him to this narrow point, that the best meanes he had to preserve his life, was either the  running rumor of his death, or the lurking holes in the wild woods, wherein he was glad to live by rupine and stealth, after the guise of savage beasts. The king thus talked of in every mans mouth that stood about him, was brought at length into the Praetorium or Generals pavilion, and there presented unto Scipio. And Scipio verily was much moved in mind to consider the former state and fortune of the man, compared now with this present condition: and to remember withall and call to mind the hospitall interteinment, the geving interchangeably of the right hand, and the covenant between them made both in publick and private. In these regards likewise Syphax tooke hart, and spake more frankely unto the conquerour. For when Scipio demaunded of him What he meant, and for what intent he not only renounced alliance with the Romanes, but also began himselfe first to make warre upon them: he made answere againe and confessed, That he  had in deede done amisse, and plaid the foole. As for his taking armes against the people of Rome, that was not the beginning of his follie, but rather the very end of his frantick sortishnes. Then it was, and never els but then, that he went besides himselfe and was bereft of his wits; then he abandoned out of his mind and cleane forgat, as well privat amitie by hospitall enterteinment,

 as all publick alliance by solemne covenants; when as he received into his house a Carthaginian ladie for his wife: then his royall court and palace was set on fire and burned with those nuptiall torches. That furious fiend it was (quoth he) and pestilent dame, that by all kind of pleasant alluring baits, and flattering enticements possessed my mind, drew away and alienated my hart; and never rested she, untill with her owne hands she did upon my body impious and ungodly armour against mine owne guest and loving friend. And yet as desperate and as wofull as my case is, in all my miseries and calamities this one thing doth me good and joyeth my heart, that I see the same pestiferous furie, that fiend of hell, and limme of the devill, gotten into the house and familie of him, who is the most deadly and mortall enemie that I have in all the world. Neither surely will Masanissa demeane himselfe more wisely, soberly and constantly  than Syphax: nay, considering his youthfull yeeres, he will be as apt to be mis-led by love, and more subject to the temptations of a woman. Certes in this action of espousing her, he hath shewed more folly a great deale and want of government. When he had uttered these words not only upon a spitefull hatred against an enemie, but also upon some new pricks of jelousie rising in his heart, seeing her whom he loved, in the possession of his concurrent; Scipio was driven into no small dumps, and wist not well what to make of it. And as he began to be suspicious of Masanissa for this mariage, so, to speake a truth, the circumstances thereof hammered in his head, and made him conceive hardly of him; for feare that another day by the suggestions of the same woman, he would play false, and trespasse as well as Syphax. The mariage was so hudled up as it were in the mids of warre and hostilitie, without the advise, without the privitie, and without the  expectation of Laelius his companie. Such hast he made all on the head, and without advisement, that the very same day that he set eye first upon the queene his prisoner, he must needs espouse and mary her out of hand, and in the very house of his greatest enemie consummate and solemnise the complements of sacred wedlock. Moreover to aggravate these matters, and make them seeme more foule and shamefull, Scipio knew full well, that Masanissa during the time that he remained in Spaine a lustie yong gentleman, it was never knowne that he was enamoured upon the lovely beautie of any captive woman. As he tossed and revolved these things in his mind, Laelius and Masanissa chaunced to come in place. And after he had welcomed them both alike, and shewed them a loving and gracious countenance, yea and honoured them with singular praise and commendations openly in a frequent audience and court, he within his lodging  tooke Masanissa into a secret place apart, and began to speake unto him in this manner. I suppose Masanissa, that you saw in me some good parts, for love wherof both at the first you were induced to come into Spaine and contract amitie with me; and afterwards also in Affrick, you reposed yourselfe and all your hopes in my fidelitie and protection. But of all those vertues, for which I have seemed worthie of your affectionate love, there is not one wherein I may so much glorie and take joy and comfort, as in temperance, continencie, and the bridling of carnall delights, and fleshly pleasures. This vertue Masanissa, I wish that you also would have joined unto the rest that are in you so rare and excellent. For our age (trust me truly) standeth not so much in danger of armed enemies, as of those earthly pleasures that compasse us on every side. And hee that by his sobrietie and governance hath been able to rule and tame the same, hath  woon himselfe more honour, and gotten a greater victorie, than wee have done by the conquest and subduing of Syphax. What valiant exploits and worthie acts you have atchieved in mine absence, I have willingly reported, and still remember. For the rest, I had rather you would consider of them by yourselfe, than change colour and blush at my rehearsall of them. Syphax through the good fortune, and by the forces of the people of Rome, is vanquished and taken prisoner. And therefore, himselfe, his wife, his realme, his lands, his townes, the inhabitants thereof, and finally all things els whatsoever that belonged unto Syphax, are become a bootie to the people of Rome. The king himselfe, and the queene his wife, in case she had not been a citizen borne of Carthage, in case wee had not seene her father to bee the grand captaine of our enemies, ought by right to have been sent to Rome; that the Senate and people of Rome might passe their censure,  award, and judgement of her, who is reported to have alienated a confederate king from us, and to have caused him rashly and inconsiderately to take armes against us. Strive then to rule and maister your lusts and affections; take heed you staine not many good vertues with one bad vice. Marre not the grace, deface not I say, the thanke of many worthie deserts, by one fault and trespasse greater indeed, than the subject cause and occasion thereof. Masanissa, whiles he heard

these words, not onely blushed as red as fire, but also began to water his plants. And when he had  promised for his part to be overruled and set downe by the Generall, and requested him withal, so farre forth as possibly the case would permit, to render and regard his promise, wherein rashly and inconsiderately he had entangled himselfe (for given his faithfull word he had, that he would not deliver and betray her into the hands and power of any other) he departed out of the Pretorium or Generall his court, all dismaied and exceedingly troubled in spirit, and betooke himselfe to his owne pavillion. Where all solitarie and alone by himselfe, after hee had passed over some time, with fetching many deepe sighes and sobs, so as he might easily be overheard by them that stood about his tent, at the last hee gave one greevous grone above the rest, and with that called for one of his trustie groomes, who had under his hand the keeping (as the manner was of kings and princes) of a speciall poyson, against all doubtfull chaunces that might happen. Which hee, commaunded him to temper in a goblet of wine, and to carie it to Sophonisba, and with all to tell her thus much from him. That Masanissa would have been most willing to performe his plighted troth and first promise, which an husband ought unto his wedded wife. But since that the superiour powers, and those that were mightier than himselfe, had bereft him of that puissance and libertie, he was readie and able yet to accomplish a second behest, namely, that shee should not come alive into the hands of the Romanes: and therefore hee advised her, that in remembrance of her father a noble warriour and Commaunder, of her native countrie, of two kings to whom she had been married, she would provide for her selfe, and save her owne honour. This credence and message, together with the poison, the servant when he was come unto Sophonisba, delivered unto her. Whereat, I accept (quoth she) this mariage present, and welcome be it unto me, if this be  the best token that an husband could find to send unto his wife. Yet thus much signifie unto him from me againe, that better content I would have beene to die, if my marriage bed had not stood so neere to my grave. Shee spake not the word so stoutly, but shee did the deed as resolutely: for shee tooke the cup in hand, and shewing no signe at all of feare, she roundly dranke it of. When tidings hereof came unto Scipio, for feare least the hote, humorous, and passionat young prince, might doe himselfe some mischeefe, he presently sent for him. One while hee gave him good and comfortable words; another while he gently rebuked him, in that he would seeme to make amends for one follie with another, and to play a more cruell and tragicall part than there was need. The next day after, to the end that he might withdraw his mind away from this present sir of troublesome fancies, hee mounted up into his Tribunall seat, and assembled an audience. There first, he openly styled Masanissa by the name of king, and honored him with singular praises and commendations: which done, he gave him a golden crowne, a faire cup likewise of gold, a chaire of estate and a scepter, both of yvorie, a(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) rich long robe embrodered of divers colours, and a coat wrought with needle worke, representing the Date tree. These honourable presents wanted no words to set them out. For as (quoth hee) there is nothing among the Romanes more stately and magnifical than triumph, so they that ride in triumph, have no ornaments more rich and sumptuous than this, which the people of Rome esteemeth Masanissa onely of all strangers and aliens to be worthie of. After this he gave Laelius also his due and deserved praises, and bestowed upon him a coronet of gold. Other martiall men likewise according to the service which they had done, were rewarded with sundrie gifts. The king having these honours done unto him, was  well quieted and contented in mind, and conceived some assured hope, now that Syphax was displaced and rid out of the way, shortly to compasse and enjoy the whole kingdome of Numidia. Then Scipio having sent C. Laelius with Syphax and other captives unto Rome, accompanied also with the Embassadours of Masanissa, returned himselfe with his power againe to Tunes. And there, what fortifications and workes hee had begun asore, now hee finished perfitly and brought to an end.
The Carthaginians, who were filled with a kind of joy that was not onely short, but also in manner vaine and foolish, grounded upon their late assault of the Romane Armada, which (considering their present state) was fortunate enough; after they heard that Syphax was taken prisoner, in whome they had reposed more hope (well neare) than in Asdruball and their owne army, were mightily affrighted and daunted; and would give no more eare to any that persuaded war, but sent as orators to sue for peace, thirtie of their principall auncients: and they amongst them were (as one would say) their privie counsell of state, and had the greatest power and authoritie to sway and overrule the whole bodie of the Senate. Who being entred into the Romane campe

and the Generall his lodging and pavillion, sell downe prostrate (after the manner and guise as I take it, of the countrey Tyrus in Thaenicia. Where, like as in other countries of Asia, the people are most servile and verie Idolairous to their Princes. from whence they were first descended) like those that worship and adore the gods. And to this their humble and lowly reverence, their language was sutable and correspondent; not excusing themselves and their fault, but transferring the beginning and occasion thereof, upon Anniball and his favorites about him, that soothed him and bare him up in his wilfull pride and insolent ambition: craving pardon for their citie of Carthage, which twise alreadie had beene subverted and overthrowen by the inconsiderate follie of her owne citizens: and once againe yet would gladly be saved and stand upright by the meanes and goodnesse of their enemies: for as much as they knew full well, that the people of Rome sought not the utter extermination and destruction of those whome they had vanquished by force of armes, but only  the soveraigntie and rule over them: promising fealtie and homage unto them; readie to serve in all loyaltie, and to performe whatsoeuer it should please them to impose and lay upon them. Scipio made them this answer againe and said, That as he came into Affricke upon hope to returne home with conquest and not with peace; so that hope of his by the prosperous and happie successe of his warres hitherto, was much bettered and augmented. Howbeit, although hee assured himselfe of the absolute victorie, at if he had it fast enough in his hand, yet a good accord he would not refuse: that all nations of the world might know, that the people of Rome can both begin warres rightfully, and also end the same as justly. My will therefore (quoth he) and pleasure is, that the conditions of peace shall be these. Inprimis, That the Carthaginians shall restore and deliver backe all the prisoners that they have taken in the wars:  with all the renegates and fugitives that have fled to their side from us. Item, that they remove their forces out of Italie and Fraunce. Item, that they forbeare to meddle in Spaine. Item, that they abandon and quit all the Ilands betweene Italie and Affricke. Item, to yeeld up all their shippes of warre, saving onely twentie. Item, that they deliver unto the Romanes, of wheat 500000 Modij, and of barley 300000. [Now what was the summe of mony that he required or demanded of them, it is not certainly agreed upon. In some writers I find 5000 talents: in others, five thousand pound weight only of silver: and there be that have set downe, that he laid upon them a double pay of all the souldiers.] Vpon these conditions (saith he) whether ye will like of peace or no, ye shall have three daies respite and libertie to consult and consider. If you will accept therof in these tearmes, make a truce with me for the present, and send your Embassadours unto  Rome to the Senate there. Thus the Carthaginians, when they had agreed together, and concluded to refuse no articles and conditions of peace whatsoever, were dismissed. But in truth they sought for nothing else but delaies and tract of time, untill Anniball were sailed over into Affricke. So they addressed certaine Embassadours unto Scipio to enter a truce: others they dispatched to Rome to treate for a peace: who brought with them for shew, some few captives, renegates, and fugitives, to the ende they might obtaine their sute more easily. But Laelius with Syphax and other captives (the principall nobles and gentlemen of the Numidians) was many dayes before arrived at Rome, and had declared unto the LL. of the Senate all things in order as touching their good speed and successe in Affricke, to the great contentment and joy of all men for the present, and with exceeding hope for the time to come. Then the LL, after consultation  had, gave order that the king should be sent to Alba, there to lye in ward and safe custodie; and that Laelius should be kept still at Rome, untill the Carthaginian Embassadors came. A solemne procession for foure daies was decreed. And P. Aelius the Pretour, after he had dismissed the Senate, called presently an assembly of the people, and together with C. Laelius went up into the Rostra [or pulpit for publicke orations.] Where, the people hearing that the Carthaginian armies were defeated, that a king of great name and renowme was overcome and taken prisoner; that all Numidia was overrunne from one end to the other with a noble and singular conquest; they could no longer conteine their joy in silence, but with shouts and acclamations and other tokens (usuall in the assembly of a multitude) expresse and signifie their exceeding gladnes and contentment of heart. Whereupon the Pretour immediately made proclamation, that  the churchwardens and sextaines should set open all the holy temples and chappels throughout the citie, and give the people libertie and leave all the day long, devoutly to goe about the gods, reverently to salute them, and heartily to render thankesgiving for this atchieved victory. The next day following, he admitted the Embassadours of Masanissa into the Senate house, and gave them audience. Who first and foremost rejoyced in the behalfe of the Senate, for the prosperous

warres and happie successe of P. Scipio in Affricke: then they gave thankes, that hee not  only had entituled Masanissa their lord and master by the bare name of king, but also invested him a king indeed, by restoring him into his fathers kingdome. Wherein, if it pleased the LL. of the Senate, he might reigne, now that Syphax was remooved and gone, without feare and trouble at all. Also, for that hee solemnely in the open assembly praised him in most honourable tearms, and adorned him richly with right stately and precious gifts. For to deserve which favors and honours done unto him, as he had endeauoured alreadie, so would he henceforth not faile to doe his best. Then they made a petition, that the Senate would confirme and ratifie by their acte and decree, his royall style and title of a King, with other benefits and favours received of Scipio. And this moreover particularly Masanissa would request (if hee might be so bold, and that it stood with the pleasure of theSenate) that they would enlarge and set at libertie all the  Numidian captives that lay in prison at Rome: for this would be a thing whereby he should acquire much honour and reputation, and gaine great love and favour among his people and countreymen at home. To these points the Embassadours received this answere. Concerning the prosperous affaires of the warres in Affricke, they congratulated likewise, and rejoyced reciprocally with the king. As for Scipio, they liked well, and confirmed his act in giving Masanissa the name of king: and therein he had done well and justly and according to good reason. And whatsoever he had passed else to the honour of Masanissa, the LL. approoved and commended the same. Then they decreed certaine presents, that the Embassadours should carry unto the king: to wit, two purple souldiers cassocks, each of them with a claspe of golde; and as many rich coates embrodered and bestudded with purple. Also two coursers barbed and trapped, with  their rich caparisons; two complete armours for horses, with their cuiraces: likewise pavillions, with all their militarie furniture, in as full and ample manner as a Consull is allowed. These presents (I say) had the Pretor direction to send unto the king. As for the Embassadors themselves, there was bestowed upon them no lesse than 5000 Asses a peece; and upon their followers in the traine, ech of them 1000 Asses. Also a double sute of apparell for either of the Embassadours, and one single sute to everie one throughout their traine; as also to those Numidians, who being set at large out of prison, were to be delivered againe to the king. Over and besides, there was appointed for the Embassadors, lodging of free-cost; gardenage and walking places of pleasure; allowance for their table, and all provision else whatsoever, at the cities expences.
In that sommer when these decrees passed at Rome, and those affaires were atchieved in Affricke, P. Quintilius Varus Pretour, and M. Cornelius Viz-consull, sought a set battaile with Mago the Carthaginian, in the territorie of the Insubrians, within the province of Fraunce. In the vaward were placed the legions of the Pretour. Cornelius kept his legions in the rereward, and himselfe in person rode to the standards in the forefront. And before both wings, the Pretour and Viz-consull encouraged all that ever they could, the souldiers for to advance their ensigns, and give a charge upon the enemie. But seeing they could not prevaile nor doe any good, then quoth Quintilius to Cornelius: You see how the fight slaketh and waxeth cooler, and the enemies that were timorous, are hardened and heartened by this resistance beyond their hope and expectation, yea, and it is to be feared, that they will turne to bee hardie also, and make head against us. Wee must needs raise up a storme of Cavallerie, if wee would disorder them, and  put them out of array. And therefore either doe you maintaine fight here in the front, whiles I bring the men of armes into the battaile, or else will I here fight in the vaward, whiles you send out the horsemen of foure legions upon the enemies. And when the vice-consull was willing to accept of whether service the Pretour would, then Quintilius the Pretour, with his sonne forenamed Marcus, a lustie young gallant, went to the horsemen, commaunded them to mount on horsebacke, and suddainely all at once sent them against the enemie. The tumult and noyse which the horsemen made, was answered and redoubled by a shout that the footmen set up. And verily the enemies battaile had not beene able to have kept their ground, but that Mago at the first stirring of the Cavallerie, made out the Elephants forthwith into the battaile, whom he had in readinesse for such a purpose. At the uncouth braying, the strong smell, and hideous sight of which beasts, the horses were affrighted: and so the aid of horse-fight prooved vaine. And as the Romane Cavallerie interlaced among the Infanterie was more strong and forcible, where they had the use both of launce point aloofe, and of swords edge close at hand: so when they were transported and caried farre off with their panting and fearefull horses,

 the Numidians horsemen had the more roume to shoot their darts against them with better advantage. Besides this disorder, the twelfth legion of footmen (whereof a great part was beaten downe and slaine, more for shame than upon any strength and valour, kept their place still; but never had bene able to have held out any longer, but that the thirteenth legion drawne forth of the rereward into the vantgard, reenforced the medley that was in hazard and lay a bleeding: and Mago withall for his part, came in with the Frenchmen out of the rereward, and opposed them against this fresh legion; but when they were once discomfited and put back (which required no great ado nor long fight) the Hastati or Iaveliniers of the eleventh legion gathered round together, and charged upon the Elephants, which now also began to breake the ranks of the footemen. But when they had launced their javelins against them standing thicke together in  plumps (and lightly there was not one of them hit amisse but did his errand) they forced them all to turne back upon their owne battaile: so, foure of them were sore wounded and fell downe dead. Then the vaward of the enemies began somewhat to geve ground; and withall, the whole strength of the Romane footemen, seeing the Elephants turne taile, came forward at once for to encrease the disordred tumult, and put them in greater feare. But so long as Mago stood stoutly to it, and kept his standing in the forefront of the ensignes, the rankes and files as they went back softly, and retired by little and little, still mainteined fight as before in good order: but after that they saw him shot through the thigh and fallen, and therewith caried forth of the bartel for dead, incontinently they were all defeated and put to flight. That day were slaine of enemies upon a five thousand, and of militarie ensignes eighteene woon and carried away. The Romans likewise  bought not this victorie without losse of bloud. For of the Pretors armie were lost two thousand and three hundred, and the greater part of them by farre were of the twelfth legion. Wherof two Tribunes militarie or Colonels also lost their lives, M. Cosconius, and M. Maenius. Likewise of the thirteenth legion, which came last to the conflict, Cn. Helvius a Colonell, in renuing the fight was slaine, and eighteen men of armes besides, most brave and excellent horsemen, with certain Centurions who were by the Elephants troden down, trampled underfoot, and so perished. And no doubt the medley had continued longer, but that by occasion of the Generall his hurt, the victorie was given away and yeelded. Mago in the dead time of the next night dislodged and departed; and stretching out his journey so farre as possibly for his wound hee might, hee marched away untill he was come to the sea side, unto the Ingauni in Liguria: where the Embassadors sent  from Carthage (who a few daies before were arived in the French gulfe) repaired unto him: commaunding him with all speed possible to saile over into Affricke, for as much as his brother Anniball likewise (unto whom also there were Embassadours gone with the like message and commission) would doe the same. For the State of Carthage now was not in case, nor upon tearms, to defend and keepe in obedience by force of armes Fraunce and Italie, but to see to home. Mago not onely moved with the commaundement of the Senate, and the daunger of his countrie, but fearing also least the enemie following the traine of his victorie, would pursue and set upon him, if hee made long stay; and doubting least the Ligurians likewise, seeing Italie abandoned of the Carthaginians, would revolt and turne unto those, under whos^ obedience they were like shortly to bee reduced: albeit hee had no hope that his hurt should have lesse shaking at sea by sailing,  than on land by travelling, or to find things there more handsome and readie for the cure, embarked his armie and departed. But before hee was well gotten beyond the point and lands end of Sardinia, he died of his wound aforesaid. Certaine ships also of the Carthaginians, being scattered asunder in the deepe sea, were by the Romane Armada that kept about the coasts of Sardinia surprised and bourded. These were the Acts performed both by sea and land, on that side of Italie which lieth along the Alpes.
Cn. Servilius the Consull having performed no worthie and memorable exploit, either in his province Hetruria, or in Fraunce (for thither also he went in the end) but onely that he redeemed his father Cn. Servilius and his unckle C. Luctatius, from servitude and bondage, now sixteene yeares after they had beene taken prisoners by the Boij before the village Tanetum, returned to  Rome, with his father going on the one side, and his unckle on the other: a man famous rather for his private deeds, than renowmed for any publicke and honourable act worthie of remembrance. And a bill was preferred unto the people, that it should not bee imputed for a trespasse unto Cn. Servilius, that whiles his own father (who had sitten upon the yvorie chaire of estate) was living (and that unknowne to him) hee had been both Tribune and Aedile also of the Commons

against the lawes in that behalfe provided. This Act being passed and graunted, he returned againe  into his province. Vnto Cn. Servilius the Consull who was in the Brutians countrey, there revolted Consentia, Vffugum, Vergae, Besidiae, Hetriculum, Syphaeum, Argentanum, Dampetia, and many other peeces of small accoumpt, upon occasion that they saw the Carthaginians war to waxe cold and feeble. The same Consull fought a battaile with Anniball in the territorie of Croton: the manner of which fight is darkly and obscurely reported. For Valerius Antias saith there were slaine five thousand of the enemies: a thing of such consequence, that either it was meere impudencie to forge it, or great negligence to overslip it. But the truth is, from that time forward nothing was done by Anniball in Italie: for to him also there came from Carthage embassadors to cal him home into Affrick, even about the same time that the others did unto Mago. And as it is reported of him, all the whiles that he gave audience to the embassadors, he gnashed  and grinded his teeth, he kept a sighing and groning, yea and hardly could forbeare to shed teares. After they had delivered their message according to their commission, Yea mary, qd. he, now they go no more about the bush with me, by covert meanes and under hand to send for me home, but openly are seene in the action: who all this while in suffering no supplies either of men or money to be transported over unto me, sought to draw and hale me from hence. Well then, It is not the people of Rome so often by me deffeated and put to flight, that hath by armes overcome Anniball, but it is the Senate of Carthage, with their backbiting and malicious envie. Neither will P. Scipio rejoyce so much, and beare himselfe proud upon this disgrace of my returne, as Hanno will; who with the ruine and subversion of Carthage, hath overthrowne our house and familie, when by no other meanes he could effect it. Now Anniball, whose mind foregave  him that such a thing would fall out, had prepared shipping afore-hand. And therefore after he had sent away the multitude of souldiours that were of small or no service, into the townes of the Brutians countrey, under a colour and shew of garisons for defence, which townes were but few, and the same rather held in by awe and feare, than abiding in obedience for love and loyaltie, he tooke with him the whole strength and floure of his armie, and crossed over into Africk. But before he went to sea, many of the Italian nation, who refusing to follow him into Africk, had taken for sanctuarie the chappell of Iuno Lacinia, which never to that day had bene violated and broken; notwithstanding the libertie of the place, he cruelly massacred in the very temple. Seldome by report had ever any man bene knowne to leave his native soile and countrey, and depart into exile with more heavie heart, than Anniball did when he went out of his enemies  land. Oftentimes he looked back to the coasts of Italie, blaming both God and man, yea cursing himselfe and his owne life, for that he led not straightwaies upon his fresh victorie at Cannae, his souldiours embrued as they were with bloud directly even to Rome. Scipio (quoth he) had the hart to go to Carthage, who when he was Consull, had never seene in Italie the Carthaginian enemie: and my selfe, having slaine at Thrasymenus and Cannae 100000 armed men, have sitten still about Casilinum, Cumes, and Nola, wearing and decaying in strength every day more than other. In this manner he blamed himselfe, and complained of his hard hap and cursed fortune: and so he was pulled out of the possession of Italie that he held so long.
Newes came to Rome about one and the same time, that both Mago and Anniball were departed and onward on their journey: The joy of which twofold gratulation was the lesse in two  regards, both for that their owne captaines seemed to have either little courage or small force to stay them behind, and impeach them for going, considering they had expresse order from the Senate so to do: as also because they at Rome were pensife and doubtfull, what would be the issue and end of all, seeing the whole weight of the warre to beare and rest upon the shoulders of one onely Captaine and armie.
And much about this time came the Saguntine Embassadors, bringing with them certaine Carthaginian prisoners, who were taken with summes of money upon them, and had sayled into Spaine for to levie and wage men for aid. The monie they laid downe in the very port-hall or entrie of the Senate house, amounting to 250 pound weight of gold, and 800 pound weight of silver. The men they received and clapt them up fast in prison: the silver and gold both, they  delivered againe to the Embassadors, with many thanks: over and besides they gave them rewards and ships to returne againe into Spaine. Then the grave and auncient Senatours began to reason and discourse in this wise, That men naturally have lesse sense of good things than of bad; and feele not so soone their owne weale as their woe. We remember, say they, what feare,

 what fright and terrour we were put in, when Anniball passed over into Italie. Lord, what losses, what lamentable misfortunes hapned thereupon! The enemies camp was discovered and seene from the walls of the citie; what vowing, what praying was there then, both of all and some! How often in assemblies and counsels were men seene to stretch out their hands to heaven, and to utter these words and cry alowd; When will that day come? and will it never be, that we shall see Italie againe cleere of enemies, obteine repose, and flourish once more, injoying happie peace? Now at length, even at 16 yeeres end and not before, the gods have vouchsafed us this blessing; and no man saith a word, nor maketh a motion of thanksgeving to their divine majestie therfore. And surely, if men know not how to accept with joy and thankfulnesse a benefit when it first commeth, they will be farre short, and faile much more to remember the same when once it is  past. Hereupon they cryed out and called alowd with one voyce from all parts of the Senate-house to P. Aelius the Pretor, for to propose the matter to the court there assembled: and a decree was graunted, that for five dayes there should be solemne processions and supplications in every church and chappell before the shrines of all the gods and goddesses: and greater beasts killed for sacrifice to the number of 120.
Now when Laelius and the embassadors of Masanissa had their dispatch and were dismissed, tidings were brought that the Carthaginian embassadors comming to the Senate to sue for peace, were seene at Puteoli, and that from thence they would travaile by land unto Rome. Wherupon it was thought good unto the Senat, that Laelius should be sent for againe and called back, that he might be present, and at the hearing of the treatie of peace. Q. Fulvius Gillo a Lieutenant  of Scipio had the conducting of the Carthaginian embassadors to Rome: who being forbidden to set foot within the citie, were lodged without in the great hall named Villa Publica, and had audience given them of the Senate, assembled in the temple of Bellona. Who made in manner the very same speech that they had before unto Scipio, cleering the whole State and their publick counsell, and laying all the fault and blame upon Anniball for making warre: saying that he had no warrant, commission, and commaundement from the Senat to passe over the Alpes, no nor so much as over Iberus: and that of his owne head he tooke armes; and warred not upon the Romanes only, but also upon the Saguntines. In consideration whereof, he that would esteeme all things aright, and weigh the truth indeed, must needs judge, that for anything done by the Senat and people of Carthage, the auncient league made with the people of Rome, hath  continued to that day sound and entier. And therefore nothing els had they in commission to sue for and request, but that they might mainteine and remaine still in that accord and league which was last concluded and contracted with Luctatius the Consull. Now when the Pretor according to an auncient custome of their forefathers, had given libertie to whomsoever that would, for to put Interrogatories unto the Embassadors; and the elder sort, such as had ben present at the making of the capitulations and covenants concerning the said peace, had demaunded of them, some one thing, and some another; and the Embassadors answered againe, that by occasion of their young age (for they were all in manner but young men) they remembred no such thing: the whole court from all parts thereof cryed out and said, that this was but a fraudulent and faiterous Carthaginian trick, to chuse and send such for to sue for the old peace, which  they themselves could not remember. And when the Embassadors were voided out of the Senate-house, and the opinions of the LL. demaunded, M. Livius was of this mind, that Cn. Servilius the Consull, who was the neerer of the twaine, should be sent for, that the treatie of peace might in his presence be consulted upon. For since that there could not lightlie a weightier matter than it was, come afore them to be determined of, he thought it stood not with the honor and reputation of the people of Rome, that such a matter should be debated of, without the personall presence of both, or at the leastwise of one of the Consuls. Qu. Metellus, (who three yeares before had beene Consull and Dictatour) spake to the cause in this manner. For as much as P. Scipio by diffeating and putting to the sword whole armies, by wasting and spoiling the territories of the enemies, had driven them to this exigent, that in  humble sort they came to crave peace: and considering that no man living was better able to judge with what mind and intent they sued for this peace, than himselfe, who warred even before the gates of Carthage; therefore no mans advise was to be heard, but onely his, either to accept of the said peace in question, or to reject it. M. Valerius Laevinus, who had beene twise Consull argued, That they were spyes and not embassadours, who now were come; and that it

were a good deed to command them to avaunt and be packing out of the confines of Italie; and  to send with them certaine men of purpose to guard them to their ships; yea, and to write unto Scipio to go forward with his warres, and not to slake one jote. Laelius and Fulvius added moreover and said, That Scipio laid this especially for his ground, to hope there might be peace, in case Anniball and Mago were not called out of Italie: As for the Carthaginians, they would make semblaunt of any thing whatsoever, so long as they expected those leaders and those armies: but afterwards without remembrance of covenants, were they never so fresh and new, yea and without respect of all the gods, they would (no doubt) maintaine and continue the warres. In these regards, they inclined the rather to Laevinus, and approoved his opinion. So the embassadours were sent away without any peace obtained, or certaine answer returned unto them.
Much about that time, Cn. Servilius the Consull, who made full reckoning that he should  have the honour of bringing Italie into quietnes, made pursute after Anniball, as if he had bene coursed and driven out by him; and first sailed over into Sicilie, and then into Affricke. Which beeing commonly noised and bruted abroad at Rome, at the first the LL. of the Senat thought good, that the Pretour should write to the Consull to this effect, That the Senate judged it meet and reason for him to returne into Italie. But afterwards upon the Pretour his words, saying that the Consull would set nought by his letters, P. Sulpitius was created of purpose Dictatour, who by vertue of that more soveraigne rule and authoritie, called the Consull peremptorily home into Italie. And the rest of that yeare, he together with M. Servilius the Generall of the horse, spent in progresse and visiting all the cities of Italie which in time of warre had shaken off their alleageance, and in taking due knowledge of all their causes and reasons severally.
During the time of the truce, there set forth also out of Sardinia from Lentulus the Pretour, an hundred hulkes laden with victuals, togither with a convoy and guard of twentie gallies of warre, and passed over into Affricke safe, both from the daunger of the enemie, and also from the perill of tempests by sea. But Cn. Octavius as he was in his voyage from Sicilie, with a fleet of two hundred hulkes and thirtie strong gallies, had not the like good speed. For as hee sailed (well neare) within the kenning of Affricke, first hee was calmed: then the wind turning South, troubled and disordered his ships, yea and scattered them over the sea one from another. Himselfe with his gallies of war wrought against the wind and the current, and with exceeding toile and labour of the ore-men, doubled the point of the cape of Apollo, and there in the bayrode at anker: but the hulks for the most part fell with the Iland Aegimurus (which shutteth up the foreland, and lyeth in the very mouth of that creeke from the sea wherein Carthage standeth) almost ten leagues from the citie: and some were driven by wind to a place called the Hote waters, over against the citie. All this happened within the sight of Carthage. And therefore out of all parts of the citie, was great running to the market place. The magistrates assembled the Senate; the people at the entrie and porch of the councell house, called upon the Senatours and cryed out, That they should not let slippe so great a bootie out of their eyes and hands. Some alledged against them, the fidelitie of treating for peace: others also objected the faithfull promise of truce (the tearme wherof was not yet expired.) But at last, when both Senate and people were entermingled all in manner together, agreed it was by a generall consent, that Asdruball with a fleet of fiftie saile, should cut over to Aegimurus; and so from thence rallie and gather  together the Romane ships dispersed along the coasts and the havens. And the hulkes (abandoned of their marriners that were fled, first from the Iland Aegimurus, and afterwards from the Hote waters aforesaid) were drawen and towed as it were at the tailes of their owne ships to Carthage. As yet the embassadours were not returned from Rome, neither knew they what the resolution of the Romane Senat was concerning war or peace, nor the day of the truce determined. Scipio taking the wrong and indignitie to be more hainous, in that the hope of peace and the assurance of truce should be violate by them first, who sought both for the one and the other; presently dispatched in embassage to Carthage M. Bebius, L. Servilius, and L. Fabius; who being by the concourse and running together of the people, neare to a shrewd turne and mischiefe; and foreseeing their returne like to be as dangerous, craved of the magistrates (who saved them  from violence) to send certaine ships to waft them. So they were allowed two gallies called Tritemes, which having conducted them untill they were arrived at the river Bagrada, where they were within sight of the Romane campe, returned backe againe to Carthage. Now the Carthaginian Armada lay in the rode before Vtica. From thence there made out three gallies

 of foure rankes of oares; whether it were upon some secret direction from Carthage so to doe, or that Asdruball the Admirall of the fleet, upon his owne head adventured so foule an action (the state having no hand therin, and therfore not to be blamed) and espying the Roman galley of five bankes of oares past the point of the cape, sodainly assailed her from the maine sea. But neither could they invest and strike her with their beake heads, making so good way, and shifting so well by reason of her swiftnes; neither could the armed souldiers from out of their lower vessels boord her, being so tall a ship over them. And right valiantly shee defended her selfe so long as her shot lasted; which when it once failed, and that shee had no other means to helpe her selfe, but onely the nearenes of the land and a number of souldiers who from the camp were run to the shore, with the losse only of the ship all the passengers escaped safe to land.
 Thus the truce being doubtlesse broken with one wickednes comming in the necke of another, Laelius and Fulvius came in the verie nicke from Rome, together with the Carthaginian embassadours; unto whome Scipio having given his word, that although the Carthaginians had not onely broken the faith and assurance given of the truce, but also the law of armes, in abusing and evill in treating the persons of his embassadors, yet himselfe would do nothing to them unworthie either the order of the people of Rome, or unfitting his owne manner and custome, dismissed the Embassadours, and made preparation for warre.
When Anniball now approched the land of Affricke, one of the mariners was commanded to climbe up to the top of the mast to discover the coast, and to see what part they were directed to: and when he made answere and said, That the prou made head upon a place called, the Ruinate  sepulchre; he misliked the osse and presage of that place, and commaunded the pilot to passe by, and leave it: and so he put his fleet within the bay of Leptis, and there he set his armie ashore. And these were the affaires of Affricke for that yeare. The actes ensuing, reach to that yeare, wherein M. Servilius Geminus, who then was Generall of the horse, and T. Claudius Nero were made Consuls. But in the end of the former yeare, when the embassadours of the confederate cities of Greece made complaints, that their territories were wasted by the kings garrisons: and when they sent their embassadors into Macedonia, for ^ demand satisfaction and restitution, they could not be admitted unto the king, nor have audience: and moreover, they gave intelligence, that there were foure thousand armed souldiers transported over into Spaine, under the conduct of Sopater, to aid the Carthaginians; and certaine summes of money likewise sent  with them: the Senate gave order that embassadours should be addressed unto the king, to give him to understand, that the LL. of the Senate tooke all this to be done against the tenure and forme of the league. So there were sent C. Terentius Varro, Cn. Manlius, and M. Aurelius. And three gallies of five course of oares they were allowed.
This was a yeare of speciall note, for a great skare-fire, whereby the publick cliffe was burnt to ashes down to the ground: also for much abundance of rain and many flouds, and exceeding cheapnesse of victuall. For besides that all Italie was open by reason of a generall peace throughout, M. Valerius Falto, and M. Fabius Buteo, Aediles of the chaire, devided the great store of corne that was sent out of Spain, among the people, street by street, and set the price atThree pence English. foure Asses the Modius. The same yeare Q. Fabius Maximus departed this life, a man of great yeeres and exceeding  old, if that be true which some writers report, that hee was Augur 42 yeeres. But certaine it is that he was a man worthie of so great and honourable a surname, yea, and if it had begun first in himselfe. He surpassed the dignities of his father, hee was equall in honor to his grandfather: Rullus his grandfather, I must needs say, had more titles of victories, and of greater battailes; but one enemie of his, Anniball, may countervaile them all, as many as they were. Howbeit, this man was counted more warie and advised, than hardie and forward: and as a man may wel doubt whether by natural disposition he loved to take leisure in all his actions, or that it was a policie of his agreeable to the warres properly then in hand; so verily nothing is more certaine than this, that as the Poet Ennius saith,
This onely man by wise delay, Restor'd our state fall'n to decay.
His sonne Q. Fabius Maximus was invested or installed Augur in his place, and for bishop in his roum (for two sacerdotal dignities he had) Ser. Sulpitius Galba was chosen. The Roman plaies were exhibited one day, and the Plebeian Games thrice wholly renued by the Aediles M. Sextius Sabinus, and Cn. Tremellius Flaccus. They both, were made Pretours; and with them C. Livius Salinator

linator, and C. Aurelius Cotts. The solemne election of the Magistrates for that yeare, whether  Cn. Servilius the Consull held, or (because of important businesie in Tuscane, about the examinations of the conspiracies there of certaine great men, by commission from the Senate, which might keepe him there) P. Sulpitius the Dictator by him nominated; it is uncertaine, by reason of the varietie and difference of writers in that behalfe.
In the beginning of the yeere next following, M. Servilius and T. Claudius, after they had assembled the Senate in the Capitoll, mooved concerning the provinces. And for as much as both of them desired Affricke, they were willing that Affricke and Italie, should bee put to the choise of a lotterie. But by the especiall travaile of Q. Metelius, the province of Affrick was neither graunted nor denied to either of them. And the Consuls were commaunded to deale with the Tribunes of the Commons, that if they thought so good, they would preferre a bill unto  the people, to know whome they would have to warre in Affricke. So all the tribes in generall gave their voices with P. Scipio. Neverthelesse, the Consuls (for so the Senat had decreed before) cast lots for the province of Affrick. Thus Affrick besell unto T. Claudius, namely that hee should faile over thither with an armada of fiftie ships, all gallies of five rankes of oares, and bee joined in equall commission with Scipio. And M. Servilius had Hetruria allotted unto him. In the same province Cn. Servilius also was to continue in goverment, in case it pleased the Senat to stay the Consull in the cittie. Of Pretours, M. Sestius by lot had the rule of Gallia, with order, that P. Quintilius Varus should make over unto him the province and two legions. And C. Livius tooke the charge of the Brutij with the two legions, which the year before were commaunded by P. Sempronius the viz-consull. Cn. Tremelius was appointed to governe Sicilie, and to receive of P. Villus  Tappulus the Pretour of the former year, that province and two legions. And ordered it was, that Villus as Propretor, should keepe in obedience and defend the coast of Sicilie with twentie ships of warre, and a thousand soldiors; and that from thence M. Pomponius should in the twentie ships behind embarke one thousand and five hundred soldiors, and transport them over to Rome. Vnto C. Aurelius Cotta was the civile jurisdiction of the cittie assigned. All the rest continued still in their governement, and had their commissions newly signed, according as they had either provinces or armies under their hand. And with sixteene legions and no more, was the State of Rome that yeare maintained. Now to the end they miight begin all enterprises in the name of the gods and proceed therein with their grace and favour, order was given, that the Consuls before they went out to warre, should set forth those games and plaies, and sacrifice those greater beasts which  T. Manlius Dictator, in the yeere that M. Claudius Marcellus, and T. Quintius were Consuls, promised by solemne vow, in case the Commonweale continued for five yeers following, in the same good estate as then it was. So the games were exhibited in the great Cirque or shew-place foure daies togither, and the sacrifices slaine accordingly, as they were vowed to the gods.
But all this whiles, as mens hope, so their fear also encreased daily more and more, whiles they could not certainely resolve with themselves, whether they had more cause to rejoice, that Anniball after sixteene yeares had abandoned Italie, and left the possession thereof free unto the people of Rome; or to be afraid, for that he had passed over into Affricke with the safetie of his armie. For why? the place was onely chaunged, and the daunger all one. And surely Q. Fabius late deceased, no vaine prophet of so great a perill and hazard, was wont to foretell, and this was  ever his song, That Anniball would be a more daungerous enemie at home in his owne countrie, than he had been abroad in a forraine land. And Scipio should find, that he had to deale neither with Syphax (king of a rude, untaught, and barbarous countrie, who was wont to lead armies of stale groomes, and little better than waterbearers and campe-slaves to keepe one place and not remove) nor with Asdruball his father in law, a captaine of all others most light of foot, and rediest to run away, ne yet with tumultuarie armies taken up in hast and raised suddainly, consisting of a rable of rusticall clowns and peasants armed by the halfes; but with Anniball, born in manner within the campe, yea and in the roiall pavillion of his father; a most valiant captaine, bred and brought up amongst armed men: who long agoe was no sooner a child, but he was a souldiour, and before he came to the prime and flower of youth, became a Generall: who growing to  be old in a continuall course and traine of victories, hath filled Spaine and Fraunce from the one side to the other, and Italie from the Alpes to the narrow seas, with the marks and memorable monuments of worthie and noble exploits; and leadeth still an armie of as long standing and continuance in warfare as himselfe, hardened and beaten to endure all those things which hardly one

 would beleeve, men could abide and suffer, embrued and bathed a thousand times in the bloud of Romanes, and carrying with him the spoiles not of common souldiors onely, but also of most brave Generals themselves. Scipio should bee sure to encounter and meet in battaile those who with their owne hands had slaine Pretours, and killed Consuls of Rome; all bedight and goodly to be seene in murall and vallare coronets, for their good service in skaling of walls, and mounting over rampiers; those I say who at their pleasure have raunged through the woon camps and forced cities of the Romanes. Neither at this day have the magistrates of the people of Rome so many bundels of rods, with axes borne before them, as Anniball hath taken from the Romane Generals whom he hath slaine, and can if hee list shew and carrie before him. Casting and tossing these doubts and feares in their mind, they themselves encreased their owne care, and doubled  their dread in this point also, that wheras they were wont for certaine yeares to make warre in sight of home, in diverse and sundrie places of Italie, with a lingering kind of hope, without regarding any issue therof like presently to ensue; now Scipio and Anniball, captains matched together (as one would say) to make a finall end and triall of all, had set all mens minds awork to expect the event now or never. And even they also who had reposed exceeding confidence, and grounded no small hope of victorie in Scipio, the more their spirits were amused upon it, and desirous to see a speedie effect, the greater was their care and doubt of the sequele. The Carthaginians for all the world were likewise affected and disquieted in mind. One whiles, beholding Anniball, and considering his noble and worthie acts, they repented that they sued for peace. Another while againe, when they looked backe and remembred, how twice they had beene defeated in  battaile, Syphax slaine, themselves driven out of Spaine, chased and hunted out of Italie, and all this by the valor and policie of one man Scipio; they trembled for feare of him, as if he were the fatall captaine borne for their ruine and utter destruction.
Now by this time was Anniball come as farre as Adrumetum; from whence, after hee had bestowed some few daies in refreshing his sea-sicke souldiers, he was roused with fearefull posts that brought newes, how all about Carthage was full of enemies and hostilitie: whereupon he made long journies till hee came to Zama. This Zama is a towne distant from Carthage five daies journey. From thence he sent out espyals, who being taken by the Romane warders, were brought before Scipio, and he caused them to be delivered unto the Tribunes or Marshals, with commandement, that they should be led throughout the camp; and suffered without all feare, to  see whatsoever they desired. And when he had asked of them whether they had perused and considered every thing to their content, and enough to serve their turne; he sent them backe againe to Anniball, with a safe conduct to accompanie them. Anniball tooke no pleasure at all in hearing of any thing that they reported: for (among other particulars) they brought newes that Masanissa chanced that verie day to come thither with sixe thousand foot and foure thousand horse. But most of all, hee was troubled anst cast downe with the resolute confidence and assurance of the enemie; which no doubt (hee thought) arose not of nothing. And therefore albeit himselfe was the onely cause of that warre, and by his arrivall had disturbed the truce concluded, and the hope of peaceable covenants; yet supposing, that a more indifferent accord might bee obtained, in case hee sued therefore while hee was entire and unfoiled, rather than after  hee were vanquished and overcome; hee addressed a messenger or pursivant unto Scipio, requesting that he might confer and commune with him. Whether he did this of his own accord, or by direction from the publicke counsell of the State, I have no reason to set downe or avouch for certaine, either the one or the other. Valerius Antias writeth, That hee was by Scipio defeated in the first battel, wherein were slaine in field 12000 armed men, and 1700 taken prisoners, whereupon himselfe in person came as embassador, with other ten Orators into the camp unto Scipio. But howsoever it was, Scipio refused not to emparle; and so, both Generals of purpose advanced forward and approched with their campes, to the end they might be neerer one to the other when they should meete in conference. Scipio made choise of a plot of ground not farre from the citie Nadagara: which as it was handsome and meete in other respects, so especially in this,  that it had a watering place within an arrow shot. Anniball tooke an hill four miles from thence, sure enough and commodious otherwise, but only that they were farre from water. In the mid way betweene they chose a plaine, open on every side, where they might discover and see all about them, that no ambush there were laid: and after they had caused their armed souldiours to retire a like distance from either partie, then came together with one truch man or interpretour

a peece,(...) not only the greatest and bravest captaines of their time, but also equall to the mightiest  kings or Emperours of realme or nation that ever had beene afore them in any age and remembrance of man. For awhile they stood one beholding the other, and said never a word, ravished and astonied with a mutuall admiration: and at last Anniball began and spake in this wise.(...) If the gods by destinies have so appointed, that I who first levied warre against the Romanes, and who so often have had the victorie as it were in mine owne hands, must needs of my selfe and mine owne motion, come now first likewise to sue for peace: glad I am and well pleased, that it is my good hap to meete with you above all other men, at whose hands I should seeke the same. And certes you also for your part among many your singular and excellent praises, may skore up this for none of the least, namely, That Anniball (unto whom the gods have vouchsafed the upperhand overso many noble captaines of the Romanes) hath yeelded  the bucklers, and geven place unto your selfe; now that you have had the honor to end this warre, more notable and renowmed at the first for your losses and overthrowes than ours: and that fortune (as it is fallen out) hath made this pretie sport with me, who at the beginning tooke armes when your father was Consull, gave him battaile first of all other Romane Generals, and am now come unarmed unto his sonne to crave peace. Verily much better it had bene, and simply the very best, that the gods had inspired into our forefathers this mind, That both you might have contented your selves with the dominion of Italie, and we likewise of Affrick. For surely, Sicilie and Sardinia both, are nothing sufficient to make amends and satisfaction, and it were but only of your part, in recompense of so many brave fleets, so many puissant armies, and so many noble captaines that yee have lost. But faults done and past may well be  blamed and reproved, when they can not be corrected and reformed. So greedie were we on both sides to conquer the lands of others, that in the meane time we have hazarded our owne. Neither had ye warre in Italie only, or we againe in Affrick alone: but both ye have seene the ensignes and armies of enemies hard at your gates, and in manner under your owne walls: and we likewise from Carthage have heard the noyse and bruit of the Romane camp. Now then, that which we have cause most to detest and abhorre, and you to wish above all other things in the world; the treatie of peace is fallen out in time of your better prosperitie, and more favourable aspect of fortune unto you. We againe are the agents therein, whom it most standeth upon and importeth that there should be peace; and who are assured, whatsoever we conclude, that the States and cities from whence we come, will approve and ratifie the same. There needs  no more but a willing mind, wel affected and enclined to those courses which tend to repose and quietnes. For mine owne part, one while age hath taught me, who am returned an old man into my countrey, from whence I came a child: another while prosperitie and adversitie both, hath so schooled me, that I would now rather be ruled by reason, than swayed by fortune. But I feare me greatly that you as well in regard of youth, as also of your continuall felicitie and fortunate traine of successe, are over-hautie and stout, for to yeeld unto any peaceable wayes. For commonly he fore-casteth no variable chaunces, who never tasted of adverse fortune. And the same are you at this day, that sometimes I was at Thrasymenus and at Cannae. You being hardly come to that age which is meete for war-service, had the charge and commaund of an armie: and looke what enterprises you tooke in hand most venterously, the same you ever exploited as happily. You pursued the vengeance of fathers and unkles death, and wan by the calamitie of your house and familie a notable name and reputation of singular vertue and pietie. Spaine full and wholy you have recovered and conquered againe: foure armies of Carthaginians you have chased from thence: no sooner were you created Consull, but when all other mens hearts failed them to defend and keepe Italie, you sailed neverthelesse hither over into Affrick: and after you had defeated heere two armies, forced and burnt in one houre two camps of your enemies, taken Syphax prisoner, a most mightie and puissant prince; wan so many cities both of his kingdome and of our dominion; you pulled me maugre my head out of Italie, whereof I had bene now sixteene yeeres possessed. Well may your hautie mind affect victorie rather than incline to peace. Full well I know of what spirit and stomack you are, more respective to grandeur and  honor, than to your good and profit. And the time hath bene, when I also had the lightsome countenance of fortune lovingly smiling and shining upon me. And were we so blessed of God as to have our right wits and perfect senses in time of prosperitie, we would consider and thinke not of things only which have hapned, but of those also that might happen. But if you

 should forget all other, I alone might serve as a sufficient example and mirror of all accidents of fortune whatsoever. For, whom not long since you either saw or might have seene encamped between the river Anio and your citie, and readie in manner to skale the walls of Rome; you see me now after the losse of my brethren, two right valiant warriours and most renowned Generals, even here before the walls of my countrey little better than besieged, making meanes in humble manner to avert and avoid those daungers from mine owne citie, with which erewhiles I terrified yours. Well, the greatest and happiest fortune is least to be trusted, and never is it worse relying on her, than when she is so free and bountifull. Now that you flourish and we fade, whiles you are aflote and we sinke; a peace, unto you that geveth it, is a glorious and goodly matter; to us that crave it, more necessarie than honorable. Better it is yet and safer of the twaine, to enjoy  a certaine peace, than hope for a doubtfull victorie. The one lieth in your hand to effect, the other as it pleaseth the gods to dispose. Beware therefore, how in one houre you hazard the felicitie of so many yeeres. And as you consider your owne strength and forces; so thinke withall upon the power of fortune: set before your eies the alternative course of Mars in warre. You shall see armour and the edge of the sword; you shall see the bodies of men as well of one side as the other: and no where lesse than in warre do events answere to our hope and expectation. And makefull accoumpt of this, that you shall not gaine so much overplus of honor, (if haply you should win a field) above that which by graunting a peace you may presently have in hand and be possessed of; as you shall forgo and loose of the principall, in case you should do amisse and take the foile. One houres misfortune is able to overturne all the honors and triumphant trophaees  as well past and gotten alreadie, as in future hope to be obteined. In knitting and concluding a peace, o P. Cornelius, all lieth in your power. Refuse that once and come to the triall of a battaile, you must take your hap as God shall appoint. If M. Attilius in times past being conquerour, would have graunted peace unto our forefathers at their suite and earnest petition; a rare and singular example had he afforded of vertue and felicitie, and few comparable unto him: but not having the grace to see when he was well; not able to set a gage to his prosperitie in some measure and in due time; not willing to restraine and stop the pride and hautinesse of his good fortune, the higher he was heaved, the fouler was his fall; and the more he mounted, the greater was his overthrow. It is for him (I confesse) that geveth peace, to capitulate and set downe the covenants and conditions, and not for him that craveth the same. And yet  per adventure we might not be thought unworthie, to set upon our owne heads a fine and forfeiture. We refuse not therefore but are content, That all shall be yours, for which the quarrell and warre first began: Sicilie, Sardinia, Spaine, all the Ilands whatsoever lying in the sea betweene Affrick and Italie. And wee Carthaginians holding our selves enclosed within the bounds and coasts of Affrick (since the will and pleasure of God is so) can abide to see you to rule and governe in forein lands and strange seas. I can not denie, but that you have good cause to suspect the Carthaginians for their faith and truth, whose late desire of peace and attendance about the same, was not so plaine and simple as it should have bene: Yet Scipio, take this withall; That it importeth much to the assurance of keeping and observing peace once interteined, to consider who the persons be that seeke and crave the same. And even your  owne Senatours and LL of the Counsell, as I heare say, were moved not a little to denie and reject the motion of peace, for this cause, that our embassie seemed unto them not so honourable as it ought to have bene. But now I, even I, no worse a man than Anniball, do sue for peace; which as I would not seeke, unlesse I thought it profitable; so I will interteine it in regard of that profit for which I sought it. And like as when I had once begun the warre, so long as the gods impeached and envied me not, I mainteined it so, as no man of ours had cause to be weerie thereof: so will I endevour that none shall repent of the peace obteined by my meanes. When Anniball had thus said, the Romane Generall made answere againe in this sort. I knewfull well,The ans^^^ of Scipio to Anniball o Anniball, that the Carthaginians upon the hope of your comming, have both disturbed the assurance of the present truce, and also troubled the hope of the future peace. Neither  doe you your selfe dissimule so much, in defalking all out of the former conditions and capitulations of peace, save onely those things which long since have beene
in our power and possession. But as you have a great care, that your fellow citizens should know and perceive, what heavie burdens they are by your meanes discharged and eased of; even so must I endeavour and labour, that the points which then they covenanted and agreed upon, they deduct not this day

out of the articles and conditions of peace, for the hire and reward of their falshood and treacherie. For unworthie you are to have the ouverture and possibility of any peace at all, ye seeke also, that fraud and deceit may turne to your profit and commoditie. Neither began our predecessours first to make warre for Sicilie, nor we since for Spaine. But as then the daunger wherein our allies the Mamertines stood; so now the ruine and destruction of Saguntum, mooved vs to take armes most justly, even for pity and compassion. That you began the quarrell and provoked us first, your selfe confesse, and the gods doe witnes: who, as in the former warre, they graunted and gave the issue, according to right, equitie, and justice: so they doe in this, and so they ever will. For mine owne part, I remember well, and thinke upon the frailtie of mankind, and the ticlishnes of this world: I consider also the power of fortune, and what shee is able to doe: I know likewise, that all our actions whatsoever, are subject to a thousand hazards and inconveniences. But as I would acknowledge my selfe to haue dealt proudly and outragiously, if before I passed over into Affricke, when of your selfe well nigh you abandoned Italie, when you had imbarked your armie, and came of your owne accord to seeke peace, I had then rejected you and cast you off: even so at this time, when I have haled and drawen you into Affricke by strong arme, as it were to trie an issue in law (all the hasting, all the shifting and resistance you could make to the contrarie notwithstanding) I am not bound to have any respective regard at all of you. Wherefore, if besides those points and capitulations, under which the peace at that time was like to be concluded (and what those were you know as well as I can tell you) you bring with you any recompence and amends for our ships, which being charged with victuall and munition, you tooke perforce from us in time of the cessation of armes; as also for the outrage and violence committed  upon the persons of our embassadors; there is some reason that I should consider therupon, and be advised by my counsell. But if you thinke hardly thereof also, as being thereby too sore pressed; look for battell, you that could not like of repose; provide for war, since you would abide no peace. Thus without any conclusion of accord, they left parling; and being returned to their owne companies, they related unto them, how their conference came to nothing, and all their words were but wind, and did no good: and therefore the matter was to be determined and tried by dint offword, and they to trust to that fortune which the gods had appointed for them. So soone as they were come into their campes, both of them made proclamation, that the soldiers should buckle themselves, make readie their armour, plucke up their spirits, and addresse themselves to a finall triall of the quarrell; where, if they sped well, they were to be victours not for  one day, but for ever and aye. For before the morrow next at night, they should know, whether Rome or Carthage should give lawes unto all nations of the earth. And as neither Affrick nor Italie, but the whole world shall be the prize and guerdon of the conquerours; so they whose hap were to loose the field, must make account of daunger and domage, equall to the winnings and gaine of the other. For as the Romanes had no way to escape, nor place of safe retreat, being in a strange and unknowen land; so Carthage (having laid all upon this one cast) if they now missed, made accompt that all was gone, and present destruction at hand. So the next day there advanced forward to this doubtfull and daungerous triall, two most noble and renowned captaines, of two right mightie and puissant states: two most valiant and hardie armies came forth into the field, resolute that day either to winne the spurres or loose the saddle; to gaine more  glorie to their former honour, or else to loose all that ever they had gotten. Thus therefore between hope and feare, their minds were perplexed and distracted; and beholding one while their own forces, and another while their enemies power; measuring rather by their eye, than weighing by reason their strength, they had at once presented unto them, objects of joy and content, as well as of sorow and heavinesse. And look what the soldiers themselves could not thinke upon, those things their leaders put them in mind of; suggesting unto them by way of admonition and exhortation, whatsoever was thought expedient and good. Anniball rehearsed his noble acts atchieved in Italie for the space of sixteene yeeres, he reckoned up how many Romane captains he had slaine, how many armies he had defeated and put to the sword: and ever as he met with any  souldiers of note and marke for some worthie and memorable battaile, he put them in remembrance of their honourable service and good deserts: Scipio related the conquest of Spaine, recounted the fresh foughten fields in Affricke, alledged the verie confession of the enemies; who neither for feare could doe other but seeke for peace, nor yet upon an inbred falshood imprinted in their hearts, continue long in the same. Besides he inferred the communication and speech

 of Anniball had with him in secret and apart from others: which according as hee was disposed to devise, he might turn at his pleasure to fit his purpose. And for as much as the gods had shewed unto them as they went out into the field, the same signes and tokens of birds, by direction wherof their fathers before them fought in times past before the Ilands Aegates; hee ossed and presaged that the warre was come to an end, all daungers and troubles overblowne, that the spoile and pillage of Carthage was at their devotion, and they at the point to returne home unto their countrey, their parents, wives, children, and domestical gods. And this hee spake with such a lostie gesture of his bodie, with so pleasant and lovely a countenance withall, that a man who had seene him, would have thought verily he had atchieved the victorie alreadie. Then he embattailed first his Hastati (or speares) in the vaward; behind them the Principes; and the rereward  he guarded and fortified with the Triarij. Neither marshalled he whole cohorts thrust thick and close together, in the head of the battaile before their ensignes, but divided them into squadrons, distant a pretie way asunder one from the other: to the end there might be roume and space to receive the elephants of the enemies, that they should not breake the arraies and rankes. As for Laelius (whom he had emploied before as lieutenant, but that yeare in qualitie of a Questor by a speciall order and direction from the Senat, and not by choice of lot) him with the Italian Cavallerie he put in the left point; and Masanissa with the Numidian horsemen in the right. The open waies and void spaces betweene the squadrons aforesaid, placed in the front before the ensigns, hee filled with the Velites or Iavelotiers, who at that time were light armed souldiers; with this commandement, that presently upon the violent charge given by the elephants, they should either  retire behind the files, or els runne to a side, both on the right hand and the left, and joyne close to the formost ranks, and make the elephants way to run upon their shot from the one side and the other. Anniball to strike a terrour into the enemies, first arraunged the elephants in the front, who were in number foure score, and more than ever he had before in any battaile. Then be embattailed the aid souldiers of the Ligurians and Frenchmen, with the Baleare slingers and the Mores intermingled amongst them. In the maine battaile he placed the Carthaginians and Affricans, with the legion of the Macedonians: behind whome (leaving a little space betweene) he set in array the battailon of the Italian souldiers in the rereward for succour: and those were most part of them Brutij; who followed him more perforce and by constraint, than of any good will, when he departed out of Italie. The Cavallerie also he displaied and spred round like  wings about the two points: whereof the Carthaginians kept the right, and the Numidians the left. Sundry and divers were the exhortations throughout the armie, amongst so many men; whose language was dissonant, whose complexions far unlike, whose manners and conditions were divers, who differed in lawes and customs, whose armours were not all one, whose raiment and apparell not sutable, and finally, whose quarrell and cause of war was not one and the same. The auxiliaries and aid-soldiers fed themselves with the hope of ready and present paiment and wages for the time past, yea and with a duple and triple augmentation thereof to boot, out of the spoile and pillage. The Frenchmen upon a speciall hatred of their own, and the same deeply setled, were soone kindled and enflamed against the Romans. The Ligurians, who were brought out of the rough and craggie mountains, and whose teeth watered at the fruitfull and plenteous  fields of Italie, were quickly by him mooved to hope after victorie. The Mores and Numidians he frighted with the proud and tyrannicall rule of Masanissa, under which they should ever after live. Before the Carthaginians he presented the walles of their native citie, their houses and house gods, the sepulchres and tombes of their ancestors, their children and parents, yea and their timorous and fearefull wives: hee set before their eies either finall destruction of all those things and slaverie of their persons, or else the empire and soveraigne dominions of the whole world: and no meane betweene these extremities either of feare or hope.
When as the Generall was most busie thus in exhorting the Carthaginians and the captains of the straungers, amongst the souldiours of their owne nations, and that for the most part by meanes of interpretors, intermingled for the same purpose with them; the trumpets sounded,  and the hornes blew from the Romane hoast. And such a wonderfull shout arose from thence, that the Elephants turned upon the Mores and Numidians of their owne side, especially in the left point of the battaile. Whome Masanissa seeing once affrighted, hee soone redoubled their feare; and riding upon them with a hote charge, laid naked the battaillon of footmen on that side, and cleane without the aid of their Cavallerie. Howbeit, some few of the Elephants

driven without feare full upon the enemie, made foule worke among the rankes of the light armed  Velites, and overthrew a number of them, not without many a wound and much hurt done to themselves. For the Velites leaping againe nimblie to the squadrons, after they had made way for the beasts, fearing they should bee troden underfoot by them, let flie their javelines at them from both sides, lying open as they did like butts to the shot on either hand. Neither lost they any time, who were in the vauntguard before the ensignes, nor gave over flinging their darts at them, untill they were driven by a voley of shot lighting upon them from all parts, cleane out of the Romane battaile: and then they turned head also upon the very horsemen of the Carthaginians in their owne right point, and forced them to run away. Laelius for his part, seeing the enemies in disarray and sore troubled, charged upon them with his horses, and encreased their fright. So as now the Carthaginian battaillon was disfurnished and stript of their horsemen on both  wings. By which time the Cavallerie joined battaile, whose hope was now quailed and strength abated, and therefore not able to make their parts good. Besides another thing there was, a small matter to speake of, but yet in fighting-time and in the very medley, of great consequence and importance, The shout and crie from the Romans was ever alike and consonant in all parts, and therefore the greater and more terrible; but the enemies made dissonant noises, according as they differed in language, being as they were, of many and sundrie nations. The manner of the Romanes fight was sure and stedfast, by reason of the peise of their owne bodies, and the weight of their armour, bearing still, and preasing hard upon the enemies: but they on the other side, shewed more swiftnesse and agilitie, than force and violence. And therefore at the very first shocke the Romanes incontinently enforced their battaillon to recule and lose their  ground. Afterward they fell to shouldering and knocking them with the pikes and bosses of their bucklers: which done, they set foot forward a good round pace, and gained some ground of them, marching on still, and no man seemed to make head against them; whiles they that were hindmost in the files, perceiving once that battaillon to goe on and win ground, still put forward the formost, which was the very thing that availed much, and was of great efficacie to put the enemies to flight. But the second battaillon which consisted of Africanes and Carthaginians, were so farre from seconding and upholding the auxiliarie straungers thus dismarching; that contrariwise, for feare least the Romanes by killing them in the forefront (who stood to it lustily and made resistance) should come as farre as to them behind, they likewise reculed and gave backward. Whereupon the aid-souldiours also suddainely shewed their hin-parts  and turning their face upon their owne fellowes: some of them retired for refuge into the second battaillon; others fell to killing of them that would not receive them within their rankes: and good reason they had, for as a while before they had no helpe at all of them, so then they were altogether excluded and shut out from them. So as now the Carthaginians had to deale at once in two medlies shuffled together, whiles they were compelled to close and come to handfight, both with their enemies, and also with their owne fellowes. Yet notwithstanding, for all they were either so affrighted, or so angrie with them, receive them they would not in no hand into their battaillon: but keeping their rankes and files close together, they cast them ato side to the wings and the void ground without the place of conflict, and all because they would not intermingle any souldiors thus skared upon running away and many wounds, with that battaillon which stood still sure  ynough, and as yet unfoiled. But the place where a little before the auxiliaries were raunged, was so full of slaine bodies, and weapons and armour thrumbled one upon another, that the Romanes had welneere more adoe to passe that way now, than they should have had through the preasse of the enemies standing thicke together. And therefore the formost of the Hastati following after the enemies, every one as well as he could over the heapes of bodies and armour on the earth, and through the slipperie filth of the bloud, made a pelmell of their own ensignes, and confusion of their rankes. Whereupon the ensignes also of the Principes began to wave, when they saw the battaile afore them so wandering and inconstant. Which Scipio when hee once perceived, commaunded in all hast to sound the retreat unto the Hastati: and when hee had withdrawne as many of them as were wounded and hurt, and bestowed them in the rereward, hee  brought the Principes and the Triarij to the out-wings and flankes thereof; to the end, that the middle battaillon of the Hastati should bee more sure and strong. By this meanes there began a new medley. For now were they come to their verie enimies indeed; such as for armour and weapons of all sorts, for practise and experience of warfare, for fame and renowne of

 worthie exploits, and last of all for greatnesse either of hope or perill, were equall and comparable unto them. But both in number and also in courage, the Romans were superiour, for that alreadie they had discomfited the Cavallerie, put to flight the elephants, beaten back the vaward, and were readie now to encounter with the maine battaile. Now Laelius and Masanissa having had the horsemen in chase a good way, whom they had compelled to flie as is beforesaid, returned in good time, and charged hotely upon the taile of the enemies battaile. And this assault of theirs it was,
Anniball defeated by Scipio that strucke the stroke, this did the deed and amazed the enemies. Many of them were environned and killed in the place, many fled and were scattered over the plains and open fields, and by the horsemen who had taken up all the avenues, and raunged all about, were caught up here and there, and so slaine. Of Carthaginians and their Allies, were killed thatday above  twentie thousand, and welneere as many taken prisoners: of militarie ensignes there were gotten a hundred thirtie three, and eleven Elephants besides, alive. Of the conquerours there died about two thousand. Anniball with some few horsemen made shift to escape out of the tumult and heat of the execution, and fled toOr Adrumentum, (...), according to Mercator. Adrumentum, having assaied and tried all meanes possible, both in the very conflict, and also before the battaile, ere he departed and left the fight. And this praise and commendation he woon even by the confession of Scipio himselfe, and all others that were expert warriours, that with singular skill that day he ordered the battell, and marshalled the field. For the Elephants he had placed in the forefront, whose adventurous force and intollerable violence in giving the onset, might empeach the Romans from following their colours, and keeping their arraies; the onely thing wherein theyreposed their greatest hope and confidence.  Then, before the maine battaile of the Carthaginians, he set the auxiliaries and aid-souldiours, of purpose, that being a confused rable and medley of all sorts of nations, such as were not bound by alleageance, but tied onely by gaine and wages, should have no libertie to retire themselves, and escape by running away: who also, as the forlorne hope, bearing the furious heat of the first brunt, might wearie the enemies with charging upon them, and if they did no other good, yet with receiving many a wound in their bodies dull and turne the edge of the enemies sword. After this, in the battel, where all his hope was, he placed the Carthaginian and Africane soldiors; that being otherwise in all things els equall to the enemies, they might in this regard have the ods, in that they were to fight with them wearied and wounded, when they themselves were in heart and lustie. As for the Italians, who also were devided from the rest by a good space betweene, he removed  farre off into the rereward, as doubtfull whether they were freinds or enemies. Anniball having done this doubtie deed and worke, as it were for the last proofe of his vertue and valour, fled to Adrumetum, and was from thence sent for to Carthage: whither hee returned in the sixe and thirtith yeer, after that he first departed thence a very child. Where in the Counsell house he confessed and said, That overcome he was not only in a battell once, but also in the main war for ever hereafter: protesting in plain tearms, that now there was no other way but one to save themselves, and that was peace, if they could obtaine it.
Scipio immediatly after this battaile, having forced by assault and rifled the enemies camp, returned with a huge bootie to the sea and his ships, being advertised afore by a messenger that P. Lentulus was arrived at Vtica with five ships of warre, and a hundred hulks laden with provision  of all kinds of victuall. And supposing it good pollicie now that Carthage was troubled and throughly affrighted, to come upon them with all terrour on every side: so soone as he had dispatched Laelius away to Rome, with tidings of this victorie, hee commaunded Cn. Octavius to lead the legions by land against Carthage. Himselfe in proper person, after hee had joined this new fleet of Lentulus, unto the old Armada of his owne, weighed anker and departed from Vtica, and sailed directly to the haven of Carthage. Hee was not farre from thence, when there met him a ship of the Carthaginians, garnished with insules, ribbands, and white flags of peace, and beset with branches of Olive; wherein were ten Oratours embarked, the best men of the citie, sent by the advise and motion of Anniball to crave peace. Who as they approched the hin-decke and poupe of the Admirall ship, put forth the vailes and tokens of suppliants, praying and beseeching  the protection and mercie of Scipio. Who had no other answere made them, but that they should repaire to Tunes, whether hee intended to remove. Then himselfe after hee had well viewed the situation of Carthage, not so much to have the full knowledge thereof at this present, as to terrifie the enemies, returned to Vtica, whether he had called backe Octavius also. As hee marched forward from thence toward Tunes, he had intelligence given him, that Vermina the sonne

of Syphax was comming to aid the Carthaginians with a power of more horsemen than footemen: whereupon, part of the armie together with the whole Cavallerie was sent: whereof the light horse and vantcurriers charging the vaward in their march, after a light skirmish discomfited the Numidians: and having stopped all passages every way with the horsemen, so as they could not get out and flye, there were upon a fifteene thousand men of them slaine, 1200 taken prisoners, 1500 Numidian horses also were gotten from them alive, and 72 militarie ensignes. The young Prince himselfe in the mids of the tumult and conflict, with some few escaped. Then encamped Scipio neere Tunes, in the same place where he lay before: and thither repaired unto him thirite embassadors from Carthage. And they verily, as they were in harder case and greater distresse, made much more pitifull entreating than before; but in their audience found lesse favour and mercie by a great deale, for their late treacherie and falshead so fresh in remembrance. Now albeit when they were set in counsell, all of them had just cause to be angrie, and thereupon were provoked to destroy and rase Carthage: yet upon better advisement and consideration, how great and difficult an enterprise, and what a long peece of service it was to besiege a citie so strong and so well fortified: and for that Scipio himselfe was troubled in mind with the expectation of a successour, who should come to win the credit and honor of finishing the war, which indeed was gotten by the travaile and hazard of another, all their hearts were turned and enclined to peace. The morrow after the Oratours were called againe before them; and after they had bene well checked, rebuked, and plainely told of their treacherie, and warned withall, that after so many losses and overthrowes which they had received, they should now learne to be wise, and at length beleeve that there were gods in heaven, and that an oath was to be regarded, these conditions  of peace were tendered and offered unto them. Imprimis, it was capitulated, That they might live free, according to the forme of their owne laws: Item, What cities, what territories (and within what bounds and limits) they held and were possessed of before the warre began, the same they might keepe still. Item, That Scipio and the Romanes from that day forward should not wast and spoile the countrey. Item, That the Carthaginians should deliver all renegate traitours, all fugitive persons, all captives and prisoners, yea, and yeeld unto them all ships of warre with brasen heads, above ten triremes or galeis of three ranks of oares. Item, That they should put into their hands all those Elephants which they had alreadie tamed and manned, and should breake and tame no more of them. Item, They should make warre neither in Affrick, nor without Affrick, but by order and warrant from the people of Rome. Item, That they should make restitution and  amends to Masanissa for all harmes, and enter into league with him. Item, That they should find come and money for the maintenance of the aid-souldiors, untill their embassadors were returned from Rome: yea and tender paiment of ten thousand talents of silver by even portions in fiftie yeares. Item, That they should put in a hundred hostages at the pleasure of Scipio, and none of them to be either under fourteene yeeres of age, or above thirtie. Last of all, they would grant a truce upon this condition, That the ships which were taken during the time of the former cessation of armes, should be restored back againe, with all things els that were therein: otherwise, no truce for the present, nor hope of peace hereafter. These articles and conditions the embassadors were willed to returne home with all. Which after they had related in the generall assemblie of the people, Gisgo mounted up the pulpit to dissuade peace, and had audience  geven him with great applause of the multitude; who as they were heartlesse and unmeet for warre, so they were as peevish and unruly, and could not long continue in repose. Heereat, Annibal took great indignation, and was highly displeased, that in such a time, those things should either be delivered or heard; and he made no more ado, but stepped to Gisgo, laid hand upon him, and pulled him down from the pue out of which he spake: whereat the people were moved and grumbled in great discontent, to see so strange a sight and unusuall, in a free citie. Then Anniball, as he was a meere martiall man, and could not skill of civile affaires, nor well away with these citizens libertie. I went, quoth he, from you when I was but nine yeeres old, and now after 36 yeeres I am come againe. All militarie skill and knowledge, which fortune sometime in my  private matters, and otherwhiles in publick affaires, hath taught me from my childhood, me thinks I have learned sufficiently: mary, for the rights and priviledges, for the lawes, customes and fashions of the citie and the common hall, I must be informed and instructed by you. Thus having pleaded ignorance for his excuse, he discoursed at large of peace, arguing how reasonable and equall, yea and how necessarie it was. The greatest point of difficultie in all the capitulations

 ministred unto them was this, That touching the things abovesaid which were taken during the abstinence of armes, there was nothing now forth-comming and to be seene but the bare vessels; and no easie matter was it to seeke up the rest. Now when as they that gainsaid the peace were convinced and put downe by reason, agreed it was, that the ships should be redelivered, and the men likewise be sought out and found: as for all the rest that was wanting, there should an estimate be made according to the value, at the discretion of Scipio, and so the Carthaginians to make all good in money. Writers there be that have delivered, how Anniball presently from the field sped him to sea, and there finding a ship readie prepared for him, streightwayes embarked, and went directly to king Antiochus: Also, when Scipio demaunded above all other things that Anniball should be yelded into his hands, answere was made, that Anniball was not in Affrick. After that the embassadorswere returned to Scipio, the Questours or Treasurers were commaunded to draw an extract according to their bookes upon record, of all such things as were in the ships, and apperteined to the citie: and looke what belonged to private persons, the owners thereof were willed to declare and testifie. In consideration and recompense whereof, there was a summe of money set downe, amounting to 25000 pound weight of silver, and the same to be paid presently out of hand by the Carthaginians. Thus a truce was graunted to them for three moneths: with this clause annexed over and besides, That during the said terme they should send their embassadours to no other place but only to Rome: and what embassadours soever came to Carthage, they should not let them depart before they had certified the Romane Generall both who they were, and what their message and errand was. Then  with the Carthaginian embassadors were sent to Rome L. Veturius Philo, M. Martius Ralla, and L. Scipio, brother to the Generall. At that time there came such store of graine and victuals out of Sicilie and Sardinia, and thereby corne was so cheape, that the merchant was faine to leave corne behind him to satisfie the shipmen and marriners for the portage and carriage thereof.
Now there had been much trouble and fear at Rome upon the first news and al'arme, that the Carthaginians had taken arms againe: and T. Claudius had commission to conduct a fleet with all speed into Sicilie, and from thence to passe over into Affrike: likewise the other Consull was commaunded to stay still at Rome, untill it were certainely knowne in what terms all matters stood in Affrike. But T. Claudius went but slowly to worke, either in preparing and rigging an armada,  or in putting it to sea; because the LL. of the Senat were of opinion, that as touching the peace and the conditions thereof, it was rather at the disposition of Scipio than of the Consull. Moreover, there were certaine prodigious signs reported even presently before the very rumour of the foresaid rising and insurrection, which caused men to feare greatly. At Cumes, the circle and compasse of the sunne appeared lesse: and it rained a good shewre of stones. Also in the territorie of Velitre, the earth setled and sunke, and made huge hollow chinks, in so much as trees were quite swallowed up under the ground. At Aticia the market-place and the shops all about, likewise at Frusino the wall of the citie in divers places, yea and the gate, were smitten with lightning from heaven: and in mount Palatine it rained stones. This wondrous sight last rehearsed, was expiat after the ancient custome, by keeping a Novendiall sacrifice and feast for nine daies;  the rest by killing of greater sacrifices. Among all, there were unusual deluges and inundations of waters, which troubled the minds and consciences of men: for the Tyber so swelled and rose so high, that by reason that the shew-place of the Circus was overflowne, preparation was made for the setting forth of the games Apollinares, without the gate Collina, neere the chappell of Venus Erycina. But vpon the very day when the plaies should be exhibited, it grew to be so fair weather of a sodain, that the pageant and pompous traine of the shew, which was a going to the gate Collina, was called backe and conveied into the Circus; and word brought, that the water was fallen and gone cleane out from thence: so the people were more joious, and the pastimes celebrated with greater resort, for that the usuall and ordinarie place served againe for the solemnitie to be performed.
Claudius the Consull at last departed from the citie of Rome, and went to sea; where betwene the havens of Cossa and Lauretum, he was overtaken with a terrible and fearefull tempest that arose and put him in exceeding feare. From thence he came to the Populonij, and there stayed untill the tempest was overblowne and gone. Then hee fell with the yleElba Ilua, and from Ilua hee sailed to Corsica, and from Corsica he passed over to Sardinia; where, as he doubled the point

and was passing the race of the mountaines called ^ Mo^e^^.Insani, there arose a farre more cruell ghust, and in places of more perill and hazard, which scattered the fleet. Many of the ships were weatherbeaten and sore shaken, many lost their tackling quite, yea and some were crackt and split. Thus the Armada being much tossed and torne, arrived at length at Carales; where, whiles the ships were drawne up into the docke to drie land, and there a repairing, the winter came upon them, and the yeare turned about. And so T. Claudius (as a private person, by reason that no man renewed his commission for a farther time) brought the Armada backe to Rome. But M. Servilius because he should not be called home to the citie for the solemne election of magistrates, after he had declared Dictatour, Cn. Servilius Geminus, departed into his province. And the Dictatour chose P. Aclius Paetus Generall of the horsemen. Oftentimes went the writs outfor publishing of the election, but by reason of tempests it held not, nor was performed. And therefore  when the old magistrates left their office after the Ides of March, and no new substituted in their roome, the citie was cleane without any magistrates of state to sit in the yvorie chaire. L. Manlius Torquatus a bishop, that yeere died. In his place was invested C. Sulpitius Galba. The Romane games were thrice exhibited a new by L. Licinius Lucullus and Q. Fulvius, Aediles of the chaire. The clarks and scribes belonging to the Aediles, togither with their beadles and summoners, were detected for carrying forth certaine money out of the treasure and chamber of the citie: and being thereof convicted, were therefore condemned, not without some touch and discredit of Lucullus himself the Aedile. P. Aelius Tubero and L. Lectorius Aediles of the commons, for that there was some error and default in their election, resigned up their places, after they had represented the playes, and in regard thereof solemnized the feast of Iupiter, and set up besides in the Capitoll  three images made of the silver that was forfeited and raised upon the fines of the persons condemned aforesaid. The Dictatour and Generall over the horsemen, by order from the Senat exhibited the games called Cereales, to the honour of Ceres.
When the Romane embassadors and Carthaginians together, were come out of Affricke to Rome, the Senate assembled to give them audience in the temple of Bellona: where L. Velurius Philo after he had declared (to the exceeding joy of the LL. of the Senate) that they had fought a battaile with Anniball, (the last that ever the Carthaginians were like to fight) and that this grievous and lamentable warre was now come to an end, he went on still and related, that Vermina also the sonne of Syphax was vanquished and subdued; which was no small increase of the other exploits so happily atchieved. Then he was commanded to go forth from thence directly  to the assembly of the people, there to impart these gladsome newes unto the multitude. Wherupon (for exceeding joy and in token of thanksgiving) all the temples in the citie were set open, and solemne processions decreed for three daies. Now when as the embassadours of the Carthaginians and king Philip (for they also were arrived) required to have a day of audience in the Senate; the Dictatour by direction from the Senate, returned them this answere, That the new Consuls should satisfie their request. After this, was the solemne assembly holden for the election of magistrates; and Consuls were created Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and P. Aelius Paetus: for Pretours, first M. Iunius Pennus, who was allotted to have the civill jurisdiction in the citie: then M. Valerius Falto, unto whome the Brutians countrey fell by lot to governe: next, M. Fabius B^t^^, whose hap was to rule Sardinia, and P. Aclius Tubero to be L. deputie of Sardinia. Concerning  the provinces wherein the Consuls were to be emploied, it was not thought good to determine any thing, before the embassadours of king Philip and likewise of the Carthaginians, had delivered their embassages: for as they saw the end of one warre, so they foresaw the beginning of another. Cn. Lentulus the Consull was inflamed with an ardent desire of the province of Affricke: for if the warre continued, he aimed at an easie victorie: and if it were at the point of an end, he gaped at the honour of finishing the same, and hoped to have the name, That determined it was whiles he was Consull. And therfore he protested plainly, that he would suffer nothing to passe before that the province of Affricke were assigned to him. His colleague (a sober, temperate, and discrete man) gave his consent; for he saw full well, that as the contending for that glorie with Scipio, was unjust and unreasonable, so in it hee would be overmatched, and never able to import  and carrie it away from him. Q. Minutius Thermus and M. Acilius Glabrio, two Tribunes of the commons, gave out and said, That Cn. Cornelius went about to compasse that, which was commenced and assayed in vaine the yeare before by T. Claudius the Consull. For when by warrant from the Senate a bill was proposed unto the people, whome their pleasure was to nominate

 for government of Affricke, all the 35 Tribes gave their voices and awarded that province to P. Scipio. Much contention there passed and many bickerments both in Senat-house and before the people, in the debating of this question: but in the end they grew to this point, to refer all to the judgement of the Senate. So the LL. of the Senate having taken their oath (for so it was agreed upon) thus concluded and gave this order. First, that the two Consuls should either agree together betweene themselves, or else cast lots for their provinces; namely, which of them should have the rule of Italie, and who the charge of a fleet of fiftie saile. Item, to whether of them twaine befell the navie, he should saile over into Sicilie: and if peace might not be fully concluded with the Carthaginians, then to crosse over into Affricke; where the Consull should warre by sea, and Scipio by land, by vertue of the same commission and authoritie that he had alreadie.  Moreover, if the conditions of peace were accepted of both parts, that then the Tribunes of the Commons should propound unto the people, as touching their wil and pleasure, whether the Consull or P. Scipio should conclude the peace; and which of them (if the victorious armie after conquest obtained, were to be brought backe out of Affricke) should have the conduct thereof home againe. Also, if they nominated Scipio for to make the peace, and bring away the armie likewise, then the Consull should not cut over from Sicilie to Affricke. As for the other Consull who had the government of Italie, he should receive of M. Sestius the Pretour, two legions. So P. Scipio had his commission sealed againe for to remaine in the province of Sicilie, with the same forces which he there had. M. Valerius Falco the Pretour in the Brutians country was allowed those legions whereof C. Livius had the commaund the yeare before. It was furthermore  agreed, that P. Aclius the Pretour should take the two legions in Sicilie of Cn. Tremellius: and that one legion which P. Lentulus the Propretour had under his conduct, was appointed to M. Fabius for Sardinia. And M. Servilius the Consull of the former yeare, continued also in his government with his owne two legions for Hetruria. As concerning the provinces of Spaine, sith L. Cornelius Lentulus and L. Manlius Acidinus had bene there for certaine yeers, the said Consuls were to deale with the Tribunes, that if they thought it good, they should propound unto the Commons, for to know their minds whome they would appoint to govern Spaine: and that he whosoever it was, should out of two armies enroll one entire legion of Romane souldiers, and of the allies of the Latine nation make up fifteene cohorts or regiments, and with the strength of them joyntly, keepe in obedience and defend the province. Item, that L. Cornelius and L. Manlius should bring over the old souldiers into Italie. Vnto Cornelius the Consull was assigned a fleet of fiftie ships, to be deducted and drawne out of two other Armadacs; the one of Cn. Octavius which was in Affricke, the other of P. Villius which guarded the coasts of Sicilie; and to choose thereout what ships he would: and that P. Scipio should keepe those fiftie ships of warre which he had alreadie. And in case his pleasure was that Cn. Octavius should be Admirall over them still, like as heretofore; then Octavius was to continue in government for that yeare as Viz-pretour: but if he made Laelius the admirall, then Octavius should depart and come home to Rome, and bring backe with him those ships that the Viz-consull had no use or need of. M. Fabius likewise had ten gallies of service allowed him into Sardinia. And the Consuls were appointed to muster and enroll two legions of citizens, that with the power  of fourteene legions, and an hundred ships of warre, the affaires of Rome that yeare might be managed.
These things thus ordered, they began to debate in counsell about the embassadours of Philip and the Carthaginians: and thought good it was to admit the Macedonians into place for to have audience. Divers and sundrie speeches they made, whiles they laboured partly to cleere that point as touching the complaints that the embassadours sent from Rome made before the king, for the forraying and spoiling of their confederates: and partly complained themselves of the allies of the people of Rome, laying much to their charge: but farre more bitterly accusing M. Aurelius, for that he being one of the three embassadors sent unto them, staied behind and took musters of soldiers; yea and against the covenant comprised in the league, made warre  upon them, and oftentimes gave battatle unto their captains and governors in open field: partly also they demanded, that the Macedonians and their captaine Sopater, who had served in the warres of Anniball for wages, and were taken prisoners and kept bound in prison, might be enlarged and set at libertie.
To these points M. Furius, sent of purpose from Aurelius out of Macedonia, made answere

breefely in this wise, That Aurelius who was left behind, for feare that the associats of the people  of Rome, wearied with rodes and incursions into their territories and other injurious oppressions, might revolt unto the king; never departed out of the confines of the associates aforesaid, and endevoured onely, that those robbers and forraiers of the countrie should not invade and overrun their lands, and goe cleare away without any harme. As for Sopater, hee was a state and peere of the realme, and one neerely allied unto the king, who lately was sent into Affricke with foure thousand Macedonians and with money, to aid and assist Anniball and the Carthaginians. When as the Macedonians being required what they could say to these challenges, framed but a doubtfull and intricate defence, before they had well made an end they received this for their answere: That since the king sought warre, if he proceeded and went on still, hee should shortly have his hands full: but for as much as he had broken the league in two points, first in offering wrong to the  allies of the people of Rome, and molesting them by way of warre and hostilitie; and secondly in helping their enemies with men and money, they deemed thus much of it, that not only P. Scipio both did and doth well and justly, in keeping them still in prison as enemies, who bare arms against the people of Rome, and were taken captive; but also M. Aurelius performed good service to the State, and a great pleasure to the Senate, in defending the Allies of the people of Rome by force of armes, when by right of league hee could not. When the Macedonians had their dispatch, and were sent away with this heavie answere, then the Carthaginian embassadors were called in.
When they beheld their reverent age,The O^^tion of Asbubal. ^ixd^^ in the Senat of Rome.and the dignitie of their personage (for they were the best and principal men simply of their citie) then every man was fully persuaded for his own part  and said, That now they dallied no longer, but meant in deed and good earnest to crave and have peace. But the cheefe and most portly person of them all was one Asdruball, in his countrey and among his citizens surnamed Haedus, a man that ever persuaded peace, and opposed himself against the Barchine faction. And therefore he had the more credite and authoritie, when hee derived the blame from the Commonweale, and laid all the fault upon the wilfulnesse and greedieavarice of some few. Who after hee had used diverse and sundrie speeches, one while excusing and clearing the crimes, another while confessing some things objected, least if they had denied certaine truths, they should with more difficultie have obtained pardon and peace: now and then also giving the LL. of the Senate an admonition and warning by the way, to use their prosperitie and good fortune modestly and with moderation, he added moreover and said, That if the Carthaginians  would have been ruled by him and Hanno, and had been so wise as to have taken their time and the opportunitie when it was, they should themselves have given those conditions of peace, which now they are constrained to crave. But for men to bee fortunate and wise both at once, it is a rare and speciall gift, and sildome seene. And here it is that the people of Rome (qd. he) is invincible, because in prosperitie they can remember to bee wise, and to take the best way for themselves. And certes a wonder it were, if ever they should doe otherwise. For those commonly who happen to meet with some new good chevance, and have not beene used thereto before, overshoot and passe themselves too much in excessive joy, which they have not the grace to governe with sobrietie and discretion: whereas the people of Rome have ever beene accustom^d to the continuall felicitie of joious victories, in so much as they are growne into a disuse of  taking pleasure and delight in them (so common they are) and have encreased their dominion and Empire, more (in maner) by sparing and pardoning those whom they have conquered, than by the very conquest of them indeed.
The speech that the other embassadors made, was more pittiful and lamentable, whiles they recounted before the Senat from what high estate, and to how base condition they were fallen: who but a while since held by force of arms, as it were the whole world, and had nothing left them now but the bare walls of the citie of Carthage, within which they were shut up, and could see nothing either by land or sea, which they might rightfully claime as their owne. Nay the very citie it selfe and their houses, they were to enjoy no longer than the people of Rome is unwilling, and forbeareth to proceed by rigour and extremitie against the same, since there is nothing else behind to  worke upon. Now when as the LL. of the Senate seemed to encline to mercie and compassion, on, one Senator there was amongst them (by report) who upon a deepe and inveterate hatred of the Carthaginians trecherie, spake out aloud and said, What gods will they regard and swear by, in making of a new league, who have broken their oth, and taken their n^^ne in vaine whom they

 called to witnesse in the former? Marrie (qd. Asdruball) even those and no other that are so sharpe revengers and heavie enemies to the breakers of league and covenant. So when all their minds were enclined to peace, Cn. Lentulus the Consull, who had the government of the navie, opposed himselfe against the decree of the Senate for to crosse the same. Then M. Attilius, and Q. Minu^us, Tribunes of the Commons, preferred a solemne bill unto the people, in this forme: Pleaseth it you, and will you graunt, That the Senate shall resolve and determine, that peace may bee concluded with the Carthaginians? Pleaseth it you to chuse and appoint who shall be the man to make that peace, and who shall bring the armie out of Affricke? As concerning peace, the tribes every one as they were demaunded their voices, graunted affirmatively (Vis rogatis) that Scipio should conclude it, and also bring away the armie. By vertue of this Act passed by the people, the  Senate made a decree, that P. Scipto by the advise and counsell of ten Commissioners, should contract an accord with the people of Carthage, under what conditions he thought good. After this the Carthaginians rendered thankes to the LL. of the Senat, and requested that they might enter into the citie, and talke with their fellow citizens and countriemen, who had beene taken captives aforetime, and lay in the common gaole and prison. For there were amongst them some of their kinsfolke and friends, noblemen of birth and of good qualitie; others also, unto whom they were to deliver some message and credence from their kinsmen. When they had spoken and communed with them, they came with a new petition and made earnest suite, to give them leave to raunsome and redeeme as many of them as they would: wherupon they were willed to give them their names; and when they had named fast upon two hundred, an order was graunted out of the  Senate, that the Romane Commissioners should take over with them into Affricke unto Scipio two hundred of those captives whom the Carthaginians would make choise of; and declare unto him from the Senate, that in case the peace were fully agreed upon and finished, he should deliver those two hundred to the Carthaginians, freely without paying any raunsome. Now when the heralds of armes were appointed to goe into Affricke, for to confirme and establish the peace according to the solemne order, at their owne request there passed an act of the Senate framed in this forme and tenure. Imprimis, That they should carrie with them every one by himselfe, certaine flint stones of their owne, and likewise Verven. Item,(...) That the Roman Pretors should commaund them solemnely to pronounce the league, and then they to aske of the Pretour sacred hearbes or Verven. A kind of grasse or hearbe this is, which was wont to be gathered from off the  Capitoll hill, and given to the Heralds.
Thus were the Carthaginians dismissed and sent from Rome: who being come into Affrick to Scipio, concluded peace with the same capitulations as is abovesaid. And so they delivered up their gallies and ships of warre, their Elephants, the renegate traitours, the vagrant fugitives, and foure thousand prisoners. Among whom was Q. Terentius Culleo, a Senatour by his calling. As for the ships, so soone as they were launced forth into the deepe, Scipio caused them to bee set on fire and burnt. Some report that they were five hundred in number, one with another, of every fort, and all directed and guided by oares. Presently were they set a burning: a dolorous sight and heavie spectacle (no doubt) to the Carthaginians for to behold, as if Carthage it selfe had been on a light fire. The renegate traitours and rebels were punished more greevously than the  fugitives. As many of them as were of the Latine nation lost their heads: all that were naturall Romanes, were crucified and roundly trussed up on the gallowes. Fortie years before was the peace last made with the Carthaginians, when Q. Luctatius and A. Manlius were Consuls. The warre began three and twentie yeares after, whiles P. Cornelius and T. Sempronius were Consuls. And the same ended in the eighteenth yeare after, P. Cornelius, and P. Aclius Paetus being Consuls. Many a time after, Scipio by report, would say, that the wilfull and covetous desire of T. Claudius first, and afterwards of Cn. Cornelius, was the onely stay and let, that this warre ended not with the finall ruine and utter destruction of Carthage.
When as the Carthaginians, who by long and continuall warres were growne bare and poor, thought the levie and contribution of money for to furnish out the first paiment, lay heavie and  fore upon them, insomuch as in their Senate house, there was great sorrow and heavinesse, yea, and pitteous weeping; it is said, that Anniball was seene to laugh agood. And when Asdruball Hedus rebuked him for laughing in that publick lamentation of the citie, considering that himselfe was the cause of those tears, If (qd. Anniball) as we see by our eic the outward disposition of the face and countenance, so wee could looke within forth and behold the affection of the mind,

yee might soone perceive, that this laughter of mine, which ye so much blame, proceedeth not  from an heart that is glad and joifull, but rather senselesse, stupified, and astonied with the exceeding greeles and calamities that have happened. Yet is not it so unseasonable and impertinent to our present condition, as these teares of yours, and weeping that you make, is absurd and nothing to the purpose. Then should yee have wept and shed teares, when our armour and weapons were taken from us, when our ships were set on fire, when wee were interdicted and forbidden to make warre with forraine nations: for then had wee our deadly blow, then our backes and hearts were broken. And never thinke that the Romanes have proceeded hardly against you, in comparison of the hatred that ye bare one to another. No great citie and mightie State can long continue and rest in quiet. If it have no enemies abroad, it findeth some at home: much like unto strong and lustie bodies, which seeming sure ynough against all outward accidents and causes  of sicknesse, are overcharged with their owne strength and fulnesse of humours, and thereby subject to most deadly maladies. So much, forsooth, and no more we feele of the publicke miseries and common calamities, as toucheth and concerneth our selves in particular: wherein nothing pincheth us more, nor goeth neerer to the quicke, than to for go our monie, and part with our pence. And therefore when Carthage was conquered and despoiled of all her auncient honours, when yee saw her disarmed and stripped naked, when yee saw her forlorne of all the armed nations of Affricke; no man then sighed, no man groned thereat: but now when the tribute imposed, is to be paied out of your private purses, yee keepe a weeping and wailing, as in some publicke funerall and mortuarie carried forth. But alas, I feare me greatly, that ere it be long, yee shall find and feele, That your weeping this day hath been for the least losse of all the rest. Thus spake  Anniball to the Carthaginians.
Scipio having assembled his whole armie together, before them all, restored Masanissa to his fathers kingdome: and over and besides, endued him with the possession of the citie Cirtha, and other townes and territories which belonged to the realme of Syphax, and were now in subjection to the people of Rome. Vnto Cn. Octavius he gave order to conduct the fleet into Sicilie, and there to make it over to Cn. Cornelius the Consull. The Carthaginian embassadours he willed to goe to Rome, that those acts and capitulations which were concluded by him with the advise of the ten Commissioners, might likewise passe under the approbation of the Senat, and the consent of the people, and so be ratified and confirmed for ever.
Thus Scipio having obtained peace both by sea and land, and embarked his armie, failed toward  Sicilie, and arrived at Lilybaeum. From whence he sent away a great part of his armie by sea, and himselfe passed by land through Italie, which now was joifull as well for the peace concluded, as the victorie atchieved. Where all the way as hee went, not onely the people came forth in multitudes out of the cities to do him honor, but numbers also of the countrie peasants out of the villages, filled all the high waies along, untill he came to Rome: where he entred the citie, riding in the most stately and magnificent triumph that ever had been. Hee brought into the citie chamber 100033 pound weight of silver. He divided among his souldiors out of the spoile ^ t^^ ^^, 40 ^hich co ^^e^^ to two shi^ si^epence, ^ngli^sh.four hundred Asses apeece. Syphax by his death rather disappointed the people of a goodly shew and pageant in the triumph, than diminished any whit the glorie of the triumpher: hee died at Tybut not long afore, to which place he had been removed from Alba: howbeit his death was not obscure, by reason that he was solemnly caried to his buriall, with the pompe of a publicke funerall at the charges of the citie. But Polybius a writer of good account, reporteth, That this K. was led in the very triumph. As Scipio rode triumphant Q. Terentius Cullco, followed after with a cap of libertie set upon his head; and ever after, so long as hee lived, hee honoured him (as beseeming it was) and acknowledged him the author of his freedome. But as concerning his surname Africanus, I cannot for certaine learne, whether it were the favour of his souldiours first, or the affectionate love of the people afterwards that brought it up, or rather began upon some of his owne house and linage that courted and flattered him therewith: like as in our fathers daies Sulla was surnamed Happie.Faelix, and Pompeius,G^ea^.Magnus. This is certaine that he was the first Generall that ever tooke his name of the countrie and nation by himselfe subdued, and thereby was renowned. But  by his example afterwards, others nothing comparable to him in victorie and conquest woon goodly titles and glorious inscriptions to their images, and honoured their houses with noble stiles and additions.




THE XXXI. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the one and thirtith Booke.
THe causes of the warre began againe with Philip king of Macedonic, which had discontinued, are set downe to be these: In the time of the holie feast of Ceres, two yong men of Acainania, who had not been prosessed in those sacred mysteries, came to Athens, and chaunced among other of their countrimen to goe into the chappel of Ceres. For which, as if they had committed some hainous  fact in the highest degree, they were by the Athenians executed. The Acarnanians moved with indignation for the death of their neighbors, required aid of Philip to be revenged for them: Some few moneths after peace granted to the Carthaginians, in the five hundred and fiftieth year from the foundation of the citie of Rome, when the Embassadours of the Athenians, who now were besieged by Philip, craved aid of the Senate, and they were of advise and resolved to helpe them, not withstanding the Commons gainesaid it (by reason that they thought the continuall troubles of so many wars were greevous and bravie unto them) yet so sarre prevailed the authoritie of the nobles, that the people also gave their consent to succom their consederate cittie. This warre was committed to the managing of P. Sulpitius the Consull: who led an armie into Macedonie, and s^ought certaine battailes fortunatly against Philip, which were performed by horse-service. The Abydons being invested and beleaguered round about by Philip, following the example of the Saguntines, slue their wives and children, and their owneselves after them. L. Furius the Pretour overthrew in a pight field the Gaules called Insubres that rebelled, and likewise Amilcar the Carthaginian, who began to make war in those parts, where Amilcar was slaine, and with him five  and thir^ie thousand men. Moreover, this booke containeth the expeditions and voiages of king Philip and Sulpitius the Consull, and the winning of certaine citties by than both. Sulpitius the Consull warred with the helpe of king Attalus and the Rhodians. L. Furius the Pretor triumphed over the Gaules.

FVll well apaied am I likewise, that I am now come to an end once of the Punicke warre, as if my selfe had been in person there, and borne my part in the toile and danger thereof. For albeit unfitting it is for mee (who have  undertaken and prosessed so boldly to write a complete and full storie of the Romanes) to be wearied in the severall parts of so great a worke: yet when I thinke and consider, how threescore yeares and three (for so many are reckoned from the first Punicke warre, to the end of the second) have taken up no sewer bookes of mine, than foure hundred eightie eight yeares before, even from the foundation of Rome, unto the Consulship of that Appius Claudius, who was the first that warred upon the Carthaginians; mee thinkes I foresee alreadie, that like as they who being once entred into the shallowes neere the shore, are trained on still, and venture to wade into the  sea, even so I, the farther I goe forward, the deeper I step, and am carried away into a vast Ocean, and bottomelesse gulfe (as it were) which cannot bee founded; and that my worke groweth still upon me in my hands, which as I went away apace, and rid matters at the first, I would have thought by this time should have decreased.
The Carthaginian peace was no sooner concluded, but the Macedonian warre straightwaies

ensued: nothing comparable to the Punicke, if ye regard the hazard and daunger, the vertue  of the captaines for direction, or prowesse of the souldiours: but if a man consider the nobilitie and reputation of the auncient kings, the same and antiquitie of the nation, the greatnesse of their seignorie and dominion, who in times past had conquered and held by the sword much in Europe and the better part of Asia, I dare well say, as noble and renowmed, if not more. But the warre commenced against Philip ten yeeres almost before, had ere three yeers end bene laid downe and discontinued by meanes of the Aetolians: who as they gave occasion to enter into armes, so they wrought a composition of peace. But afterwards in processe of time, when the Romanes by reason of peace with the Carthaginians, had nothing to doe and were at leisure; and yet bearing an inward grudge and owing a displeasure to Philip, as well for his faithlesse peace with the Aetolians and other allies and consederatesof that countrey, as also for aid  both of men and money lately sent into Affricke to Anniball and the Carthaginians: behold, the Athenians, whose territories hee had cleane wasted and spoiled, and whome he had driven within their citie walls, importuned them with their prayers, and persuaded them to take armes and renew the warre aforesaid. And much about the same time, there arrived embassadours from king Attalus, as also from the Rhodians, giving notice that divers cities and states of Asia were sollicited likewise by Philip to band against the Romanes. These embassadors had their dispatch, and received this answere, That the Senate would have a carefull eye to the affaires of Asia. But the entier treatie and consultation concerning the Macedonian warre, was wholly reserved and referred unto the Consuls, who then were employed in the warre with the Boij. In the meane season three embassadours were addressed unto Piolomcus the king of Aegypt, to wit, C. Claudius Nero, M. Acmilius Lepidus, and P. Sempronius Tuditanus, with this commission: First, to signifie and let him understand, that Anniball and the Carthaginians were subdued: secondly, to give thankes unto the king for continuing so fast and faithfull unto the Romans in their distresse and adversitie, when other of their allies, and even their next neighbours forsooke and abandoned them: last of all, to request him, that in case they should be forced by wrongs and injuries offered, to wage warre against Philip, hee would vouchsafe the same mind still and his woonted affectionate favour toward the people of Rome.
Neare about this time, P. Aclius the Consull being in Fraunce, advertised that the Boians before his comming had made rodes into the lands of the friends and allies of the Romanes, presently in all hast levied and enrolled two legions upon the rumour of this tumult and trouble;  and joyning thereunto foure cohorts of footmen out of his own armie, sent C. Appius a colonell or captaine of the consederates, with this power so sodainly raised, and with commandement to march through that part of Vmbria which is called, the Tribe Sappinia, and to invade the territories of the Boij, whiles himselfe in person led his forces the open way traversing through the mountaines, and came thither. Appius being entred into the confines of the enemies, at the first had a good hand, and sped well in forraying the country with safetie of himselfe. But afterwards, having made choice of a meet place neere unto a castle called Mo^^^n^, L^^naro.Mutilum, for to cut downe and reape the corne, (for now the fields were ready for harvest) but yet, without espyals sent out to discover the coasts about, without setting strong and sufficient guards, which being well appointed and armed, might defend the unarmed that were busie in their harvest worke; hee chaunced  himselfe and all his forragers and reapers to be surprised at unawares by the Frenchmen, and assailed on every side. Wherupon they also that were armed, sled in great fright; and 7000 men stragling here and there over the corne fields, were slaine; and among them, C. Appius himselfe their leader. The rest for feare were driven to put themselves within their campe: from whence without direction and guidance of any certaine captaine, and onely upon a generall consent of the souldiers, the night next following they abandoned their hold, left much of their baggage behind them, and through blind forrests, chases, and wild mountaines (in manner unpassable) they came in the end to the Consull: who, after he had perfourmed in his province no memorable act, save only that hee wasted the borders and frontiers of the Boij, and made a league  with the Ingauni (a nation of the Ligurians) returned to Rome. So soone as hee had assembled the Senate, all the whole house with one voice called upon him, to treat and consult up on no other matter before they had determined of king Philip, and the complaints made by their allies: so he proposed that out of hand to be debated in councell. And the Senate in a frequent number there met, passed a decree, that P. Aclius the Consull, should send whome he thought

 good with commission and authoritie, for to receive the Armada which Cn. Octavius was to bring out of Sicilie, and therwith to crosse over into Macedonia. So M. Valerius Laevinus the Vicepretour was sent; and when hee had taken the charge of the fleet, consisting of eight and thirtie saile, at the hands of Cn. Octavius about Vibo, hee passed the seas to Macedonia. Now when M. Aurelius the lieutenenant was come, and had enformed and advertified him, what puissant armies, what numbers of ships the king had prepared and gotten together; how partly himselfe in person by going about not onely to all the cities of the continent, but also they ylands in the sea; and partly by sending his embassadours every way, had sollicited unto warre and raised much people to take armes: shewing moreover, that the Romanes were not to enterprise that war without preparation of greater forces; and that more speedily, for feare least if they made flow  haft and lingered, Philip might enterprise that adventure, which Pyrrhus (a potentate and prince of a farre lesser dominion) had done before: it was thought meet that Aurelius should dispatch his letters to the same effect, unto the Consuls and the Senate.
In the end of this yeare, when a motion was propounded in the Senate-house, as concerning the setting out of lands unto the old souldiers for recompence of their good service, who, under the conduct and fortunate government of Scipio the Proconsull, had brought the warre in Affricke to an end: the LL. enacted a decree, that M. Iunius the Pretor of the citie, if he thought so good, should create ten Decemvirs as surveyours, for to measure out and divide among them the lands in Samnium and Apulia, so much as had beene forfeit and confiscate to the people of Rome. And these were they: namely, P. Servilius, Q. Caecilius Metellus, Cnteu: and Marcus named Servilij, and both surnamed Gemini, Lucius and Aulus both Hostilii, and surnamed Catoes likewise. P. Villius Tappulus, M. Fulvius Flaccus, P. Aclius Paetus, and Q. Flaminius.
At the same time P. Aclius the Cos. called the assembly and high court of Parliament for election of magistrates: and for Coss. were created P. Sulpitius Galba, and C. Aurelius Cotta. After them were the Pretours chosen, to wit, Q. Minutius Rufus, L. Furius Purpureo, Q. Fulvius Gillio, and C. Sergius Plancus. The Romane stage playes were that yeere exhibited with great state and magnificence most sumptuously, by L. Valerius Flaccus, and T. Quintius Flaminius, Aediles of the chaire, and for two dayes together were represented anew. These Aediles distributed and devided most faithfully among the people a mightie deale of corne, which Scipio the Proconfull had sent out of Affricke, at foure asses the Modius: whereby they wan great love and favour  of all men. Also the Plebcian playes were thrice set forth all whole againe, by the Aediles of the Commons, L. Apustius Fullo, and Q. Minutius Rufus. This man from his Aedileship stepped to the Pretours place. And by occasion of those playes, there was a solemne feast celebrated in the honour of Iupiter..
In the 544 yeere from the foundation of the citie, when P. Sulpitius Galba, and C. Aurelius were Coss. the warre with king Phili began, within foure moneths after peace graunted to the Carthaginians. And before all other matters, this affaire was propounded in the Senate by P. Sulpitius the Cos. upon the Ides of March, the very day on which at that time they used to enter upon the Consulship. Where, by the Senate it was decreed, Imprimis, That the Consuls should sacrifice with greater beasts to what gods themselves thought good, with a solemne  prayer in this forme: That whatsoever the Senate and people of Rome minded and intended to do, either concerning the affaires of Common-wealth, or the undertaking and enterprise of this new warre, the same might speed well and happily in the end, to the behouse of the people of Rome, their allies, and namely the nation of the Latines. Item, That after sacrifice and divine prayer, they should consult with the Senate about the state of the citie, and the government of the provinces. At the same time, it fell out very sitly to provoke and stirre up their minds unto warre, that not only letters were brought from M. Aurelius the lieutenant, and from M. Valerius Levinus the Viz-pretour: but also a new Embassie of the Atheniens arrived; the one importing, and the other reporting, that the king drew neere and approched their confines, and within  a while would be not only lord of their lands and territories, but also maister of their citie, unlesse the Romanes set too their helping hand. After that the Consuls had openly pronounced and declared, that the sacrifices were performed rightly and according to order, and that the gods gave care unto their prayer, and accepted thereof: and the Soothsayers and bowell-priers likewise out of their learning made answere and shewed, that the inwards of the beasts were as they should be, and signified happinesse, namely, the enlarging of their confines and frontiers,

with the atchieving of victorie and triumph. Then were the letters abovesaid of Valerius and  Aurelius read, and the Athenien embassadors had a day of audience. After this, there passed an Act of the Senate, That thanks should be rendered unto their allies, for that they being long tempted and sollicited for to revolt, yet not withstanding had not failed in their allegeance, not forsaken their sealtie, no not for feare of a present siege. As touching sending aid unto them, it was thought good to geve answere when the Consuls had their provinces allotted unto them; and when that Consull whose hap it should be for to go into Macedonie, had proposed unto the people, That defiance should be geven to Philip king of Macedonie, and open warre proclaimed against him. Now it fell by lot unto P. Sulpitius to take that charge in Macedonie, who preferred and presented a bill unto the people in this manner: Pleaseth it you, and is it your will, that warre be proclaimed and denounced againstking Philip and the Macedonians within his  realme and dominion, for the wrongs offered and the warre levied by them upon the friends and allies of the people of Rome? Vnto the other Consull Aurelius, befell the province of Italic. Then upon this the Pretours cast lots for their provinces. Cn Sergius Plancus had the jurisdiction of the citie; Q. Fulvius Gillo was to governe the province of Sicilie, Q. Minutius Rufus of the Brutij, and L. Furius Purpurio of Fraunce. The foresaid bill as concerning the Macedonian warre, in the first parliament assembled about it, was in maner by all the centuries in the formost scrutinies nipped and slatly denied. Which thing, partly men of the themselves were forward enough to do, as being overweried with long and fore warres, and worne out for very yrksomnesse of redious travaile, and painfull perils: and partly Q. Baebius a Tribune of the Commons, failed not to set them on: who taking the old course and way of blaming and accusing the nobles, had laid to  their charge, that they sowed the seeds of warre still, and ceased not to raise warre upon warre, to the end, that the commons might never be at rest, and enjoy the repose of peace. The LL. of the Senate tooke this to the heart, in such fort, that the Tribune was shaken up and all to reviled in the Senate house with most opprobious and reprochfull tearmes; and every man did his part to encourage the Consull to publish a new assembly and scrutinie, for the proposing of the same bill; to chastise and rebuke the sloth and idleness of the people; yea, and to open and shew unto them, what great domage and losse, how much shame and disworship they should incurre by these delaies before the warre began. Then the Consull having assembled the people for this purpose in Mars field,Sline^ ^ (...) ople of Rome.before that he cited the Centuries to give their voices, called them all together and made a speech unto them in this wife. It seemeth (quoth he) that you are ignorant, my masters and citizens of Rome, that the matter put to question is not, whether ye would have warre or peace, (for Philip will not permit that to be at your disposition and pleasure, who alreadie prepareth mortall warre both by sea and land) but whether ye would rather choose to transport the legions into Macedonie, or receive your enemie here within Italie. And what difference there is betweene the one and the other, you have had sufficient proofe and experience (if ever at any time before) even in this last warre, especially with the Carthaginians. For who is he that maketh doubt, but if we had with speed relieved the Saguntines besieged, who fled unto us for helpe and earnestly craved for our protection, like as our ancestors and progenitors in due time assisted the Mamertines; we should have turned the whole violence and force of the warre into Spaine, which by our long driving off and lingering delaies we entertained in Italic, to our  great losse and grievous calamitie. Neither need we to doubt of this, but that we have hitherto staied Philip in Macedonie, (who without question had combined with Anniball by meanes of letters and intercourse of embassadours, for to have passed over into Italie before this time) only by sending of Laevinus with a fleet, to begin with him at home, and to make warre in his owne kingdome. Deferre we then to doe that now, when Anniball is chased out of Italie and the Carthaginiaus defeated; which then wee did, when wee had the same Anniball our enemie within Italie? Go we on still and suffer the king by winning the citie of Athens (like as wee permitted Anniball by forcing of Saguntum) to trie and see our slackness and cowardise: we shall have him I warrant you arrived in Italie, not at five moneths end, as Anniball was after his departure from Saguntum; but within 5 daies, after he is disankered once and under faile from Corinth. Set case ye will not compare Philip with Anniball, no nor the Macedonians with the Carthaginians; yet I am sure ye will make them matches, and equall with king Pyrrhus: so far forth I say, as one man excelleth another in valour, and one nation surpasseth another in power. Epirus hath never bene accounted, nor is at this day, but the smallest appendant to the kingdome of Macedonie,

 and of least importance. But as for Philip, the whole and entier seignorie of Peloponnesus is under him, and lord he is of Argos it selfe, a citie enobled as well by the death of Pyrrhus, as the auncient name and renowne that goeth of it. Compare now againe the times of our state. How much flourished Italie in those dayes more than now? Our affaires were then much more found and unfoiled: our captaines safe, our armies all, so many as they were, untainted; whom the Carthaginian warres afterward consumed: yet as puissant and great as we were, Pyrrhus assaied us, he put us to trouble and sorrow enough, yea and came in traine of victorie to shake our free hold, even welneere to the citie of Rome. So as not only the Tarentines, and all that tract of Italie, which they call the greater Greece, banded with him in such sort, as a man would have thought they had followed the very language and those of their name: but the Lucanes also and  the Brutians, yea and the Samnites revolted from us and rebelled. And are ye of beleefe that these will be quiet and remaine in loyaltie and obedience, if Philip once were passed over into Italie? Yes mary will they, there is no question: for they stood fast afterwards, and continued true in the Punick warre. Nay, nay, never make reckning that these States will not revolt from us, so long as they know any one, unto whom they may turne and raunge themselves. If ye had thought much of it, and bene loth to passe over into Affrick; in good faith at this day ye should have had Anniball and the Carthaginians your enemies still in Italie. Let Macedonie therefore be the seate of warre, rather than Italie: let our enemies cities and lands be destroyed with fire and sword. We have found full well by good experience, that our fortune is better, and our forces more puissant abroad in forain parts, than at home in our owne countrey. Go to therefore  in the name of God, to the Scrutinie and give your voices; and those things that the LL. of the Senate have devised to do, graunt ye the same, and yeeld your assent. Ye have not only the Consull author of this advise and counsell, but also the immortall gods (who as I offred sacrifice and prayed devoutly unto them, that this warre might redound to the good and benefit of my selfe, of the Senate, of you, of our allies, of the Latine nation, and finally of our armies and armadaes) have vounchsafed me all the signes and tokens of comfort and joy, and assured me that all shall be well, and according to our hearts desire. This Oration of his once ended, they went presently to deliver up their voyces, and gave Vtirogasti.affirmatively for the warre, and suffred it to passe, according as he had propounded. Then by an order from the Senat there was a solemne supplication for three dayes proclaimed: and in all churches and chappels, and before every shrine and alter  the gods were prayed unto, that the warre (which the people had allowed of) against king Philip, might be well atchieved, and have an happie end. Moreover, the Consull Sulpitius conferred with the heraulds, and asked their advise, Whether they would ordeine, that the warre to be denounced against king Philip, should be intimated to himselfe in person: or thought it sufficient to the proclaimed within the confines of his dominion, at the next frontier towne of all, where he kept a garison and guard: they pronounced againe, That it mattered not, but the Consull should please himselfe, and do full well in the one and the other. Then the Consull was permitted by the LL. of the Senate, to chuse whom he would, so he were not a Senatour, for to send as a messenger or pursevant of armes, to geve the king defiance, and to publish warre. After this it was debated in counsell, how the armies should be disposed as well of Consuls as Pretors. The  Consuls were commaunded to enroll two legions, and to discharge and casse the old armies. Sulpitius who by a decree was to manage this new warre of so great name and consequence, was allowed to take with him out of that armie which Scipio the Viz-consull had brought out of Affrick, as many voluntaries as he could procure: but in no case to urge any old souldiour against his will. Also it was decreed, that the Consull should allow unto the Pretours L. Furius Purpuria, and Quintus Minutius Rufus 5000 men apeece of the associates of the Latin nation: whom they should employ, the one in the province of Gallia, and the other in the Brutians countrey, to defend those parts and keepe them in obedience. Q. Fulvius Gillo was himselfe likewise commanded to chuse out of that armie which P. Aclius the Consull commanded, as many as had served fewest yeeres, untill he made up the number of 5000 also of allies and Latines; which should be a garison  to keepe in order and safetie the province of Sicilie. M. Valerius Falto, Pretor the yeere before, and L. deputie of the province of Campane, had his commission signed anew, to continue for the terme of one yeere longer, and as Viz-pretour to passe over into Sardinia, with direction to chuse out of the armie there five thousand of allies and Latines, such as had served least time. And the Consuls were commaunded to take up two legions of citizens, which might be sent to

any place, as need should require, considering that many nations in Italie tainted and infected  with the fellowship and companie of the Carthaginians during the warres and ever since, were swelled with anger and despite against the Romanes. Thus the Common-weale for that yeere was to use the employment of sixe Romane Legions.
Amids these preparations for warre, there arrived embassadors from king Ptolomeus, geving intelligence, that the Athenians had craved aid of their king and maister, against Philip. And although they were confederate as well with him as the Romanes, yet the king would send into Greece neither a fleete of ships, nor an armie of men, defensive, or offensive to any, but by authoritie and consent of the people of Rome. In case therefore the Romanes were resolved, and sufficient withall of themselves to defend their allies, he would be willing to sit still and take his repose at home. Otherwise, if the Romanes were rather disposed to rest and take their ease, he  would himselfe be well content to send such forces to the aid of the Athenians, as should defend them easily against all the power of Philip. The Senate returned great thanks unto the king, with this answere, That the people of Rome were purposed to protect their owne allies: but if during this warre they stood in need, upon any occurrence that might happen, they would give knowledge thereof to the king: as being assured and making full accoumpt, that all the puissance and wealth of his kingdome was a sure prop and trustie piller of their State and Commonwealth. This done, by order from the Senate the embassadors had given them for a reward15 pound 12 (...) 6 d. sial. five thousand Asses apeece. Now whiles the Consuls were busie in taking musters, and providing all things meete for the warre; the citie very devout and geven much to religion, in the beginnings especially of all new warres, after they had performed their supplications aforesaid, and done  their devotions at every alter and shrine: because nothing might befor-let and left out, that at any time heretofore had bene done; ordeined that the Consull unto whom the province of Macedonie fell, should vow solemnly to exhibit to the honor of Iupiter, the great games and plaies, and a rich present beside. But Licinius the high-priest, stayed this publick vow for the time that it went not forward, alleadging that it was not lawfull to make a vow of an uncerteine summe of money not determined: and if such money might not serve for the use of warre, it ought presently to be set by and laid up safe, and not be mingled and shuffled with other monies: and unlesse that were duely done, the vow could not be paid and performed according to the order of holy rites. Albeit the thing it selfe and the person of the man that moved this scruple, touched and troubled them much, yet they would needs that the Consull should propound the matter  to the colledge of the Priests and Bishops, to know their resolution, whether a vow might not directly be made of an uncertaine peece of money. The Bishops set downe their opinion and judgement, that it might be well enough, yea and better than otherwise. Whereupon the Consull pronounced the vow, according to the very same forme of words (as the high priest endited and spake before him) which aforetime they were wont to use, in making the quinquennall vowes from five yeeres to five: save onely thus much, that he vowed and promised to represent the playes, and to present oblations unto Iupiter, amounting to such a summe of money, as the Senate should set downe when the vow was to be performed. So many times before had the great games bene vowed, and a determinate summe of money ever assigned: but these were the first that were not limited within any certaine stint and compasse.
Now when all mens minds were wholy bent upon the Macedonian warre, behold on a sodaine, when they feared nothing lesse than such a thing, there arose a rumor of French troubles and tumults: for the Insubrians, the Cenomans and Boij, having sollicited and raised up by way of insurrection the Sallij, the Iluations, and other states of Liguria, under the conduct of Amilcar the Carthaginian, who in those parts stayed behind with the remnant of Asdruball his armie, were seazed of Placentia: and after they had sacked the citie, and for very despiteous anger burnt a great part of it, leaving hardly two thousand persons of all sorts, which amid the fire and ruines thereof chaunced to save themselves, crossed the river Po, and advaunced forward to the spoile and pillage of Cremona. But the inhabitants of that colonie, having heard of the miserie and calamitie befallen upon their neighbour-citie, had some respit and time to shut their gates, and to bestow their guards upon the walls: so as, they should at leastwise be first besieged or ever they were forced; and might be able to dispatch messengers unto the people of Rome. L. Farius Purpurco was governor of that province for the time; who having by order from the Senate discharged all the rest of the armie but only five thousand of allies and those Latines, abode with

 that power in the next countrey to that province, about Ariminum. He then addressed his letters unto the Senate, signifying in how bad termes the province stood, namely, that of those two colonies, which all the time of the Punick warre had escaped those great stormes and tempests of troubles, the one was won by the enemies and put to the sackage, the other now besieged, and at hand to be lost: neither would his forces be sufficient and able to help the distressed Cremonians, unlesse he should wilfully cast away five thousand allies, and expose them as a prey unto fortie thousand of the enemies (for so many they were strong) to have their throtes cut, and to be hewen in peeces; and by so great a losse and overthrow of his, to give more hart and courage to the enemies, who are now in their ruffe, and puffed up with pride for the ruine of one Romane colonie alreadie. Vpon the reading of these letters, there went forth a decree from the LL. of the  Senat, that C. Aurelius the Consull should send out precepts for the armie to be readie at Ariminum that very day, on which he appointed them to the Rendez-vous in Hetruria: and that either himselfe in his own person, if it might stand with the good of the State, would go with a power to suppresse these French commotions, or els write to L. Furius the Pretor, that when the Rom. Legions presented themselves unto him out of Hetturia, he should send in their steed his owne five thousand allies for the guard of Hetturia in the meane time, and make a journey himselfe in person to levie the siege before Cremona, and to set the colonie free that now was beleaguered. They thought good besides to dispatch embassadors into Affrick, who first should go to Carthage, and afterwards to Masanissa in Numidia. To Carthage, for to intimate unto them; That Amilcar a citizen of theirs, left behind in Fraunce, (and whether he were of the armie of Asdruball  before, or afterwards of Mago, they knew not for certein) waged warre there, against the covenants in the league conteined: that he had assembled certein forces of French and Ligurians, to enter into armes against the people of Rome: and therefore, if they had any love to intertein peace, they should call him home, and deliver him to the people of Rome. Over and besides they had in commission to give them to understand, that delivery was not yet made of all the rennegate rebels, but many of them, by report, were retired to Carthage, and there went up and downe, and conversed openly; which persons were after diligent search made, to be attached and apprehended, that they might according to the tenure of the accord, be sent home againe and delivered into the hands of the Romanes. And thus much concerning their message to the Carthaginians. Now they had in charge besides to congratulate with Masanissa, and to  declare what joy they tooke in his behalfe, namely, for that he had not only recovered the inheritance of his fathers kingdome, but also enlarged his dominion, by conquest of the most flourishing part of the realme of Syphax. Moreover, commaunded they were to signifie unto him, that they had undertaken to warre upon king Philip, because he had friended and aided the Carthaginians; and by offring and doing wrong to the friends of the people of Rome, even at what time as all Italie was full of troubles and warres, enforced and put them to it, for to send their armies and their armadaes into Greece, and so by dismembring and deviding their forces into sundry places, was the principall cause that they were so late ere they passed over into Affrick: requesting him for the maintenance of this warre, to send over certein aids of Numidian horsemen. These orators had great gifts and honorable presents given them for to cary unto the  king, to wit, divers peeces of plate both of gold and silver, a purple robe of State, with a rich castock or cote wrought in palme tree worke, with a royall scepter of yvorie, also a robe embrodred before with purple, with an yvory chaire of estate. Last of all, they were willed to make promise unto the king, that if he could thinke upon anything needfull and expedient either to establish his kingdome, or to advance his royall estate, the people of Rome would endevour respectively for his good demerits to compasse the same to the uttermost of their power.
There arrived also about that time, embassadours from Vermina the sonne of Syphax, and presented themselves unto the Senate, excusing the error and pretending the youth of the prince, clearing him of all fault, and laying the whole blame upon the fraud and faiterie of the Carthaginians, promising for their king and master in this wife, That like as Masanissa of a prosessed enemie  was become a sworne friend to the Romanes, even so would Vermina doe his best and straine himselfe, that in all offices of friendship toward the people of Rome; neither Masanissa nor any other should surpassed and go beyond him; and making petition in his name, that the Senat would vouchsafe to give him the titles of King, of Allie, and Friend unto the Romans. These oratours had this for their answere, That not onely Syphax, his father before him, of a confederate and

friend, sodainly without any cause at all prooved an enemie to the people of Rome; but also  himselfe had practised alreadie in his young yeeres, and laid the first ground of his warrefare in annoying and troubling the Romanes by warre; and therefore he was to seeke pardon and crave peace at their hands, before he might be invested by them with the tearmes of King, of Ally, and Friend: for the honour of that style, the people of Rome were woont to vouchsafe to none, but those kings onely who had deserved singularly well of them. Mary there should be certaine Romane Legats in Affricke, unto whome the Senate would give order, to minister and tender unto Vermina certaine conditions of peace, according to a large and absolute commission that they had from the people of Rome, To doe what they thought good. And in case the king misliked ought in those capitulations, and were desirous to have any article added, put out, or altered, he must have recourse againe to the Senate, and demaund the same. So there were Legats  or commissioners sent into Affricke with such a commission abovesaid, namely C. Terentius Varro, Sp. Lacretius, and Cn. Octavius, and each of them had allowed a galleace directed with five rewes of oares.
After this were the letters read of Q. Minutius Pretour in the province of the Brutij, importing thus much, That the consecrated money of Proserpina at Locri, was by night stollen out of her treasurie; but to say who should doe the deed, they had no presumptions to give light and lead them directly. The Senate tooke the matter in very ill part, and grieved exceedingly, That sacrilegious men fell still to church-robbing, and would not give over: and that the late and fresh example of Pleminius (so notorious as well for the heinous fact as the fearefull punishment) was not able to terrifie them and give them warning. So C. Aurelius the Consull was enjoined to write  unto the Pretour into the Brutians countrey, to this effect: That it was the Senats pleasure, that due enquirie and examination should be had of the treasurie thus robbed, after the same precedent and course that M. Pomponius the Pretour tooke three yeeres before. And looke what money could be found, it should be laid up duly in the place; and what was not forth-comming, it should be supplyed and made good againe. Also (if he thought meet) that there should be certaine purgatorie sacrifices, according as the bishops before ordained in the like case, for the expiation and satisfaction of the violating and defiling of the temple. Moreover, there chanced about the same time divers prodigious tokens from many places to be reported. In the Lucanes countrey the rumor and voice went, that the welkin was on fire; and at Privemum, while the skie was bright and faire, the sunne appeared red all day long. At Lanuvium in the temple of  Iuno Sospita, there was heard in the night season a mightie great noise. Nay and more than this, in sundry places (as men say) were many monstrous and straunge births seene. In the Sabines countrey one child was borne, and no man knew what to make of it, male or female: and another likewise was found of sixteene yeeres of age, a very Hermaphrodite of doubtfull sex between both. At Frusino there was a lambe yeaned with a swines head: and at Sinuessa a sow farrowed a pig with the head of a man. In the Lucanes countrey there was foled upon the common ground a colt with five feet. All these monsters were ugly to see and abominable, and holden for great defects and errours of nature working strangely out of kind. But above all others, those birthes both male and female, (or rather neuter) were most abhorred and detested, and order was given presently, that they should be cast into the sea; even as of late daies when C. Claudius and M. Livius were Consuls the like deformed monster was thither had away and drowned. Neverthelesse the Decemvirs were commaunded to turne over and peruse the bookes of Sibylla, to know what such prodigious monsters might portend: who by their learning and out of those bookes, gave direction to make the same sacrifices which last of all for the like uncouth sights were made. Moreover, they gave commaundement, that certaine hymnes and songs should be chaunted throughout the citie by three severall quires, of nine virgins in every one; and an oblation to be offered by them with all devotion to queene Iuno. C. Aurelius the Consull caused all this to be perfourmed according to the order and direction of the Decemvirs. And as in our fathers daies Livius composed the dittie of the hymne, so at that time P. Licivius Tegula framed and set downe a forme of song which they should sing. Thus when all things were expiate, and satisfaction  made accordingly for the appeasing of the wrath of the gods, (for even at Locri also the sacriledge was found out by Q. Minutius, and the mony missing was raised out of the goods of the offenders and guiltie persons, and bestowed there againe in the treasurie) as the Consuls were minded to take their journey into their provinces, there repaired many privat citizens

 unto the Senat, unto whom the third paiment was due that yeere for the loane of mony which in the time of M. Valerius and M. Claudius Consuls they had lent out and disbursed, because that the Consuls had made them answere, That the stocke of the citie chamber was hardly able to defray the charges of a new warre, which required maintenance of a mightie navie and of puissant armies, and therefore flatly denyed them and said, That they had not wherewith to satisfie and make present paiment. The Senate could not endure that they should haue this occasion to make complaint; considering, that if the commonwealth would still employ the money upon the Macedonian warre also, which was granted in loane for the Punicke warre, this would be the end of it, that (one warre following thus in the necke of another) their owne money which was lent upon a curtesie and benevolence out of their privat purses, should be little  better than confiscate for some forfeiture, and fall to the exchequer and common chest of the citie. These private persons demaunding nothing but reason and right, and the citie withall not able to discharge her debt, the LL. set downe a middle and indifferent course betweene honestie and profit; and that was this: That for as much as many of these men said, that the citie had much land upon sale, and they were to buy and make purchase, therefore the common grounds lying and being within fiftie miles of Rome every way, should be granted unto them in see farme, and the Consuls to set downe an estimate of their value and worth, and charge them with a chiefe rent or tribute of 3 farthings an acre by the yeere, to testifie only that they were the cities lands; to the end that if any man hereafter (when the citie should be aforehand and in case to repay the former debt) were desirous to have money rather than land, he should restore  the lands and possessions againe into the cities hands and receive his money. These private citizens (who were the foresaid creditours) accepted gladly of this offer and condition. And hereupon this land was called by the name of Trientius and Tributus, because it was set out and granted in lieu of a third part of the lone money. Then P. Sulpitius after he had pronounced his vowes abovesaid in the Capitoll, and departed out of the citie in his coat of armes, with the Lictors and huishers afore him, arrived at Brundusium; and so with the old voluntary soldiers drawne out of the army that was returned from Affricke, (whom he had enrolled into legions) and ships chosen out of the fleet of Cornelius the Consull; he loosed from Brundusium, and the next day after landed in Macedonia: where there attended him the embassadors of the Athenians; who humbly besought him to deliver them from the siege that invested their citie. So C.  Clau. Gento was incontinently sent to Athens, furnished with 20 long ships of war, and a strength of men: for the king himself in person besieged not Athens, but even then made hot assault upon the town Abydus, as having alreadie given proofe of his forces in sea fight, both with the Rhodians and king Attalus, and in neither battell had good successe. But besides the ordinarie stoutnesse and pride engrassed in him by nature, hee was aloft now and looked high, by reason of the alliance made betweene him and Antiochus king of Syria, with whom he had parted the richesse and realme of Aegypt, unto which they both aspired, upon the newes they heard of the death of king Ptolomeus. Now the Athenians had drawne upon themselves the warre against king Philip, upon a small occasion and of no importance; who of all their auncient estate and glorie, retaine nothing els but great heart and hautie spirit. It fortuned that two young men of Acarnania, who  had taken no orders and were not consecrate, entred among the other multitude into the temple of Ceres, in the time of the feastivall daies, and celebration of sacrifices to that goddesse belonging: and being altogether ignorant in the custome of that solemnitie and religion, and asking some foolish absurd questions, nothing sit for that time or place, were soone bewraied by their speech and language: who being convented before the Prelats of the said temple, notwithstanding it was evidently proved and knowne, that upon an error onely and oversight, and not for any ill intent they were come into the church, yet were they put to death as fellons, and guiltie of some hainous fact in the highest degree. The people of Acarnania complained unto king Philip, and enformed him of this villanous part and hostile act by them committed; and obtained a graunt from him, that they might be permitted with the aid of the Macedonians, to make  warre upon the Athenians. This armie at first invaded the territories of Athens, and with fire and sword made wast and havocke of all, and so with a rich bootie of all sorts returned into Acarnania. These were the first quarels on both sides, that stirred coales and kindled fire between them. Afterwards was defiance given, and open warre proclaimed, by the generall decrees of both States. For when king Attalus and the Rhodians pursued after Philip, as he retired into Macedonie,

and were come as farre as Aegina, then the said king passed over to Pyreaeum, for to renue and  confirme the league with the Athenians. Against his comming the whole cittie went forth with their wives and children to meet him on the way: the Clergie with their rich vestiments and goodly ornaments were readie to receive him as hee entred the cittie: the very gods themselves in a manner abandoned their shrines to give him entertainement. Immediately was the people summoned to a generall assembly, that the king might deliver his mind before them all: but afterwards upon more sage advise, it was thought to stand better with the honour and majestie of a prince, that he should set downe in writing what he thought good, rather than in open place, either to blush himselfe in recounting his favours and good turnes done unto the citie, or in hearing the acclamations of the multitude in token of joy, to be abashed and ashamed of their grosse and unmeasurable flatterie. But in his letters which hee sent unto the assemblie, and were there  openly read and published, first he made a rehearsall of the benefites that this confederate cittie had received at his hands. Secondly he discoursed of the worthie exploits which he had performed against Philip. And finally he knit up all with an exhortation, that whiles they had himselfe, the Rhodians, and especially the Romanes to friend them, they should put themselves in armes and begin warre; as who, if they now forslowed the enterprise, and let slip the present opportunitie, should hereafter seeke in vaine to find it, which once they had so retchlesly lost. Then had the Rhodian Embassadours audience given them, who lately had done the Athenians a great pleasure, in recovering and sending home unto Athens foure long foists, which newly had been borded and taken by the Macedonians. Hereupon with generall accord they decreed to denounce and wage warre upon king Philip. But first they did king Attalus incredible honour beyond all  measure, and then likewise to the Rhodians. Then and never before there was some speech moved of adjoining unto the ten auncient tribes, one other tribe, which of the kings name should be called Attalis. Vnto the citie of the Rhodians they gave in token of vertue, a crown of beaten gold. And like as beforetime the men of Rhodes had granted free Burgeoisie of their citie to the Athenians, so they of Athens now endued the Rhodians with their liberties and franchises. This done, king Attalus returned to his fleet in the rode of Aegina. The Rhodians then weighed anker, and from Aegina failed toZia. Cea. From whence along theCalled Cyclades in the Aegean sea, or Archipelago. islands, they passed to the Rhodes: and in their voiage confedered themselves with them all, exceptingAndro. Andros,Pario. Paros, andCythus, or Caure. Cythnus, which were guarded by garrisons of the Macedonians. In Aegina king Attalus made his abode acertain time, and entred into no action, by occasion of messengers whom he had sent into Aetolia, and embassadors that were expected from thence. But as he could not prevaile with the Aetolians, and persuade them to take arms, contenting themselves with the peace that in some sort they had concluded with Philip: so himselfe, and the Rhodians (who, no doubt, if they had pressed and followed hard upon Philip, might have gained and enjoied this glorious title, That they alone of themselves had delivered Greece from servitude) by suffering him once againe to crosse the seas as farre asStretto de Gallipoli. B. (...) S. Georg^j. S. Georges a^me. Hellespontus, and to possesse himselfe of the commodious and important townes of Greece, thereby to reenforce his power and gather more strength, gave food and nourishment to the warre, and in the end let the Romanes goe away with the honour, both of managing and also of finishing the same. Philip carried with him yet a more princely mind and kingly courage: who, although he was not able to match and make his part good so much as with Attalus and the  Rhodians his enemies, yet was hee nothing at all daunted with the thundering threats of the Romane warre; but sent Philocles, a captaine of his, with a power of two thousand foot and two hundred horse, to invade and spoile the territorie of the Atheniens, committed his Armada to the charge of Heraclides, to set saile forMarogna, ^el Marolia. Maronea, and himselfe in person marched by land thither with another regiment of two thousand footmen lightly appointed, and two hundred men of armes. Maronea he forced at the first assault. But as for Aenus, after he had with much labor and travaile laid siege thereto a long time, in the end he was maister thereof, through the treason of Ganymedes, deputed L. Govern or there for king Ptolomeus. After this he surprised and woon other castles, as Cypsela, Doriscon, and Serrheum. From thence hee advanced forward to Chersonesus, where he gained Eleus and Alopeconnesus, which willingly surrendred: Callipolis also and Madytos, with some other peeces of base account and reckoning. But the Abydenes shut their gates against the king, and would not suffer so much as his embassadours to set foot within their cities. There lay Philip a long time before the town and beleaguered it: and surely had not Attalus and the Rhodians foreslacked the time, it might have beene saved and the siege raised. Attalus

 sent thither three hundred souldiours and no more to lie in garrison, and the Rhodians one galley onely with foure bankes of oares out of the navie when it rode at Tenedos. And afterwards when as Attalus himselfe was thither come, at what time as the townesmen could hardly hold out any longer against the siege, he made them a shew onely neare at hand of some helpe: other reliefe would he affoord none to his allies either by land or sea. The Abydens at first planted their engines and artillerie along the walles, and with shot from thence not only distressed their enemies, and kept them from approch and entrance, but also annoyed them as they lay in harbour with their ships: but afterwards, seeing part of their walles ruinate and laid open; and perceiving besides that the enemies had undermined and were come under the ground as farre as the inner countermure, which the inhabitants in great hast had raised within, forthwith  they sent embassadours to the king to treat and article about some conditions for delivering up the citie. The townesmen capitulated and demaunded, that the Rhodian galley aforesaid, with all her mariners, and the garrison also of king Attalus, might be sent away in safetie, and themselves permitted to depart the towne every one with a single suite onely of apparell. But Philip made answere againe, that he had no peace for them at all, unlesse they would quit the place, and simply commit themselves unto his mercy. This embassage related unto them, set them in such an heat and choler, that partly for spight and indignation, and partly upon despaire, they fell into the semblable rage that the Saguntines did in times past. All the dames and wives of the citie they commaunded to be shut up within the temple of Diana: their young boies and maidens that were free borne, the sucking babes, together with their nourses, they caused to be  bestowed within the common place of publicke exercise: their gold and silver they tooke order to be brought into the market place: their rich attire, their costly apparell and furniture, to bee cast into the two gallies, the one of Rhodes, and the other of Cyzicum, which rid in the haven: and last of all, that their priests should be brought forth with their beasts for sacrifice, and altars erected in the middest of the place. There, first were certaine men chosen of purpose: who so soone as they perceived the battaillon of their countrimen defeated and slaine, fighting before the breaches of the wall, immediately should run upon their wives and children, and kill them without mercie, cast away into the sea their gold and silver, and all the furniture abovesaid that was in the gallies, and set the edifices and houses asire, as well publicke as private, in as many places as possibly they could. For the performing and execution of these premisses, they were  bound by an oth ministred unto them; the forme whereof, with a cursed malediction thereto annexed, they pronounced word for word from the Priests mouth. Then, as many as were of lawful age to beare armes, sware likewise, That not one of them would depart out of the battaile alive, but with victorie. Thus remembring the oth they had taken, and how they called the gods to witnesse, they fought so resolutely, that whereas the night would have parted the combate, the king terrified with their furious rage, first gave over the conflict. The cheese and principal men of the cittie, whose charge was to play the more cruell and horrible part in this tragicall act, seeing there remained but few alive after this skirmish, and those greevously wounded and tired out of heart for wearinesse; the next morning early by day-break, sent their priests with their insules and veiles of peace, to render the citie unto Philip. Before the towne was fully yeelded, M. Acmylius  the youngest of those three Roman embassadours which were sent to Alexandria, hearing of the streight siege of the Abydenes, came by the consent of the other two unto Philip. Where he laid open his greevances, and made complaint, That he had warred upon Attalus and the Rhodians, and namely even then besieged and assailed Abydus most forcibly. And when the king answered that Attalus and the Rhodians without just cause on his part offered, began first to molest and trouble him. What! (quoth Aemylius againe) were you molested and troubled first by the Abydenes too? Philip who was not wont to be told the truth so plainly, thinking this rejoindre of his, more bold and malapert, than to be offred to a king, Your youthfull age, quoth he, and faire face, and above all, the Romane name maketh you hardie and audacious. But I would advise you all, first to remember your covenants, and to interteine peace with me. For in case ye once  begin with me, and put me to it: I do you to understand, that I also am fully resolved to make you feele the smart, and know, that the realme and nation of the Macedonians, is no lesse renowmed for seates of armes than the Romans. Philip having dismissed the embassador, and seized upon all the gold and silver that lay on an heap together, lost all the bootie of men of qualitie, that might have yeelded him a round raunsome. For the multitude of common people fell into such

a fit of rage and madnesse, that all of a sodaine they imagined those who let their lives in the conflict  were betrayed: and so casting one in anothers teeth their perjurie, and charging the priests especially that they were foresworne, in delivering them alive unto the enemie whom they had devoted and appointed to death; they ran at once from al parts to the pitiful massacre of their own wives and children: and when they had so done, they made no more ado, but by fire, by sword, by drowning, hanging, and one way or other, they wrought a quick dispatch and cleane riddance of themselves also. The king amazed and astonied to see them thus horne-wood, stayed the bloudie hand of his owne souldiours, saying that he would allow the Abydenes three daies to dye in. During which terme of time, the conquered Abydenes exercised more fearefull crueltie upon their owne persons, than ever the conquerours would have put in practise in the heigth of their heate and choletick furie. In so much as there was not one of them came alive into the enemies  hands; but such as either fast tyed with bonds, or otherwise by some forcible meanes, were stayed from being their own hangmen, and the butchers of their proper bodies. Philip after he had placed a garison at(...) Abydus, returned into his owne realme. Now when this miserable calamitie of the Abydenes had fleshed Philip to enterprise warre against the Romanes, like as Anniball afore him tooke hart by the wofull destruction of Saguntum to do the semblable: behold, he was encountred with posts that brought newes, how the Consull was in Epirus alreadie, and had withdrawen his land-forces to Apollonia, and bestowed his servitours at sea in Corcyra, there to winter.
In this while, the embassadours who were sent into Affrica, had their dispatch and this answere from the Carthaginians. First as touching, Amilcar the Generall of the armie and forces in  Fraunce, they could do no more but banish his person, and confiscate his goods. Then concerning the fugitive traitours and rebels which were run from the Romanes, they had sent home againe unto them as many as they could search out and come by: and to that purpose they would addresse embassadours themselves unto the Romanes, to satisfie the Senate in that behalfe. And presently they sent to Rome two hundreth thousand Modij of wheare, and other two hundred thousand into Macedonie to the armie there. From thence the Romane Embassadors went forward to the kings in Numidia. To king Masanissa they delivered the presents which the Romanes sent, and declared unto him their commission: at whose hands they received a thousand Numidian horse, whereas he offred them two thousand: himselfe tooke order for their embarking, and so dispatched them into Macedonie, with provision of two hundred thousandMo^^. measures  of wheare, and as many of barley. A third embassage they had to Vermina, who met the embassadors as farre as the utmost marches of his realme, and to their disposition and discretion referred the drawing and penning of all conditions of peace as they would themselves: saying withall, that he held any peace whatsoever, that he should have with the people of Rome, for good and just. So there were presented unto him certaine articles and conditions of peace, and for the ratifying thereof, he was enjoyned to send his embassadors to Rome.
Much about the very same time L. Cornelius Lentulus the Viz-pretor returned out of Spaine: who having declared in the Senate his valiant and fortunate exploits, that for many yeeres together he had atchieved in Spaine; and in consideration thereof, demaunded that it might be lawfull for him to enter the citie in triumph: the Senate judged that his noble acts deserved no  lesse than he sued for: but they had no such precedent from their auncestours, that he should be allowed to triumph, who had warred, neither as Dictatour, nor Consull, nor Pretour: and as for Lentulus, in qualitie of Viz-pretour only, and not of Consull or Pretour, he tooke upon him the charge of the province of Spaine. Howbeit, in the end they came downe to this point, that he should ride into the citie on horseback as Ovant. But T. Sempronius Longus a Tribune of the Com. interposed his negative, alleadging that they had as little example to shew for that; and no practise or custome at all of their auncient predecessours. But in fine, the Tribune gave place to the generall accord of the LL. and was content to be over-ruled. So after the order set down by the Senat, L. Lentulus entred Rome in that solemnitie and pomp before named. He presented in shew, of the pillage that he had gotten137500 pound  (...) after 5 (...). the (...). 44000 pound weight of silver,33200 pound (...) at 3 pound an ounce. 2450 pound weight of gold. To his souldiours he distributed out of the spoile7 (...) 6 (...) English. 120 Asses apeece.
Now was the armie of the Consull translated alreadie from Arretium to Ariminum, and five thousand Latin allies were passed out of France into Etturia: Therefore L. Furius departed from Ariminum, made hast by taking great journeis to come against the Gaules, who then laid siege

 to Cremona, and encamped within a mile and an halfe from the enemie. Meanes and opportunitie he had to do a notable exploit, and win a good hand of the enemies, if immediatly upon his first comming he might have assailed their campe: for they vagued to and fro in scattering wise up and downe the countrey a foraging, and had left no sufficient guard for the defence of their camp. But he feared greatly that his souldiours were wearie and tired: because the companies marched apace thither in exceeding great hast. Howbeit the Gaules being called back by the hooping and hollaing of their fellowes, let go their bootie which they had in manner as good as in their hands, and returned to the camp, and the morrow after raunged themselves in battaile ray. The Romanes were not behind for their parts, albeit they had hardly time enough to set themselves in order, the enemies ran so sodainly, and made such hast to fight. The right  wing (for the armie of the allies was divided into wings) was placed in the vantgard: the two Romane legions in the rereward; M. Furius led the right wing, M. Cecilius had the conduct of the legions; and L. Valerius Flaccus (all three Lieutenants) commaunded the Cavallerie. The Pretour kept with him two Lieutenants, Cn. Lectorius, and P. Titinius, by whose meanes he might looke about from every part, and be readie to oppose himself against all sodaine attempts whatsoever of the enemies. At the first, the Gaules hoped that with their numbers they should be able to tred downe and trample under their feet, that right wing of allies which was in the forefront: and to that effect they reduced their multitudes into one place, and charged upon it with all their might and maine together. But seeing that enterprise sped not well, they endeavoured to environ the corners and sides, and to compasse the enemies round about: which they thought they might  soone do, being so many as they were in comparison of so few: which when the Pretor perceived, to the end that he also might spread out his battailons at large, he displaied the two legions in the rereward, so as he compassed on both hands that wing which sought in the vaward: and therewith vowed two chappels to Iupiter, if that day he might be so fortunate as to vanquish his enemies. To L. Valerius he gave direction, that of one side he should with the Cavallerie of the two legions, and on the other side with the horse belonging to the allies charge upon the wings of the enemies, and not suffer them in any case to enclose the battaile about. Herewithal himself also, espying the middle battailon of the Gauls to be but thin, by reason they were stretched out from thence to the corners and points of each hand, commanded his souldiers to keepe close together, to advance forward and break through their ranks. So were the wings of the Gaules by the horsmen  discomfited, and they in the mids repulsed backe and chased by the footmen: and when the enemies thus at once on every hand were beaten downe and killed, they shewed their backs, and fled as fast as they could to the campe. The horse pursued them in the rout and chase; and anon the legionarie footmen made after also, and gave an assault upon their campe. There escaped from thence not all out sixe thousand: slain there were and taken prisoners above 35000, with seventie banners and ensignes, and more than two hundred French wagons, charged and laden with much pillage. In this conflict, Amilcar the Generall of the Carthaginians lost his life, and three noble men of the French, leaders of marke and name. The Placentine captives to the number of two thousand men of free condition, were delivered againe to them of their owne colonie. This was a goodly victorie; and upon the letters which came with tidings thereof  to Rome, received there with great joy; and ordained it was, that a solemne procession should be held for the space of three daies. Of Romanes and allies one with another, there died in this battaile two thousand: most of them were of that right wing, upon which the enemies in the beginning of the conflict most of all discharged their furie.
Albeit the Pretour had brought the warre to a good passe and in manner finished it, yet the Consull also C. Aurelius, having accomplished his necessarie affaires at Rome, made no stay but took his journey into Fraunce, and received the victorious armie of the Pretor. The other Consull who came into his province but a little before the end of Autumne, wintered about Apollonia. The Roman gallies which from the Armada that lay in dock atCo^p^u. Corcyra, were sent as is aforesaid, to Athens with C. Claudius, were no sooner arrived at Pyreaeum, but they mightily comforted  the allies, whose harts were welnigh done: for neither wer there any more inrodes now by land as there were woont to be from Corinth side by the way of Megara along into their territories: and the men of warre and pyrats ships which from Chalcis had made not onely the seas dangerous to the Athenians, but also the maritime and sea coasts, durst not now approch nearer than to the cape of Sunium, no nor venture into the open maine sea from out of the streights of

Euripus. Over and besides, there came in to them three Rhodian gallies with foure bankes of  oares: there were also three open ships of Athens well rigged and appointed, for to keepe the quarters that lay along the river. Claudius was well appayed, and thought he had gotten enough for the present, in case the citie and territorie of Athens might be sufficiently guarded by this fleet. But see, there presented unto him an occurrent besides of far greater importance and consequence. Certaine banished persons of Chalcis, expelled from thence by the wrongs and violence of those that sided with king Philip, advertised him, that the citie of Chalcis might be easily surprised without any conflict or resistance at all: for, not onely the Macedonians raunged abroad every where up and downe, because there were no enemies neare at hand to feare; but also the townesmen presuming upon the garrison of the Macedonians, neglected the guard of the citie. Vpon the assurance of their words, he set forward: and although he was arrived at Sunium  with to good speed, that he might with ease have sailed to the entrance of the streights of Eubcea, yet for feare of being discovered (when he was got once past the cape) he kept his fleet within the bay still untill night: and at the shutting in of the evening, he weighed anker and lanched forth, and having a calme sea, he arrived before Chalcis a little before the breake of day, and presented his forces against those parts of the citie that were least peopled: and with the helpe of some few souldiours, he skaled and got the towre that stood next, with the wall about it, whiles in some places the warders were sound asleepe; and in others, not at all to be found. Then they advanced forward unto those parts that were more inhabited, and stood thicker with houses; where, after they had killed the guard and broken open a gate, they received into the towne all the rest of their souldiours. Whereupon, there was running now on every hand into all parts  of the citie, and much hurrie and confusion; which was the greater, because the enemies had set fire on the houses about the market place. The kings garners also were of a light fire, together with the arcenall and armorie, where there was exceeding store of provision, of engins; of artillerie and other ordenance and instruments for warre. After this they fell to execution and to massacre in every place, as well those that fled as those that made head; so as they missed not one that was of age meet to beare armes, but either he was killed or put to flight. Sopater likewise the Acarnanian captaine of the garrison, was there slaine. All the pillage was first brought and piled up together in the common place of the citie, and afterwards embarked. The common goale besides was broke open by the Rhodians, and the prisoners and captives let out, whome Philip had there lodged as in a place of surest guard and custodie. Then they overthrew the Images  and statues of the king, and brake their neckes: which done, they founded the retreat, went a shipboord, and returned to Pyreaeum, from whence they came. But if the number of Romane souldiers had beene such, that they might have kept Chalcis still with a garrison, without quitting and abandoning the defence of Athens, a great matter had been gotten in the very beginning of the warre: to wit, the citie of Chalcis and the passage of Euripus, had beene taken from the king. For as the narrow passe of Thermopyle stoppeth the way into Greece by land, so the streights of Euripus maketh all sure by sea. Philip at that time lay in the citie Demetrias; where, after he heard the newes of the calamitie besalne upon a confederate citie, albeit now it was too late to helpe when all was lost; yet because he would be revenged (which is a thing that commeth neare to the nature of aid and succour) he went forth immediatly with five thousand footmen  lightly appointed and deliver, and three thousand horsemen, with all the speed and hast he could to reach nere unto Chalcis; making full reckoning that the Romans might be surprised on a sodaine: but being disappointed of this hope, and thither come where he could see nothing els but a piteous spectacle of a friend-citie halfe ruinate and still smoking, and so few people left alive, that they hardly were able to bury their dead, he returned as hastily as he came; and having passed over Euripus at a bridge, hee lead straight to Athens by the way of Baeotia, with a deepe persuasion and hope, that a like enterprise unto the Romanes should have the like issue. And verily he had not missed of the semblable effect, correspondent to his designes, but that a certaine watchman (one of those whome the Greekes call Hemerodromos, that is, posts and carriers that in one daies space will run and rid a mightie deale of ground) descried from a watchtowre  the kings troupes marching: whereupon hee ran out afore, and came to Athens ere midnight. There were they all asleepe too, and as retchlesse as they of Chalcis were a few dayes past, which was the losse of their town. The Pretor of the Athenians, and Dioxippus the captaine of a regiment of hired strangers and aid-soldiers, awoke at this so fearfull and sodain tidings and

 gat up, assembled the souldiers into the market-stead, and commanded to sound alarme from the highest place of the citie, that all men might take knowledge that the enemies were nere at hand. By which meanes they ran every man from all parts to the gates and up the walls. Within few houres after, and somwhat before day light, he approched the citie: and seeing many lights every where, hearing also a noise of people running to and fro (as in time of such a tumult) he staied his march, and commaunded his souldiours to sit them downe and rest themselves, intending to proceed by ouvert and open forces, since covert and craftie courses, sped no better: and so at length he came before Dipylos. This Dipylos is a gate, standing in the very front of the cittie, greater and wider a good deale than the rest. Both within and without that gate, are large and broad streets, so that both the inhabitants within-forth may marshall an armie, and lead in battaile  ray from the common place directly to the gate, and also the enemies without, have roume at will to conduct a power, as well of horse as foot, by meanes of a spatious causey or high way, which reacheth out almost a mile in length from the foresaid gate, and leadeth to the place of exercise or schoole called Academia. At this quarter of the cittie, the Athenians, together with the garrison of Attalus, and the regiment of Dioxippus, issued forth, and entred the causey abovenamed, having first within the gate set their men in order of battaile. Which when Philip saw, he made full account, That he had his enemies as he would himselfe to doe his pleasure with them, and that now he should have his fil of a massacre and carnage that he had wished for so long (for there was not a State or citie in all Greece that he maliced more than this of Athens.) And therfore he exhorted and encouraged his souldiours, that they should have their eie upon him ever  as they fought, and know well this, that where the king was, there should the banners and guidons be displaied, there should the strength and force of the battaile be: and so he set spurres to his horse, and ran with full carriere to charge the enemies. Thus was he not onely carried away with heat of choler, but ravished also with a desire of glorie, esteeming it a goodly thing, and a matter tending to his great honour, for to be seene fighting in the view of a great multitude of people that had taken up and filled the battlements of the walls (as it were) to behold a solemne spectacle. Thus being advaunced a good way before the maine battaile, accompanied with some few men of armes, he rode among the mids of the enemies, where he bare himselfe so valiantly, that as he mightily heartened his own men, so he affrighted no lesse his enemies. Many a one he wounded with his owne hand, reaching at them that were neere, levelling at those that were farther  off, and drave them afore him like sheep, and followed hard upon them in person to the very gate; where he made soule worke among them, thronged and crouded as they were together in the streight of the passage, for hast they made to escape, and committed a greevous slaughter. And albeit this was but an unwise and rash adventure of his, yet he retired himselfe in safetie, without farther daunger of his person, by reason that they who were placed in the turrets of the gate, forbare to shoot and launce their darts, because they would not hurt their own side, intermingled among the enemies. But after this, when the Athenians kept their souldiors within the wals, Philip sounded the retreat, and pitched his tents at Cynosarges, where there was a temple of Hercules, and a schoole of learning, and a grove standing about it. As for Cynosarges, and the school Lyceum, and whatsoever was either religious, or pleasant and delectable about the cittie, was  burned. And not onely the edifices, but the sepulchres also and monuments of the dead were defaced and cast downe: in which furious heat of anger, nothing was spared, were it sacred or prophane, without regard of God and man. The next morrow, when the gates were first kept shut, and afterwards set open againe upon a suddaine, because the garrison of Attalus entred into the citie from Aegina, and the Romane from Pyreaeum side; Philip dislodged and remooved backe from the citie almost three miles. From whence he went to Eleusine, hoping to surprise the temple at unwares, together with the towne and castle, which both environneth the temple, and also commaundeth the same. But when he perceived that the corps de guard was not neglected, and that a fleet besides was comming from Pyreaeum to succour them, he gave over this dessigne, and led his armie to Megara, and so streight forward immediately to Corinth: and having intelligence,  that the Achaei held a generall Diet and counsell at Argos, thither hee came unlooked for of the Achaeans, and put himselfe amongst them at the very session and assembly. Consultation there was, about waging warre with Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedemonians: Who seeing, that the seignorie of Achaea was taken from Philopaemenes and conferred upon Cycliades, a captaine not to bee named and compared with him, and perceiving also that the aids which the

Achaeans had, were fallen from them and gone, took their vantage, renued the old quarrell, and made fresh war upon them, wasting the villages and territories of the borderers, yea, and threatning the good towns and cities also. Now whiles they sat devising and conferring together what number of souldiours should be levied and enrolled out of every severall state and cittie, for to withstand this common enemie, Philip franckly promised to ease them all of that care as touching Nabis and the Lacedaemonians; and not onely to impeach them for spoiling the lands of their Allies, but also to lead his armie out of hand into the very territorie of Laconica and Sparta, and thither to turne the whole terror of this warre. This kind speech and friendly offer of his, being with a generall applause of them all accepted. Marrie, this you must (quoth he) take withall, that good reason it is, whiles I my selfe am content to defend and maintaine your countrie by my forces, mine owne territories inthe meane time bee not disfurnished of their garrisons  and left naked: and therefore, if yee thinke good, provide me as many souldiours as may suffice for the guard of Oreum, Chalcis, and Corinth, that thus making all sure behind me, I may be secured from daunger that way, and with more resolution prosecute the war against Nabis and the Lacedaemonians. The Achaeans smelled him quickly, and knew ful wel, to what end this gracious promise of his and frank offer of aid against the Lacedemonians tended. His only drift was to draw forth of Peloponnesus the youth and floure of the Achaeans, as a pledge and sure hostage, for to engage the whole nation, so farre as they should be interessed in the warre that he had with the Romanes. Cycliades the Pretor of the Achaeans, thinking it bootlesse, and no good policie, to discover so much and to enforce that point against him, inferred onely this speech and said, That it was not lawfull by the customes and ordinances of the Achaeans, to propose other matters to  parle or, than those for which they were assembled together: and so after the order enacted for levying and waging an armie against Nabis, he dissolved and brake up the assembly, which he now had held right stoutly and with the libertie of the place, who otherwise, before that time was taken ever for no better than one of the kings flatterers and favorits. Thus Philip put besides the great hopes that he had conceived, levied some small number of voluntarie souldiours, and returned to Corinth and the land of Attica.
During the time that Philip was in Achaea, Philocles a captain under the king, departed out of Euboea with two thousand Thracians and Macedonians, for to wast and spoile the confines of the Athenians; and over against Eleusina passed over the forrest and hil Cytheron, from whence having sent out the one halfe of his forces every way to prey upon the plain country, he sat himselfe  downe close with the other halfe in a convenient place for an ambush, to the end, that if peradventure they should make out from the fort at Eleusine, and set upon his souldiors as they drave booties, hee might suddainely arise and charge upon the enemies at unawares, spred and scattered all abroad. But this ambushment was discovered. And therefore after he had called the soldiers back who were run al abroad a boothaling, he put them in order wel armed and appointed to besiege and assault the fort of Eleusine, against which he led all his forces: but after much hurt and many a wound received from them he retired, and joined with Philip as he returned out of Achaea. The king also himselfe in person, assaied to force and batter the said hold: but the Roman ships comming from Pyreaeum, and a fresh garrison received into the place, caused him perforce to give over the enterprise. After this the king devided his power, and sent one part thereof  against Athens, under the conduct of Philocles, and himselfe with the other marched to Pyreaeum: that whiles Philocles kept the Athenians within the citie, by approching their walls, and threatning to besiege and assault it, he might himselfe with facilitie win and gaine Pyreaeum, wherein there was left but a smal and slight guard. But he found as hot a peece of service about the assailing of Pyreaeum, as before at Eleusine, by reason of the same souldiours in manner, that defended as well the one as the other. So on a suddaine he departed from Pyreaeum, and marched directly toward Athens. From whence he was repulsed and chased by a suddain sallie both of horse and foot, made from the streights of the wall halfe ruinate; which wall stretching out, as it were, two arms, joineth the port Pyreaeum to Athens. So he left battering and assaulting the citie, and parting againe his armie with Philocles, he went out to forrey and spoile the countrie: and as in his  former saccage he exercised himselfe in demolishing the tombes all about the cittie, so because he would leave nothing entire and safe, he commaunded the chappels of the gods, which were consecrate in every village and hamlet, to be pulied downe, rased, and burnt.
The countrey of Attica was mervailously beautified and embelished (as it were) with goodly

 peeces of worke in that kind, (by reason as well of the store they had of native marble, as also of their industrious and excellent workemen) which ministred matter and occasion unto him of this outrage and madnesse. For not contented and satisfied with the ruine of the temples, and casting downe of images, he commaunded that the very stones should be broken and hatterd in peeces, that least being whole and sound they might serve to make up and stop the breaches of the ruines. And after that his fell mood and anger was not so much satisfied and satiate, as it wanted matter to worke upon in that place, he departed out of his enemies countrey into Boeotia, and performed no other deed in Greece worthy of remembrance.
Sulpitius the Consull at that time lay in camp betweeneSissopoli, Pineto, Piergo, Nigro. Apollonia andDurazzo. Dyrrachium, neere the river Apsus: and having caused T. Apustius the Lieutenant to come thither, he sent him with  part of his forces to wast the borders of his enemies. Apustius after he had forraied the frontiers of Macedonie,Vito, Negro and forced at the first assault certaine holds, as Corrhagum, Gerrhenium, and Orgessum, came with his armie before Antipatria, a citie seated in the narrow streights of a certaine passage. And first he called forth the principall and chiefe citizens to a parlie, and assayed to persuade and induce them for to commit themselves under the protection and savegard of the Romanes: but afterwards, seeing they trusted upon the greatnes, the strong walls and situation of the towne, and therefore made no reckning of his motives, but rejected them, he assai
led it by force of armes, and wan it in the end. All that were above fourteene yeeres of age he put to the sword; the whole pillage he dealt amongst the souldiours; the walls he rased, and set fire on the towne. The feare of like miserie was the cause that Codrio, a towne of good strength and well fortified,  was yeelded to the Romanes without assault, or any sword drawne. There he left a garison: and after that, he forced Ilium, a towne better knowne for the name that it carieth of the other famous Ilium in Asia, than for any thing els. As the Lieutenant returned with a great bootie to the Consull, one Athenagoras a captain under the king, charged upon the taile of the arriergard, disordred the hindmost, and impeached their passage over the river: but the Lieutenant, at their crie and sodaine affright rode in all hast back, caused them to turne againe and make head, set them in battaile ray, and bestowed all their bag and baggage in the mids upon a heape. The kings souldiours not able
 to abide the violence of the Romanes, were many of them slaine, and more taken prisoners. So, the Lieutenant having retired his armie in safetie, was immediatly sent back unto the Consull to the Armada.
 The warre being thus begun, and the exploit of this first expedition happily performed, the princes, potentates, and LL. that bordered upon the Macedonians, repaired into the Roman camp, to wit, Pleuratus the sonne of Scerdiletus, Aminander king of the Athamanes: and from Dardania, Bato the sonne of Longarus. This Longarus had waged warre aforetime in his owne name and quarell, with Demetrius the father of this Philip. These States offring and promising their aids unto the Consull, had this answere from him, That for the Dardanians and Pleuratus, he would use them, when hee entred with an host into Macedonie. As for Aminander, hee gave him in charge the while to sollicite the Aetolians to warre. The Embassadours of king Attalus (for they also were come at the same time) hee dispatched with this order, That their king should attend the comming of the Romane fleet at Aegina, where hee wintered; with which and his owne  jointly together, he should assaile Philip at sea, like as he had done beforetime. Embassadours also were addressed to the Rhodians, that they likewise should have their hand and be seene in this warre. Philip for his part foreslowed not to make preparation (for now by this time was he come into Macedonie) and sent with part of his forces for to keep the streights of the passage of Pelagonia, his son Perseus, a very child of yong yeers, having chosen certain of his trustie friends, to direct and govern his tender age. As forSciato. Sciathus andLemene. Peparethus, two towns of no smal importance he destroied, for fear the enemies fleet should seize upon them, and with their pillage content and pay themselves. He sent likewise embassadors to the Aetolians (a nation inconstant and unquiet by nature) that they should not upon the arrivall of the Romans, chaunge their alleageance. Now the Diet or generall councell of all the states of Aetolia, which they call Panaetolium, was to be held  at a certaine day appointed. And therefore to prevent and meet with all dangers, both the kings embassadours made hast to bee present thereat; and also L. Furius Purpurio presented himselfe there, as sent embassadour from the Consull. The Athenian embassadours likewise were at this assembly. And first the Macedonians (with whome a league was but lately concluded, and therefore freshest in remembrance) had audience,The Oration of the Macedonian Embassado^^^. who said, They had no new matter to speake

of, seeing there was no new occurrent and businesse fallen out: onely this, that upon what motives  and considerations they were entred into an accord and peace with king Philip, (as having experience that the alliance with the Romanes never did them good) for the very same they should maintaine it still, being once concluded and confirmed. Or love ye rather (qd. one above the rest of the embassadours) to imitate the Romanes licentiousnes or their levitie, I know not whether? who, as they gave order and commaundement, that your embassadours being at Rome, should receive their dispatch and answer in these rearmes: Come ye now to us indeed my masters of Aetolia, when without our consent and warrant ye have made peace with Philip? so likewise at this present are readie to require that ye should band with them, and warre upon Philip. They presended aforetime that they tooke armes against him, by occasion of you, in your quarell and defence; and now they forbid you to be in peace with Philip. At first, they entred into Sicilie for  to aid and succor Messana. A second time they went thither to set free and deliver Syracusa out of the oppression of the Carthaginians. And now at this time they hold in possession both Messana and Syracusa: and all Sicilie entier they have made it tributarie, yea and reduced it into the forme of a province, to be ruled under their sword, and the jurisdiction of their deputies and magistrates. In good faith, I assure you, that as ye according to your lawes and customes hold your Diets and Counsels at Naupactum, by your own magistrates elected and created among your selves, wherin ye have libertie to make choise both of friends and enemies whom ye wil, and to enterteine either peace or warre at your pleasure: so, writs are sent out to the States of Sicilie for their knights and burgesses, to assemble in Parlement at Saracose, at Messana, or Lilybaeum. And the Romane Pretor it is and no other that summoneth them thither, as also to their Assises  and Sessions: at his commaundement and not otherwise they are cited to generall Counsels. Him they see sitting on high in his tribunall seate, guarded with Lictors, attended upon with Vshers, there to heare and determine cause, and from aloft to pronounce hard sentences and proud awards. His rods threaten their backs and sides, his axes are readie to chop their heads from their shoulders: and from yeere to yeere new lords still they choose and send among them. And this dealing, none of them either can or ought to mervaile at: for why? they see cities of Italie, by name Rhegyum, Tarentum, and Capua, (to speake nothing of their neighbour townes, by whose fall they arose, by whose ruines Rome grew mightie) subject likewise to the same rule and government. As for Capua, the very sepulcher and tombe of the Campane nation (now that the naturall people thereof are either dead and buried, or driven out as exiled persons) remaineth at  this day as a monster and wonder in nature, resembling a headlesse and limlesse dismembred trunke of a bodie: a towne (I say) without Senate, without Comminaltie, without magistrates: where more crueltie was shewed, in leaving it to it selfe thus abandoned, and in this manner to be inhabited, than if it had bene cleane rased and laid even with the ground. Meere folly it is and without all sense and reason, to beleeve or hope, that if these strangers and aliens borne (who differ more from us in language, in customes and lawes, than they are distant and disjoyned by space betweene of land and sea) be once seized and possessed of these places, that any thing will continue long entier in the present state. The kingdome of Philip (ye will say) is a block in your way, and seemeth to prejudice your freedome and liberties: yet he being made your heavie friend, and that through your owne fault and desert, required no other thing at your hands for amends, but peace; and even now desireth nought els but your alleageance, and the faithfull observance of the same. Acquaint forein legions once with this your countrey; you take the yoke of servitude upon your necks for ever. Accept the Romanes once for your lords: too late it wil be then and in vaine for you, to seeke Philip againe, and wish him your allie. Small matters and momentanie occasions may well cause the Aetolians, Acarnanians and Macedonians, (men of one language) to fall out, and as slender motives, will soone make them friends againe: a little thing setteth them at a jarre, and as little bringeth them in tune. But all Grecians both are and ever will be at warre with Barbarians: enemies they are by nature, which is perpetuall and immurable; and not by occasions which alter every day. But where I began my speech, there will  I leave and make an end. In this very place you the same men, agreed three yeeres past to have peace with Philip: and the selfe same Romanes as they misliked then and disavowed that peace, so now they will needs disquiet and trouble it after it is once passed and accorded. And since the case still is all one, and fortune hath made no alteration, I see no reason why ye should varie and change your minds.



After the Macedonians, the Atheniens entred in place, for the Romanes were wel contented therewith, and would needs have it so: These Atheniens having suffred many wrongs and indignities at the kings hands, had juster cause of complaint, and more reason to inveigh and aggravate matter against his crueltie and outragious dealings.Th^ Oration of the Athenian (...). First, they bewailed the piteous spoile and miserable saccage of their territories: neither complained they so much and found themselves grieved, in that they had susteined harmes and suffred hostilitie from an enemie, (for there be certein lawes and rights belonging unto warre, by vertue whereof, to geve and take, to suffer harme and to do harme interchangeally, is an ordinarie matter and allowable: As for example, the burning of standing corne in the field, rasing and pulling downe of houses, harrying and driving of booties both of men and cattaile, rather pitifull calamities, than shamefull  indignities to endure.) But this is the point say they, and hereof we complaine, That he who termed the Romanes, strangers borne, and barbarous, hath so polluted and violated at once all lawes of God and man: so as in his former rode and expedition he seemed to make most impious war with the infernall gods and spirits beneath: and in the second, with the heavenly powres and gods above. All the monuments and tombes within their confines are defaced and destroyed: the dead in their graves are all laid bare, not so much as the bones of any one lye covered with mould. Temples we had and chappels, which, as in times past when our auncestors inhabited those small holts, hamlets and villages, they consecrated and hallowed: so when they were reduced into one citie, and enrolled into wards and parishes, they forsooke not nor abandoned altogether. Round about these sacred churches hath Philip set fire, and consumed all: the holy  images of the gods, lye some scorched and halfe burnt: others headlesse and dismembred, among the pillers and posts of the temples throwne along on the ground. And looke what foule work he hath made in the country of Attica, so rich and so bewtifully adorned in times past, the like havock if he might be let alone, would he make in Aetolia and in all Greece throughout. For had not the Romanes come in time to succour, our very citie also had bene so served, and pitcously disfigured. For with like mischievous intent came he to the citie which worshipped those gods, not sparing the goddesse Minerva, the patronesse and protectresse of our towne and castle: the same wicked mind he caried against the temple of Ceres Eleusina: and no better affected was he to Iupiter and Minerva in Pyreaeum. But being repulsed by force and armes not only from our temples, but also from the walls of our citie, he wreaked his anger and raged, against those chappels  and religious houses, which had nothing for their defence, but only the reverent regard of the gods, whereof he had none. Hereupon, they prayed and humbly besought the Aetolians, to have compassion of the Atheniens, and to enterprise the warre, under the conduct first of the immortall gods, and then of the Romanes, who next to the gods are most powrfull and mightie. Then the Romane embassadour spake in this wife. The Macedonians first, and after them the Atheniens,The Oration of the Romane Embassadours. have altered the whole course and forme of my speech. For, whereas my comming hither was to complaine of the injuries done by Philip to so many cities of our allies and associates; the Macedonians by accusing the Romanes first, have put me so hardly to my shifts, that I need rather to employ my wits in making a defence of our selves, than in framing an accusation against others. The Atheniens againe in reckning up and recounting the impious, abhominable,  and inhumane parts of king Philip committed against the gods, both above and beneath, what have they left behind for me or any man els to object against him besides? VVhat they have said, you may well thinke, and truly suppose, that the men of Chios, Abydus, Aenus, Maronea, Thasos, Paros, Samos, Larissa and Messene; those also heere of Achaia, complaine of the same, yea and of more grievous and cruell enormities; as whom he had greater meanes to annoy and hurt. As for such things as hee hath laid to our charge, if they deserve not honor and glorie, I confesse they can not be answered and defended. Reproched us he hath with Rhegyum, with Capua, and Saracose. I cannot denie, but during the warre of Pyrrhus wee sent a legion to Rhegyum, there to lye in garison at the instant prayer of the Rhegines themselves, who requested us to send them. This legion I confesse, most wickedly  and treacherously seazed upon the citie, and possessed it to their owne use, for the guard and defence whereof they were first sent. A vowed wee (I pray you) that act of theirs? Nay, pursued wee not by armes that leaud legion and ungratious? and when wee had them in our power and at our devotion, forced not wee them to make amends and satisfaction to our allies, with the smart of their backe and sides, and with the losse of their heads in the end?

And when wee had so done, restored wee not unto the Rhegynes their citie, their lands, all their goods whatsoever, together with their liberties, franchises, and lawes? As for the Syracusians, when they were oppressed by straunge and forraine tyrants, wee judging it to be a great indignitie, relieved and succoured them: and after we had beene (for three yeeres space almost) wearied and toiled out with continuall siege and uncessant assault both by land and sea of their citie, so exceeding strong and so well fortified; we seeing that the Syracusians themselves made choice rather to be in servitude under those tyrants, than to be taken by us, gave them their citie againe, both forced and freed by the same armies. Neither denie we that Sicilie is our province; and that the cities which took part and sided with the Carthaginians, and joyntly with them accorded to wage warre against us, are tributaries unto us and pay us yeerly rents and pensions: nay we are so farre from not taking this upon us, that contrariwise wee would, that both  you and all nations besides well knew, that every one received at our hands that measure of fortune that he duly deserved. And now as touching the Capuans, should we repent that wee have chastised them in such sort, whereof they themselves verily can not complaine? These men, after we had maintained warre against the Samnites in their quarrell and defence, for the space well neare of seventie yeeres, to no small dispence of ours, and with many a losse and overthrow, after we had linked them unto us, first by league and alliance, then by marriage and affinitie, and last of all, by freedome and burgeoise of our citie: these men I say, in our adversitie, were the first of all other nations of Italie, that vilanously massacred our garrison there, and revolted unto Anniball: and then for very spight and indignation that they were by us besieged, sent Anniball to assaile the citie of Rome. And if we had proceeded in that rigour against them, that we had left  neither citie standing nor any one person of them living, who could take offence thereat, and j^^tly say, That they had bene more hardly entreated and dealt withall than they deserved? There were more of them, that upon touch and pricke of guiltie conscience for their leaud and wicked deeds, made themselves away and so perished, than were by us executed and put to death. As for the rest, we took from them indeed their town, we deprived them of their possessions and livings, yet so, as we left them both lands to occupie, and place to dwell in: the guiltlesse towne it selfe we suffered to stand still safe and sound, that whosoever at this day seeth it, can not find the least token or shew of a citie either forced or woon. But what speake I of Capua? seeing wee have affoorded unto Carthage (a citie conquered and subdued) both peace and also libertie? Insomuch as we have cause rather to be afraid, least by remissenesse and over-willingnes to pardon those  whome we have vanquished, we give occasion to many more to be so bold as to trie the hazard and fortune of warre against vs. And thus much I had to say in defence of our selves. Now somewhat I have to speake against king Philip; whose horrible murders committed upon those of his owne house, even his neerest kinsfolke and friends; whose loose life and unbridled lust (more unkind and inhumane in manner than his crueltie) yee know better that are neerer unto Macedon^e. As for you, my masters of Aetolia, we have for your sakes begun warre with Philip, and you againe without us have concluded peace with him. It may be you will alledge, that whiles we were occupied in the Punicke warre, yee were forced and compelled for feare, to take such conditions of peace at his hands, who was the stronger: we likewise (pressed with greater affaires and troubles) forbare to prosecute and follow that warre, which by you first was laid  downe and given over. At this present, seeing by the grace and goodnesse of the gods the Punicke warre is come to an end, both we have emploied and bent all our forces against Macedonie, and ye also have good occasion and opportunitie offered to reenter into amitie and alliance with us, unlesse ye had rather perish with Philip, than vanquish with the Romanes.

When the Romane Embassadour had ended this Oration, the Aetolians generally were enclined and affected to the Romanes: but Damocritus their Pretor (corrupted as the speech went with a summe of money received from king Philip, and made for him) gave assent neither to the one partie nor the other, but said, That in counsels of great weight and importance, there was nothing more hurtfull and prejudiciall, than hast: for repentance (qd. he) follow it never so soone, when a thing is once done, yet it commeth too late and booteth not: considering, that rash  councels can not be revoked, hastie and headlong courses cannot possibly be recalled, nor matters once past be reduced againe to their former state. As for the proper time of that resolution now in hand, wherof my selfe ain of advise, that the due maturitie and full ripenesse should be expected, it might now at this present be set downe and concluded upon. For seeing that by our

 lawes and ordinances provided it is, that we may not treat of any affaires concerning peace or warre, but in the generall counsels called Panaetolaik or Pylaik: therefore for the present I would have you to ordaine and decree, that your Pretour without fraud or covin might call and hold a Diet or court of Parliament, whensoever he is minded to treat of warre or peace; and whatsoever then and there shall be proposed and determined, it may stand in as good force, strength, and vertue, as if it had passed in a fullParaetolium: A genoalicouncell, where the States of Aetoliae (...) esse^l^ed. Panaetolaik orPylai^s^mcencil^^m: An^^her Diet holden at Therm^p, lae, where the States of Greece or Amphictyones met, and sent ech one their deputie or agens, called Pylagoras. Pylaik councell. Thus the embassadors being dismissed and sent away in suspence, and nothing decided and concluded, he said, That hee had performed a singular peece of service to his nation and countrey. For now they would side and take part with those, whose fortune it were to speed better in the field. Thus went matters in the assembly of the Aetolians.
 Now Philip with all diligence prepared for warre both by sea and land. His sea forces hee assembled together unto Demetrias, a port in Thessalie; making account, that Attalus and the Romane fleet would in the beginning of the next spring depart from Aegina. Over his navie and all the sea coasts he appointed Heraclides Admirall, like as he had done aforetime. Himselfe levied and gathered his land-forces, supposing verily that hee had debarred and bereft the Romanes of two great meanes of aid, to wit, the Aetolians of the one side, and the Dardanians of the other; in that the narrow streights and passage of Pelagonia, was stopped and made sure against them by his sonne Perseus. The Consull on the other side made not preparations for warre, but was on foot and in action alreadie, conducting his armie through the confines of the Dassaretians, and transporting with him out of his wintering harbor all the provision of grain, wherof the country  yeelded him sufficient to the maintenance of his soldiers. The great towns and villages were surrendred unto him, partly for love and partly for feare: some were forced by assault, others abandoned by the inhabitants, and were found desolate, by reason that the barbarous people were retired into the mountaines neare by, to save themselves: and at Lingum neare the river Bevus he encamped; from whence hee sent to purvey for come out of the garners and barnes of the Dassaretians. Philip saw well enough that the country all about was in an hurrey, and the people in great feare and fright; but being uncertaine to what place the Consull entended to march, he sent out a cornet of light horsemen as espials to discover what way the enemies tooke, and whither they pretended to goe. The Consull likewise for his part was as doubtfull: well hee wist that Philip was dislodged from the places where he had wintered, but in what quarter he journied, he  knew not: and therefore he also had set forth certaine horse in espiall to scoure the coasts. These two bands or troupes from divers and contrarie parts, encountred in the end in one way, after they had a long time wandered at adventure through the countrey of the Dassaretians. Both parts knew well by the noise they heard a farre off, as well of men as horse, that enemies approched; and therefore they had both horse and armour in readines, before they were in sight one of another: for so soone as ever they were within their entervieu, they made no stay, but charged immediatly and joyned issue. It fortuned, that for number and valour both, they were equally matched, as being choice and elect men of either side: whereupon they fought for certaine houres alike, uutill such time as their owne wearines and the faintnesse of their horses parted the battaile in doubtfull victorie. Of the Macedonians there died 40 horsemen: and of the  Romans, five and thirty. And for all this, neither brought the Macedonians any better intelligence to their king, nor the Romans to their Consull, of the place where the enemies were incamped. But certaine fugitive traitours gave advertisement thereof: who commonly in all warres, upon a running head and light humour that naturally they have, are given to hearken after news, and to enquire in what tearmes enemies stand. Philip imagining that it would availe somewhat both to purchase the affectionate love of his souldiours, and also to induce them more cheerefully and readily to undertake all hazards for his sake, in case hee seemed to have a carefull regard to burie those horsemen which were slaine in the journey and expedition aforesaid; commaunded their bodies to be brought into the campe, to the end, that all men might see what honour hee did them in their funerals. But see how nothing is more uncertaine, nor whereof a man may  make lesse reckoning than the minds and affections of the multitude! That which was thought would have made them more willing and forward to enter into any daunger and jeopardie whatsoever, even that, wrought a contrarie effect, and caused them to be most fearefull and backward. For they who were used to fight with Greeks and Illyrians, and to see mens bodies wounded with push of pike, galled with arrowes, and pierced with launce here and there, in this or that part;

after they beheld once their fellowes so butcherly mangled with the Spanish curtelaxes and arming  swords, the armes cut away from the bodie, the heads either smitten clean off by the neck, or cloven down right, and lying on the shoulders, their paunches ript with the bowels open, and guts drawing after; with other deepe wounds and broad flashes, most hideous and fearefull to behold; then they saw all full well (fearefull creatures as they were) what manner of weapons, and what kind of men they were to deale against. Nay the king himselfe was terribly afraid, who had not as yet encountred with the Romanes in any set field. Whereupon he sent for his son, to come backe with the garrison that he had in the streights of Pelagonia, thereby to encrease and strengthen his owne forces: and so laid open the way into Macedonia, for Pleuratus and the Dardanians. Himselfe in person with a power of twentie thousand foot, and foure thousand horse, guided by the fugitives abovesaid, marched toward the enemie, and about a quarter of a mile or somewhat  lesse from the Romane campe, possessed himselfe of a little hill neere to Athacum, which he fortified with trench and rampier. From whence, when he beheld the Romanes encamped hard under him, he wondered (by report) to see not only the whole bodie of the camp, with the form and order thereof in generall, but also how every part was raunged and set out in severall, both in the manner of quartering and pitching their pavilions, and also in the proportion of the waies for breadth and length betweene. And having viewed and considered every thing accordingly: Beleeve me (quoth he) there is no man who seeth this, that can either thinke or say, it is the campe of a barbarous nation. For two daies space the Consull and the king (expecting one anothers attempts and enterprises) kept their souldiours close within their holds. When the third day was come, the Romane Generall brought forth his whole power into the field. But the king fearing to  hazard all so soone upon a cast, drew forth foure hundred Triballians (which were, as we have said elsewhere, of the Illyrian nation) and three hundred Cretensians, all footmen, accompanied with the like number of horsemen; and sent them under the conduct of Athenagoras, one of his courteors and gallants, for to brave the Cavallerie of the enemies, and to chalenge them to fight. The Romanes, whose maine battaile was little above halfe a mile off, put out against them their light armed vant-curriers, and as it were, two companies or cornets of horsemen: to the end, that they might be equall with the enemie in number, both of foot and horse. They of the kings part supposed verily, that they should fight after their old and accustomed manner: namely, that the horsemen should by turnes, one while ride forward in the face of the enemie, other while retire againe; sometime follow in chase and have use of their darts and weapons, and sometime  turne and shew their backe parts; that the nimblenesse and activitie of the Illyrians would stand in good steed to make excursions and suddaine skirmishes; also that the Cretensian archers should be emploied in shooting arrowes aloofe at the enemies, as they advaunced and came forward, or flung out all abroad on every side: but the violent charge of the Romanes, no lesse continuall and obstinat, than fierce and eager, put them quite out of this manner of service, and disordered all. For no otherwise than if it had been a set battaile betweene two entier armies, their footmen lightly armed, so soone as they had launced and let goe their javelines from them, tooke them to their swords, and came to hand fight: the horsemen likewise, no sooner affronted the enemies, but either staying their horses they fought on horsebacke, or els a lighted on foot, and among the footmen maintained the medley. By this meanes neither the kings Cavallerie  could match the Romanes, because they had not been used to a steadie battell; nor his footmen who were wont to traverse their ground, and skirmish, never standing still, and withall in manner halfe naked for any harnish they had, was able to make their parts good with the Roman light appointed footmen, who had their swords and bucklers, and were furnished with armour, as well defensive as offensive. So they could not endure long to maintaine fight, but were forced to retire into their campe, and by nothing els saved themselves but by good footmanship and riding apace. There passed one day betweene, when the king minding to trie a conflict with all his forces of Cavallerie, and footmen lightly appointed, had laid in await by night certaine targatiers, whom they call Peltastae, in a convenient place betweene both campes, and given direction and charge unto Athenagoras and his men of armes, That if they sped well in open battell and plaine  fight, they should on still and follow their good fortune: but if they went by the worse, and were too weake, they should give ground by little and little, and traine the enemie to the place of ambush. Well, it fell out so, that the horsemen indeed reculed accordingly, but the leaders of that cohort aforesaid of targatiers, not attending the signall long ynough, but raising their men out

 of ambush before due time, lost the opportunitie of playing their part, and performing a good peece of service.
The Romane Consull having both obtained victorie in ouvert battell, and escaped the daunger of a covert traine, retired himselfe into his campe. The morrow after, he came down into the plaine field with all his forces, and put them in battell array, having arraunged his elephants in the forefront of the vaward. And this was the first time that ever the Romanes had use in their warres, of this beast; by occasion, that in the late Punicke war, they had taken some of them alive from their enemies. But perceiving that Philip kept himselfe close within his campe, hee approched under the very rampier, yea, and reproched him for his cowardise. And seeing for all that, he could not even then be drawne to a battell: considering also, that if he kept there a standing  campe long, so neere unto the enemie, his provision of come should bee exposed to daungers; for no sooner should the purveyors and forragers be gone abroad into the countrey, and spread over the fields, but the enemies light horsemen would be readie at their heeles to fetch them in, and cause them to come short home: therefore he removed his campe to a place almost eight miles off, called Octolophum, where he might make his provision with lesse daunger. Now when the Romanes purveied for corne and victuals in the territorie thereabout, and were come upon a time somewhat neere and within daunger of Philip, at first the king let them alone, and kept his men within their campe, to the end, that they might be more bold and venturous, and withall, lesse warie and circumspect: but espying them once stragling asunder here and there out of order, he set forward with all his Cavallerie, and the auxiliaries of the Candiotes, and marched so  fast, as the swiftest of his footmen by running might keepe pace with the horsemen: thus having gotten betweene them and home, he pitched downe his ensignes betwixt the Romane camp and the forragers. Then devided he his forces in two companies, the one he sent forth to course and chase them, so dispersed as they were; giving speciall charge and direction, not to leave any of them alive that they could reach: with the other he staied himselfe behind, and beset all the waies, and stopped the passages by which the enemies were like to retire and have recourse unto their campe. Soone were they killed or put to flight in every place, and as yet not one escaped to the Romane campe, for to bring newes of this discomfiture: for, as many as fled backe, chaunced upon the guard that the king had set: and more were slaine by them that beset the waies, than those that were sent out to the pursuite and execution. At length some happened  to escape through the middest of the kings corps de guard, and in great hast and fearefull maner came into the campe with a troublesome noise and tumult, rather than any certaine tidings. The Consull, after order given to the horsemen, that every man should succour and rescue what way soever hee could, their distressed fellowes in this extremitie, himselfe led forth the legions out of the campe, and marching in a fouresquare battaillon advaunced toward the enemies. The horsemen being spred over the fields in divers places, some lost their right way, being deceived by other outcryes heard from a contrary part: othersome met with their enemies, and at one instant, the skirmish began in many and sundrie places. The band that guarded about the king, fought most fiercely and cruelly: for both they were for their owne number as well of horse as foote, a full armie welneere; and also most of the Romanes light upon them, because  they kept the very port and rodeway in the middes. In this regard also were the Macedonians the better and had the vantage, because the king himselfe was present in person to encourage and exhort them: and withall the auxiliarie Candiotes wounded many of the Romanes ere they were aware of them: for why, they were well prepared aforehand, raunged thicke and close together, and so fought against them that rode skattering abroad one from another, and without array. And verily, if they could have kept any mean and measure in their chase, they had mightily advanced themselves, not onely in winning the honor of that day, but also, in the maine point of the whole warre. But pursuing them beyond all reason, and without discretion, upon a bloudthirstie desire that they had of massacre, they chaunced upon the Romane squadrons which were gone before with the Tribunes and Colonels: in so much as the horsemen aforesaid,  who before fled, when they once saw the ensignes of their owne infanterie, reined their horse heads, and turned againe upon the enemie that ran with bridle in horse neck: and so in the turning of an hand, the fortune of the battaile chaunged and came about, and they that erewhile made pursute, now shewed their backes, and fled amaine. Many of them were staine that came to close handfight, many likewise of those that ran away. Neither fell they all upon the edge of

the sword, for some there were who plunged into bogs and marishes, where both horse and man  sunke in the deep mud and mire, and so were swallowed up and perished. The king himselfe also was in great daunger: for his horse being wounded under him and fallen, he also came headlong down to the ground, and hardly escaped, but hee had been troden under foot, and mischeeved as hee lay along. One horseman above the rest saved his life, who hastily lept himselfe from horsebacke, and withall mounted the king (so skared as he was) upon his owne horse: who being now on foote, and not able to run as fast as the horsemen that fled away, was with many a stab and thrust soone dispatched by the enemies that came running together to the king when he was seene to fall. And the king after he had ridden in fearefull flight about the fenny meeres, one while where there was some way, and otherwhiles where there was none at all to be seene, chaunced at length to come to his camp, when most men were in despaire that he could possibly escape in safetie. In this skirmish there were two hundred Macedonians slaine, a hundred almost taken prisoners: foureskore brave and goodly coursers, with rich caparisons and other furniture, together with the spoile of faire armours caried away.
There were that blamed the king for being too rash that day, and the Consull for his slacknesse. For Philip, say they, should have kept him quiet in rest and repose, knowing, as he did, that the enemies within few dayes would have bene brought to extreame want and penurie, now that the territorie all about was cleane spoiled and wasted. And the Consull for his part, when he had foiled the Cavallerie and light armed souldiours of the enemies, and as good as taken the king prisoner, ought presently to have advaunced against the kings camp: for never would the enemies so discomfited have stood to it: and so in the minute of an houre, they had bene vanquished  for ever. This is soone said, but (as most things els) not so soone done. For in case that the king had likewise brought forth into the field all his Infanterie, peradventure in that tumult, when all his men were discomfited and driven to flie out of the field to their camp, yea and to keepe within the rampiar, for feare of the enemie, readie upon his victorie to get over the counterscarp and other fortifications, the king might have bene deseized of his hold, and lost all. Again considering, that the whole power of Philip his footmen remained still intier within the camp, the corps de gard before the gates warding; the sentinels and watch set in convenient places of the rampier attending: what other good should the Consull have done in advauncing thither, but imitated the rash foole hardinesse of the king, who a little before so hotely followed the chase of the horsemen discomfited? Neither was the kings first designement to be reproved  and found fault with, when he charged upon the foragers, skattered as they were over all the fields: if he could have seene when he was well, and have used his good hand in measure and moderation. Lesse mervaile it is besides, that he was willing to trie the fortune of a battaile; because there ran a rumor, that Pleuratus and the Dardanians were departed from home, and with a puissant power entred alreadie into Macedonie: And if hee thus were beset round about with these armies, there was no doubt but the Romanes might have vanquished and subdued him, and never stirred foote for the matter. Philip therefore supposing that upon these two late received foiles of the horsemen, he should have but unquiet and dangerous sitting in the same standing camp still: and minding to dislodge from thence, and in his remove to beguile the enemie and not be seene, dispatched a Pursevant at armes or herald unto the Consull, a little before  sunne setting, to crave surcease of armes, untill he had buried his horsemen that were slaine: and at the reliefe of the second watch he deceived the enemie; for leaving many fires through all his camp, he marched without any noyse and departed. The Consull had newly supped, and was going to rest, when he was advertised that a Pursevant was come, and what his errand was. And for the present, he made the messenger no other answere but this, that the next morning he would talke with him, and geve him audience. But Philip by this meanes got the advantage of that whole night, and part of the next day, to gaine riddance of way in his journey, which was the only thing he sought for. And toward the mountaines he tooke his flight, for that way he wist well the Romanes would not follow after, with an armie so heavie and changed as it was. The Consull by day breake, graunted the Pursevant a cessation of armes, and gave him his dispatch: but it was not long after that he was advertised how the enemie was gone: and not knowing which way to follow after, he passed some few dayes in foraging and purveying provision all about the place where he lay encamped.
After this he marched to Stubera, and gathered together all the graine that was to be had

 about Pellagonia. From thence he went forward as farre as to Pluvina, and all this while knew not for certeine into what quarter of the countrey the enemies were retired. Philip having first set him downe and encamped before Bruana, and departed from thence by crosse and crooked wayes, strucke a sodaine feare into the enemie, whereupon the Romanes dislodged from Pluvina, and neere unto the river Osphagus pitched their pavilions. The king likewise rested himselfe not farre from thence, and had cast a trench and raysed a rampier along the banks of the river, which the inhabitants call Erigonus. And after he was for certein advertised, that the Romanes intended to goe to Erduaea, he marched afore to seize upon the streights, and to empeach the enemies, that they should not gaine the passage that lyeth as it were in a narrow gullet, barred and enclosed on each side. There hee raised in one place a rampier, and  cast a trench in another; made barricadoes heere and there, partly by piling stones up on heapes in steed of a wall, partly by felling of trees acrosse, according as either the ground would geve leave, or the place affourd matter: And thus stopping up all the wayes by sundrie devises and meanes, hee made the place (to his thinking) both unpassable and imprenable, which of it selfe by nature was hard enough and troublesome. The countrey all about was for the most part forrests, and full of wood, verie incommodious, especially for that manner of battailons and ordinance of array, which the Macedonians call Phalanx: which serveth them in small or no steed at all, unlesse with their long pikes they may make a pallisade, or hay (as it were) and oppose them before their shields: which they cannot well doe, unlesse they have free scope and libertie of plaine and open ground. The Thracians also were  fouly troubled and combred with their speares named Rhomphraeae, which were likewise of a mightie length, and by reason thereof (catching as they did, and snarling within the boughes and branches of trees that grew in their way every where about) hindered them verie much. There remained the Cohort or band of the Candiotes, that seemed of some use for to bee employed. And yet the same also as it was able to discharge arrowes against both horse and man, and to annoy them so long as they lay open and exposed to shot, if happily they offered charge; so they were not of strength sufficient to drive their shafts levell, and to pierce thorough the Romane targets: for otherwise there was no part of the bodie offered it selfe unarmed and naked for to aime at. And therfore so soone as they perceived that kind of shot to serve them to little or no purpose, they caught up stones which lay all over the valley, and let them  fire at the enemie. Which stones, as they light and beat upon their bucklers, kept a great clattering, and with the sound they made (rather than with any hurt besides) kept the Romanes for a time from mounting up the banke. But the Romanes making no reckoning of these stones neither, partly by pavoises and target-fences over their heads, made way directly through the thickest of their enemies; and partly by wheeling a little and fetching some compasse about, gained the pitch of the hill, and were gotten up to the very top: from whence they drave the Macedonians (all affrighted as they were) downe the hill, and chased them from their holds and guards: and by reason they had much adoe to flie (the ground was so rough and uneven) most of them were killed and cut in peeces. Thus the difficultie of the streights was overcome, and they were possessed thereof, with farre lesse trouble and conflict than they looked for and made account  of. Then they marched on forward as farre as to Erduaea, where the Consull after he had put the fields all over to the wast, retired himselfe to Elimaea. From thence he forced Orestides, and assailed the towne Celetrum, situate as it were, in a demie Iland: there is a lake that environeth the walls, and but one way by land that leadeth to the towne from the maine, and the same very streight and narrow, in forme of a gullet. At the first when the towne was summoned, the inhabitants trusting to the naturall strength of the place, kept their gates shut against the Consull, and refused his summons. But after they saw once the ensigns displaied and marching against them, when they perceived the enemies defended under a pavoise to approch close to the gate, and the narrow streight and avenue aforesaid, beset with a band of them; before they would encounter and fight, they yeelded themselves for very fear. From Celetrum he marched on towards  the Dassaretians, and wan by assault the citie Pelium. From thence he caried away the bondslaves, with the rest of the pillage; but all persons whatsoever free borne, hee let goe at libertie without paying ransome. The towne he gave them againe, after hee had planted in it a strong garrison: for it stood well, and in a verie good place, for to make rodes and incursions into Macedonia. Thus the Consull having raunged over the countrey of the enemies, brought his armie backe

through the peaceable parts into Apollonia, where he began first to make warre.
Now the Aetolians, the Athamanes, and Dardanians, and many other warres rising sodainly  at once, some from one place and some from another, had diverted and turned Philip a contrarie way. Against the Dardanians (as they returned out of Macedonia) he sent Athenagoras with the footmen lightly armed and appointed, and the greater part also of the horse, giving him in charge and direction to follow them hard at their heeles as they departed, and to play upon their backes, and cut off the taile of their rereward; to teach them against another time, not to be so hastie to come abroad with an armie againe. Democritus the Pretour of the Aetolians (who in the Dict aforesaid held at Naupactum, persuaded to take a longer time for to consult about this warre) had in the next councell or parliament following, mooved the Aetolians to enter into armes; namely upon the same that was spread abroad of the horsmens fight before Octolophus;  and also upon the comming of the Dardanians, and Ple^rat^s with the Illyrians into Macedony: besides the arrivall of the Romane fleet at Oreum, and the generall voice and bruit that went, how Macedonie should shortly be assailed also by sea, over and above so many nations that from all parts about were come alreadie by land. These motives regained Democritus and the Aetolians to friend the Romanes againe. Who joyning unto them Aminander the king of the Athanians, went forth together for to besiege Cercinium. They within the towne had shut their gates, whether by constraint or willingly of themselves, it was not knowen: for they had the kings garrison within among them. How ever it was, within few daies Cercinium was taken and burnt. As many as remained alive after that great defeature, as well bond as free one with another, were with the rest of the pillage carried away. This fearefull example caused all the people inhabiting  about the marrish of Boebe, to abandon their cities, and to retire themselves for securitie into the mountaines. The Aetolians for want of rich prey and bootie (which they could not find there) turned from them and marched toward Perrhaebia. In that quarter they woon by force the citie Cyretirae, and cruelly put it to the ransack. The inhabitants of Malloea surrendred of themselves without compulsion, and were received into protection as allies. Out of Perrhebaea Aminander was of advise and desirous to march against Gomphos, by reason that the countrey of Athamania bordered so neere upon that citie, and it seemed easie to be forced without much trouble. But the Aetolians fingers tickled and itched againe to be doing with the rich and fertile fields of Thessalie, and thither went they to raise booties and seeke pillage. Athamander followed still for companie, albeit he liked well neither of these fashions of the Aetolians thus  outragiously to make rodes and to spoile every where; nor of their manner of encamping at adventure, in what places soever they chanced to come, without all discretion, regard, and care of fortifying and guarding the armie. Fearing therefore least their inconsiderate rashnes and supine negligence, might be an occasion that he or his should come to a shrewd turne, and incurre some domage, spyed his time; and seeing them to incampe in a plaine neere to the city Phaecadum, he tooke a little hill little above halfe a mile off, where both he and his, might with the helpe of any small guard, lie in securitie. Now when as the Aetolians seemed in manner to have forgotten that they were in the enemies country, but that they drave some booties: whiles they were some of them wandring and stragling, disbanded and halfe armed, others within their campe without any corps du guard, swilling and sleeping all night and day long, and made no  difference of the times, Philip came upon them before they looked for him. And it being once known by the report of some that fled out of the fields in great affright, that he approched; then Democr^^us and the rest of the captaines began to quake for feare. Now was it about noonetide of the day, at what time as most of them having taken their full lode of wine and viands, lay along fast asleepe. Then they fell to awake and raise one another, and to give the alarme: anon they sent out every way to call in those that were preading abroad in the fields. So much they were astonied, that for hast many of the horsemen went forth without their swords, and most of them forgat to put on their cuiraces. Thus being led out in post hast, and hardly in all (foot and horse together) able to make up the number of sixe hundred, they light upon the kings Cavallerie, for number, armour, and courage much better than themselves. And therefore at the first push were discomfited: for before they were well entred into skirmish, they fled shamefully away toward their campe. Some of them came short thither, and were either slaine or taken prisoners, even as many as the kings horsemen overtooke, and gat betweene them and their other companies that fled. Philip, when he saw his men approch neere unto their campe, commaunded

 to sound the retreat: for both horse and man was wearie, not so much with fight as with their long journey and the exceeding speed that they made. Whereupon hee gave commaundement, that the horsemen by troups, and the light armed footmen by their companies and squadrons should water their horses one after another, and go to their dinner and repast. Others lie kept still in armour for a guard attending the regiment of the footmen, that came but slowly forward, by reason they were heauily armed at all peeces; who being come, they also were enjoyned to pitch downe their ensigns, and lay their weapons before them, and to take a short bait and hastie pittance, sending two or three at the most out of every band for to water the horses. All this while the horsemen, together with the light armed souldiours, stood well appointed and in readinesse, if happily the enemie would have given any attempt.  The Aetolians bestowed armed men all about the gates and the rampier, intending to guard and defend their strength and fortifications, for now by this time they also that were scattered over the fields, had retired themselves into the campe. And so long as they beheld the enemies to keepe quiet, and not stirre, and were themselves in a sure hold, they made their bravadoes, and were very lustie: but after that the ensignes of the Macedonians began to advaunce forward, and march in order of battell well appointed, close unto their trench; all at once they abandoned their guards and quarters, and ran out at the backe part of their campe, and fled to the foresaid hill, where the Athamaniens were encamped. Many of the Aetolians were likewise in this hastie flight killed or taken prisoners. Philip made no doubt, but that the Athamaniens also might have been driven from their hold, if there had beene day ynough behind: but the day being spent alreadie  first in the skirmish, and afterward in the ransacking of their campe, he set him downe upon the next plaine, hard at the foot of the hill aforesaid, intending very early the next morning to affaile the enemie. The Aetolians skared as much now, as they were before when they quit their owne campe, fled scattering away the night following. Here Aminander stood them in very good steed, by whose good guidance and direction, the Athamaniens being skilful in the coasts of the countrie, conducted them into Aetolia, over the high mountaines, whereas the enemies followed after them in blind and unknowne by-waies. Some few of them happened in this confused and scattered flight to loose their way, and stumble upon the Macedonian horsemen, whom Philip by day light, had sent to cut off the taile of the enemies, so soone as he perceived the hill abandoned. About the very same time, Athenagoras a captaine under the king, overtooke the Dardanians  as they returned into their countrey, and at the first put their arrierward in disarray. But afterwards the Dardanians turned head againe, and embattelled themselves: so they fought on even hand, and nothing was woon nor lost on any side. The Dardanians began not so soone to advance forward and march on againe, but the kings power, with their horsemen and light armed souldiours came upon them afresh, and put them to great trouble. For they had no such meanes of helpe, and were besides surcharged with heavie armour, and withall, the place gave great advantage to those of the kings part. Very few were slaine, more wounded, none at all taken prisoners: for the manner of the Dardanians, is not to breake out of their rankes and arraies for a little, and upon small occasions; but as they fight close, so they retire together, and part not. Thus Philip having restrained these 2 nations, by 2 brave exploits, which were as happily performed as bravely  enterprised, recovered the losses againe, by him received in the Romane warre. There happened besides, another occurrent, which deminished the number of his enemies the Aetolians. For Scopas, one of th^ cheefe noblemen of that nation, being sent from Alexandria by king Ptolomaeus, with a mightie masse of gold, caried away with him into Aegypt sixe thousand footmen, and certaine horsemen, waged for mony to serve. Neither had he left behind him any of the floure and youth of Aetolia, if Damocritus had not chastised and rebuked them, and so by that means kept some of them at home; making remonstrances unto them, one while of the warre that was toward, and another while of the desolation which was like to ensue thereupon. But whether he did this upon a good zeale and care that he had of his countrey, or only to crosse Scopas, because he  had not sed him well with rich rewards and fat presents, it is not known. And thus much concerning the affaires passed betweene Philip and the Romanes for that summer.
The Romane fleet having in the beginning of the same summer committed to sea from Corcyra, together with the lieutenant Au. Apustius passed beyond the point of the cape Malea, and joined with king Attalus, neere Scyllaeum in the territorie of Hermione. Then the whole cittie and State of Athens, upon hope of present aid and succour, brake out and poured forth at once

all the hatred and malice which they had conceived against Philip, and which a long time for very  feare they had held in, and therefore kept themselves in good and reasonable tearmes with him. Now in this citie there never want prompt and readie tongues to stirre up and provoke the common people to a commotion. And as in all free States generally such kind of men are entertained and borne out by the favor of the multitude, so in Athens especially, where eloquence is in most request, and beareth greatest sway. Presently therfore an Act was put up and proposed unto the common people, and by them graunted and confirmed, That all the Statues and Images of king Philip, together with their titles and stiles, likewise of all his progenitors and predecessors, as well men as women, should be defaced, pulled downe, and destroied. Item, That all the festivall daies, the sacrifices and sacrificers, which had been instituted and ordained for the honor of him, should bee profaned and unhallowed againe. Item, That the very places, wherein ought  had been erected, or inscriptions graven to his honour, should be held as detestable and accursed: and that from thence forward, it might not bee lawfull to set up there any of those things that ought to stand, and be dedicated in a pure and cleane place. Item, That the publicke priests of the citie, in all their praiers, and so often as they praied for the good estate of the people of Athens and their allies, for the preservation of their armies and armadaes; should detest and curse by name king Philip, his children and realme, his forces both by land and sea, with all the race and name of the Macedonian nation. Moreover, it ran on in the decree, That if any man from that time forward, would preferre and propound any thing that might tend to the disgrace and infamie of Philip, the whole people of Athens should approve and allow the same whatsoever, and make an act thereof. Contrariwise, if any person say or doe any thing for his honour, or to impeach and checke his dishonour, whosoever should happen to kill the said partie, he should be deemed and reputed, that he had killed him justly and lawfully. Finally, this branch was comprised within the decree, That all things ordained in times past against Pisistratus his line and progenie, should bee observed and stand in force against Philip. Thus verily warred the Athenians against Philip with letters and words: wherein they are right valiant, and to say truth, good at nothing els. But Attalus and the Romans, having from Hermionae shaped their course for Pyreaeum, arrived there. And after they had sojourned some few daies in Athens, and were loden with a number of decrees, wherein the Athenians recounted the praises and commendations of their allies beyond all measure, like as they had before exceeded in shewing their malice against their enemie; they set saile from Pyreaeum to Andros. Where, riding at anker in the bay  called Gaureleon, they sent certaine men to sound the minds of the inhabitants, Whether they would chuse to yeeld the towne willingly, or rather abide the hazard of a forcible assault. Who answered againe, that the kings garrison being possessed of the castle, and keeping it for Philip, they were not their owne maisters. Whereupon the king and the Roman lieutenant set their forces on land, and with all preparation of engines and artillerie fit for an assault, approched the citie divers waies. The Romane standerds and their armes, not seen before in those parts, the resolute courage also of the souldiours, who so lustily and nimbly came neere to skale the walls, terrified and amased the Greekes, much more than any thing els. Therefore immediately they fled into the castle, and the enemies were LL. of the citie. Now, after they had for two daies space held out in the fortresse, presuming more upon the strength of the place, than the force of their armour  and weapons; they and the garison together, compounded upon the third day to quit the place, so they might be brought with a convoy to Delium, a towne in Boeotia, and ev^ry man to have one single suite of apparell. Then the Romanes leaving the bare citie unto king Attalus, ransacked it themselves, and tooke away with them all the pillage and ornaments that beautified the same. And to the end, that the Isle should not lie wast and desart, Attalus persuaded the Macedonians in manner all, and certaine also of the Andrians, there to remain. Afterwards, they also who by composition were transported to Delium, were by the faire promises of the king drawn away from thence: which they gave eare and credit unto the sooner, for the love of their native country, the misse whereof they might hardly brooke. From Andros they crossed to Cythnus. There they spent certaine daies in assaulting the citite, to no purpose: and seeing the gaines would hardly  quit their paines, they departed from thence. Neere unto Prasiae (which is a place of Attica within the maine) there joined unto the Roman fleet twentie pinnasses of the Issaeans, who were sent to rob and spoile the territorie of the Carystians: the rest of the fleet remained at Gerestum, a noble rode and port of Euboea, untill such time as the Issaei were returned from Carystum. Then all

 together they made saile, and passing the mids of the maine sea, they fell with the isle of Icus, neer unto Scyrus. There they were staied for certaine daies, by reason of the raging Northwind: which being once laid and the sea calme again, they passed to Scyathos, a citie lately pilled and ransacked by K. Philip. The soldiers raunged over the countrie, and brought corn with them to their ships, and whatsoever else was fit for mans food. Other bootie neither was there any, not deserved had the Greeks to be spoiled at their hands, Thence they bent their course for Casandrea; and first they rode at anker neer unto Mendis, a village situate by the sea side, and belonging to that State. From whence having sailed beyond the cape, and desirous to come about with their vessels for to approch the verie walles of the citie, there arose a tempest and sodaine ghust; wherein they had like to have beene cast away: but scattered they were asunder; and having for the most part lost  the rackling of their ships, they escaped with much adoe to land. This tempest at sea, was also a fore-token presaging unto them, that they were to follow the warre by land, and to give over sea service. For when they had brought all their ships together and set their men a shore, they assailed the towne: but they had the repulse with many a bloudie blow besides (for there was within, a strong garison of the kings) whereupon they gave over their enterprise, returned backe, and sailed over to Canastaeum a citie of Pallaene. And having doubled the point of Torona, they set their course for Acanthus. There at first they forraied the territorie; then forced the town, and ransaked it. And for that their ships had their ful fraught and charge of pillage, they sailed no farther forward, but returned from whence they came to Scyarhus, and from thence to Eubaea: where leaving behind them maine navie, they put in with ten ships lightly appointed,  to the Bay or gulfe of Malea, for to parley with the Aetolians about the whole course and managing of the warres. The chiefe of this embassage sent from the State, was one Sipyrrhicas an Aetolian, who came to Heraclea for to treat and conferre about these affaires together with the king and the Romane Lieutenant. They demaunded of Attalus by vertue of the accord and agreement before made, to furnish them with a thousand souldiours: for so many ought hee by right to set out and mainteine, whensoever they were to wage warre against Philip. But this demand was denied to the Aetolians; in regard that aforetime they likewise thought much to make a rode to spoile Macedonie, at what time as Philip kept foule worke about Pergamus, burning all edifices before him, as well sacred as prophane, when they mought have drawne him perforce from thence into his owne realme to looke unto his proper affaires there.  Thus the Aetolians were dismissed with more hope than helpe: for the Romanes sed them only with faire words, and large promises of all things. Then Apustrus with king Attalus returned to the fleet.
After this they laid their heads together, and began to consult about the siege and assault of Oreum. A strong citie this was both in regard of the walls, and also of a good garison, by reason that heretofore it had ben once assailed. Now there were 20 saile of Rhodian ships all close covered with hatches and decks, which under the conduct of captaine Agesimbrotus, had joyned with the fleete of Attalus and the Romanes, after the winning and conquest of Andros. These ships they sent to lye in the Bay of Zelasium, (a promontorie or cape above the citie Demetrias, lying very conveniently over against Isthmia) for this intent, that if the Macedonian ships  should come abroad from thence, they might be readie in gard to make saile against them. Heraclides an admirall for king Philip, lay there at rode with the navie, attending rather some enterprise by opportunitie and vantage of the enemies negligence, than by plaine and open force. The Romanes and Attalus in the meane time planted their ordinance against Oreum at divers parts. The Romanes at the castle side that standeth upon the sea: The king from the vale that lieth betweene two forts, where as the citie is enclosed also with a wall. And as they assailed in sundrie places; so their manner of assailing was much different, and their engins divers. The Romanes assayed to approch the wall with tortoises, pavoises and mantilers, and to shake it with the Ram: They of the kings part used Crossebows, Balists, Catapults, and all manner of engins to shoot forth quarels and darts, yea and to levell and weigh mightie stones of exceeding great  weight. They undermined also: and in summe, they practised all meanes which they saw by experience did good during the former assault and siege. But the Macedonians were not only more in number than the time before to defend the citie, but also of better courage and resolution: by reason that the king had rebuked them sharply for their fault passed: and they remembred well both his menaces, and also his promises for the time to come: in so much as the

assailants had small hope to win the towne in hast. Meane while the Romane Lieutenant, supposing  that some other exploit might be performed, leaving a sufficient number (as he thought) for the finishing of the fabriks begun, and other engins of assault, put over to the next places of the continent: where he surprised on a sodaine Larissa (not that noble and renowned citie in Thessalie, but another, which they call Cremaste) and woon it, all but the fortresse. Attalus in like sort tooke Aegeleon, fearing nothing lesse than such an accident from them that were busie in besieging another towne. By this time, as the engins and other fabricks without Oreum were at the point of finishing, and readie to performe the batterie for which they were made: so the garison within was overtoiled with continuall paine and travaile, spent with watching night and day, and faint with many a grievous wound. Moreover, part of the wall, shaken underneath with a butt and push of the Ram, was alreadie fallen downe in sundrie places, in so much as the Romanes  entred by night at the open breaches, and all the way above the Key, and so were possessed of the castle. Attalus likewise by the breake of day, after he saw the banner reared upon the fortresse, and the signall which the Romanes put forth, entred the citie; for now the walls in many places lay along. The garison and the townesmen fled to a second citadell that they had, from whence after two dayes they yeelded. The citie was the kings lot: the bodies of the prisoners, were the Romanes share. Now drew the sunne neere unto the Aequinoctiall line in Autumne, at what time the Euboean gulfe called Coela is dangerous, and not well trusted of mariners. Therefore being desirous to be gone into a place of safe retreat, before the troublesome winter weather overtooke them, they turned their course and made head to Pyraeeum, from whence they came: where Apustius leaving behind him thirtie ships, set a compasse about the  cape of Malea, and sailed to Corcyra. But the king stayed still so long as the festivall dayes of Ceres continued, because he would be present at the celebration of those solemnities. After the feast ended, himselfe likewise retired into Asia: but first he sent Agesimbrotus and the Rhodians home againe. These were the affaires and exploits performed this summer by sea and land, by the Romane Consull and the Lieutenant generall, with the aid of king Attalus and the Rhodians, against king Philip and his allies.
The other Consull C. Aurelius being come into his province when the warre was brought to an end, could not smudder and conceale his anger conceived against the Pretour for fighting in his absence. When he had taken order therefore to send him into Etruria, himselfe with the legions invaded the countrey of the enemies: where by way of robbing and spoiling he warred  so as he got more prey then praise. But L. Furius, seeing there was little to do in Etruria, and withall desirous rather than his life of a triumph over the Gaules (which he supposed to obteine with more case, whiles the Consull was absent, who was both angrie with him, and also envied at him) arrived at Rome before any man looked for him, and assembled the Senate in the temple of Bellona. Where, after he had declared what acts he had atchieved, he requested that he might be permitted to ride into the citie with triumph. In great credit and accoumpt he was with many of the Senatours, both for his noble and worthie deeds, in which regard they honoured him: and also for a speciall favour and love, in which respect they affected him. But the more auncient and elder Senatours denied him triumph, as well for that he had warred with the armie of another, as also because he had abandoned his owne province and government, upon a greedie desire to catch a triumph, by waiting his opportunitie, and taking advantage: a thing not warrantable by any former precedent or example.
And as many of them as had bene Consuls said moreover, That above all things he ought to attend upon the Consull his returne. For well might he (say they) being encamped neere unto the citie, have defended and guarded the Colonie only, and so have drawen the time out untill his comming, and never needed to have fought a set battaile for the matter. And although the Pretour have omitted so to do, yet ought not the Senate to follow his example, but expect the Consull. When as therefore they shall have heard the Consull and Pretour discoursing and arguing the matter both together face to face, then they should be able to judge better and more soundly of the cause.
A great part of the house was of opinion that they ought to looke unto nothing els but  the good service done, and whether he were lawfully called thereunto, as a magistrate of himselfe, to manage his affaires by his proper conduct and the guidance of his owne fortune.
For, of the two Colonies (say they) which were opposed as two sorts and bulwarks to restraine the sodaine impressions and tumults of the French; when the one was sacked and burnt, and the

 same fire like to leape from it to the other so neere, (as from house to house that joyne together) what could the Pretour have done otherwise in that case? For if there might be nothing attempted without the Consull, it must needs follow, that either the Senate did amisse in geving the Pretour the charge of an armie (for if their will was that the warre should be managed not by the Pretours armie, but by the Consuls, they might have limited it in the Commission by speciall words, expressely forbidding the service to be done by the Pretour, but onely by the Consull) or else the Consull hath committed a fault, who having commaunded the armie to go out of Tuskane into Fraunce, came not himselfe in person to Ariminum to encounter the enemie, and be present in that warre, which without him might not be lawfully fought. Over and besides, the occasions and seasons of warre attend no stayes, and tarie for no  politick delayes of Generals. And otherwhiles, fight a man must, not because he is willing thereto, but because his enemie puts him to it. To conclude, the very battaile it selfe, and the happie issue thereof, ought onely to be considered and regarded. The enemies are defeated and slaine; their camp taken and ransaked; the siege raised from the one Colonie, and it preserved; the captives of the other recovered and restored to their friends; and to be briefe, in one battaile the quarell is decided, and the warre finished. And not onely men have rejoyced for this victorie, but also there have bene processions for three dayes space to the honor of the immortall gods: FOR THAT LU. FURIUS HATH MANAGED THE COMMON-VVEALE VVELL AND HAPPILY, AND NOT ILL AND RASHLY. Finally, these French warres fall by a fatall destenie to the house and race of the Furij. By these and such like remonstrances alleaged by himselfe  and his friends, the majestie of the Consull absent was overweighed with the favour borne to the Pretour present.
And so in a frequent assembly of Senatours, a decree was graunted, That L. Furius should ride in triumph. Thus triumphed over the Gaules L. Furius Pretour, whiles he was in office. He brought into the common treasurie 320000 Asses, 170000 pound weight of silver. But neither were there any prisoners led captives in shew, nor spoiles caried in pomp before his chariot, nor yet his souldiers followed after. So as it appeered, that all other things besides victorie alone, perteined properly to the Consull.
After this were the plaies exhibited with great magnificence, by P. Cornel. Scipio, which hee h^d vowed in Affricke, during his Cousulship. Also there passed an order for the lands of his souldiours; That for so long as each one had served in Spaine or Affricke, hee should have two  acres for every yere: and that these lands should be set out and assigned unto them by ten Decemvirs for the purpose deputed. Then were certaine Triumvirs created for to supply and make up the number of Romane inhabitants in Venusia, by reason that during the time of Anniball his warre, the strength of that colonie was much enfeebled and impaired. C. Terentius Varre, T. Quintus Flaminius, and P. Cornelius Scipio the sonne of Cneus, enrolled new coloners to inhabite Venusia.
The same yeere C. Cornelius Cethegus, who governed Spaine as Proconsull, discomfited a great hoast of the enemies in the countrie of the Sedetanes. In which battaile, by report, were shine 15000 Spaniards, and 78 militarie ensignes taken. C. Aurelius the Consull, when hee was returned out of his province to Rome against the solemne election of magistrates, complained,  not as men made reckoning he would have done; (That the Senate expected not for his comming, nor that the Consull was not permitted to debate the matter with the Pretour) but found himselfe grieved, That the Senate had decreed a triumph so, as the partie onely was suffered to speake who was to triumph, and none of them ^^ght be heard who were present at the battaile. And whereas our forefathers ordained, that lieutenants, colonels, marshals, and centurians, yea, and in one word, the souldiours should be at a triumph; for this end and purpose, that the truth might appeare to the world, of all things atchieved by him unto whome so great honor was to be done: Was there any one (quoth he) of all that armie which fought with the Gaules, I say not a souldier, but so much as a lackey or horseboy following the campe, of whome the Senate might enquire, whether the Pretour spake true or false? This done and said, he published  the day of assembly for the election abovesaid: wherein were created Consuls L. Cornelius Lentulus, and P. Villius Tappulus. After them were Pretors chosen L. Quintius Flaminius, L. Valerius Flaccus, L. Villius Iappulus, and C. Bebius Pamphilus. Graine and other victuals that yeare were cheape. Great store of corne was brought out of Affricke, which the Aediles of the chaire distributed to the people, at i. d. ob. sie^i.two Asses a Modius. They also set forth the Roman games and pastimes

right sumptuously; yea and represented them one day more than ordinarie, Moreover, of the  ^^er raised by fines and forfeitures, they made seven brasen statues, which they set up in the (...) house of the city. The Plebeian plaies likewise were thrice renued all over by the Aediles (...) the commons L. Terentius Mas^aliota, and C. Bebius Pamphilus Pretour elect. Finally, the su^^erall games that yeere were foure daies together exhibited in the common place of the citie, ^^ca^ioned by the death of M. Valerius Laevinus: and celebrated they were by his two sonnes (...) and M. who also shewed unto the people a brave spectacle of fencers at the sharpe: wherein ^^ere were five and twentie couples that entred the lists and performed combat. M. Aurelius Cott^ ^^e of the Decemvirs, that yeer departed this life; and in his place M. Acilius Glabrio was subordained. In the solemne assembly for electing Aediles of the chaire, it chaunced that those two which were chosen, might not immediatly enter into office: for C. Cornelius Cethegus was created  in his absence, whiles he governed the province of Spaine. And C. Valerius Flaccus who was present at his owne election, might not be sworne to maintaine the lawes, because hee was the Flamin or priest of Iupiter. For lawfull it was not for any magistrate to exercise his place above five daies, unlesse he were sworne to the lawes. Then Flaccus preferred a petition that he might be dispensed with: wherupon the Senat ordained, That if the Aedile would find one to sweare in his name at the good pleasure and discretion of the Consuls, then the Consuls (if they thought it mee:) should deale with the Tribunes of the Commons, to propound it unto the people that it might passe under their graunt. So L. Valerius Flaccus (the Pretour elect for the yeere following) was presented to take the oath for his brother. Then the Tribunes put it to a canvase before the people, and they enacted, That the oth of his brother should be of the same validitie  as if the Aedile himselfe had taken it in his own person. Concerning the other Aediles also, there passed an act of the commons. For when the Tribunes proposed unto the people, Which two they would have to go into Spain as LL. deputies, with commaund over the armies; to the end, that C. Cornelius the Aedile of the chaire might come home to beare his office, and L. Manlius also after so many yeeres, depart out of his province: the people ordained, that Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and L. Stertinius should have the conduct and government in Spaine, in qualitie and title of Proconsuls.




THE XXXII BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the two and thirtith Booke.
MAny straunge and prodigious sights (as they were reported from divers countries) are here related and set downe: among which, this is one; that in Macedonie there was a bay tree sprung up of it selfe in the poupe of a galley. T. Quintius Flamininus the Consull fought fortunately against Philip in the st^eights of Epirus: and having put him to flight, hee compelled him to returne into his owne kingdome. Himselfe, with the assistance of the Aetolians and Athamanes, infested sore and plagued Thessalie, which bordereth upon Macedonie. L. Quintius Flamininus the Consull his brother, by the aid of king Attalus and the Rhodians, made conquest by war at sea, of Eubaea and all the sea coast. The Achai werereceived into amitie. The conspiracie of slaves, that complotted to deliver and set at large the hostages of the Carthaginians, was detected and tooke no effect. The number of Pretours was encreased to sixe. The Consull Cornelius Cethegus defeated the French Insubrians in battaile. League and amitie was concluded betweene the Romanes and the Lacedemonians, with their tyrant Nabis. Over and besides, there is contained in this booke, the winning of many cities in Macedonie.

WHen the Consuls and Pretors were entred into office upon the15 of March.Ides of March, they cast lots for the government of the provinces. To L. Lentulus, fell Italie; and to P. Villius, Macedonie. As for the Pretours, L. Quintius had the jurisdiction of the citie of Rome, and C. Babius the government of Ariminum; L. Valerius ruled Sicilie, and L. Villius his lot was to commaund Sardinia. Lentulus the Consull had order given him to levie new legions, and Villius to receive the armie of P. Sulpitius, with commission and licence to take up as many souldiers as hee thought good himselfe to furnish the same with a fresh supply. Those legions which C. Aurelius Consull had in charge, were assigned over to Baebius the Pretour, with condition to keepe them with him, untill the Consull were arrived in Fraunce with a new armie; and so soone as hee came, to discharge and dismisse all the souldiours home to their houses except 5000 allies:  for as much as this number was thought sufficient to governe the province about Ariminum.
The Pretours of the former yeere continued still Commaunders of their armies. Cn. Sergius was enjoined to see and take order, that certaine lands should be set out for those souldiors who had served many yeeres together in Spaine, Sicilie, and Sardinia. And Q. Minutius had in charge to goe through with that inquisition of certaine conspiratours and traitours in the Brutians countrie, upon which hee had sitten alreadie as Pretour with great fidelitie and diligence: and also to send unto Locti for to receive due punishment of those prisoners, whom being attainted and convicted of sacriledge, hee had sent bound to Rome. And finally, to cause all the treasure taken out of the temple of Proserpina, to bee restored thither againe, with an over-encrease, to make satisfaction and to race out the wicked part committed. The Latin feasts  and holydaies were solemnised againe by vertue of an ordinance of the bishops, upon this occasion, That certaine embassadors from Ardea complained in the Senat, how they had not their ordinarie allowance of flesh at the Latine feasts aforesaid in the mount Alba, according to the old custome. Newes came from Suessa, that two of their citie gates, and all the wall between, was smitten with lightening. Messengers also from Formiae reported, that their temple of I^piter

was likewise blasted. Moreover, they of Ostia brought word of the semblable mischance with  them in the church of Iupiter. And from Velitrae tidings came of the like mishap, fallen upon the temples of Apollo and Sangus. And that in the temple of Hercules there sprung up a bush of haire. Letters came also from Q. Minutius the Propretour out of the Brutians countrey, that there was a colt foled with five feet, and three chickens hatched with three feet apeece. After all this, P. Sulpitius the Propretor sent letters from out of Macedonie, containing among other matters this newes, that there was a lawrell tree grew of it selfe in the poupe of a galley.
The Senate in regard of all the former prodigious sights, ordained, that the Consull should sacrifice greater beasts, unto what gods hee thought good: but about this last rehearsed, the Soothsaiers that prie into beasts inwards, were sent for into the Senate house; and by the direction of their answere, an edict went foorth, That the people should goe in procession, and  make supplications one day, and in all temples and alters of the gods, there was sacrifice celebrated with great devotion.
The Carthaginians this yeere came to Rome with the first paiment of the tribute imposed upon them: and for as much as the treasures and receivers of the citie made report, that the silver was not good and lawful, and being brought to the triall, was found too light by one fourth part washed away, those Carthaginians were constrained to take up money of the bankers of Rome, and to make good the defect and losse of the silver abovesaid. They put up a petition besides unto the Senate, that it might stand with their good pleasure to redeliver now their hostages. Whereupon an hundred of them were rendered backe, and good hope there was of the (...), if so be they continued loial and fast in their alleageance. And when they made a farther request in  behalfe of those hostages which were not delivered, that they might be transported from Norba (where they were not to their good liking and ease) to some other place, graunted it was, that they might remoove to Signia and Ferentinum. In like sort, the Gaditanes made humble suite, and obtained this libertie, that there should not be sent from the Romanes a captaine to governe Gades, any thing to the contrarie, in their covenant (concluded with L. Martius Septimius, when they yeelded themselves under the subjection of the Romanes) notwithstanding. Moreover, for as much as the embassadours of Narnia made complaint, that they had not their full number of inhabitants, and that there were certain straungers entermingled among them, not of their own nation, who bare themselves as Coloners; therefore L. Cornelius the Consull was commaunded to create three Deputies or Commissioners, called Triumvirs for to reforme this disorder. And  chosen there were for this purpose, Publius and Sestius Aclius, who had both of them the surname of Paeius, and C. Cornelius Lentulas. This that was graunted to them of Narnia, was denied to the embassadours of Cossa, who likewise requested that the number of their inhabitants might bee encreased.
The affaires thus finished at Rome that there were to be done, the Consuls went into their severall provinces. P. Villius so soone as he was arrived in Macedonie, was welcommed at his first comming with a daungerous mutinie of the souldiours, which long afore being kindled, was not well quenched at the first beginning. These were those two thousand, which after the descature of Anniball, were sent out of Affricke into Sicilie; and from thence, a yeere after almost, transported into Macedonie for voluntarie soldiors: but they themselves stood stoutly to it, that it was  no voluntarie act of theirs, but that they were shipped by their Colonels and Tribunes ful against their wils. And howsoever it was, whether they served willingly or unwillingly, it was but meet and good reason, that the time of their souldierie should run out, and their service have an end at length. Alledging, that for these many yeers they had not seen Italie; that they waxed old men under their harnish, having horne armes in Sicile, in Affricke, and in Macedonie; that with toile and travell so tedious, they were weake and feeble; and after so many wounds and hurts received, they had no more bloud to loose. The Consull made them answere, that their cause was good and reasonable, but marred in the handling; and meet he thought it, that they should bee dismissed, if they could have requested it in modest tearms: but neither it, nor any cause els whatsoever was warrantable to make a mutinie and sedition. Therefore, if they could bee content to keepe  to their colours, and bee at commaund as loial^ souldiours, hee would in their behalfe write his letters unto the Senate, as touching their conge and dismission: for bee they well assured, that they shall get more by sober and gentle behaviour, than by any such stubborne, froward, and wilfull demeanure.
 At the same time Philip assailed the citie of Thaumaci with terraces and mantelets in all forcible manner, so that he was now at the point to batter and shake the wall with the ram. But the sodaine arrivall of the Aetolians enforced him to surcease his enterprise; who by the conduct of A^chidamus having passed through the mids of the Macedonian guards, and ent^ed the towne, never ceased day nor night to make sallies sorth, one while upon their standing watch, otherwhils upon their fabricks and engines. The naturall situation of the place yeelded them good helpe and vantage: for the town of Thaumaci is seated on high to a mans thinking as he goeth from Pylae and the gulfe of Malea by the way of Lamia, and sheweth it selfe alost, seeming to overlooke and commaund the streight passage of the forrests called Coele. Again, when one travaileth and passeth over the craggie rough places, and the crooked waies entangled with so many windings and  turnings in the vallies of Thessalie, and is approched once neer to the citie, all on a sodain he may discover and discerne before him a mightie large and open plain, as it were a wide and vast sea, so as a man shall have much adoe to reach with his eye so sarre as these downes lye out everie way under him, and see all over them. And hereupon, by reason of this strange and marvailous prospect, the citie is calledThe sire of the citie Thanmaci. Admirable, or wonderfull.Thaumaci. Over and besides that the high ground affourdeth it securitie, it standeth also upon a huge rocke, devided into divers crags and broken cliffes. These difficulties forced Philip to give over his attempt, and namely, when he considered and weighed withall, that the towne it selfe when it was woon, would not quit the painefull labour, and pay for the daunger about it. Besides, the winter was now at hand, when hee departed from thence, and retired his forces into Macedonie, there to harbor. Where, when all others, during the time that  they could catch any repose and rest, refreshed their spirits and bodies with some recreations and disports; Philip onely, how much respit soever hee had, either of intermission or remission from continuall labour of marching in journey, and sighting in battell; so much more trouble he had in his mind, whiles he coursed and discoursed with himselfe, what the total and finall issue might be of this warre: whiles he stood not onely in seate of the enemies, which persecuted him by sea and land, but also in doubt, as well of the hearts of his allies, as of the affections of his own subjects: least the one in hope of the Romanes friendship should revolt, and the other (even the Macedonians themselves) desire novelties, and long for a chaunge. Therefore hee addressed his embassadours into Achaea, both to exact an oth of the Achaeans for their alleageance (for they had capitulated in the accord and agreement made, yeerely to sweare sealtie unto Philip)  and also to deliver into their hands, Orchomenus, Herea, and Triphylia. And when they demaunded also Aliphera, the embassadours answered, that the citie never pertained to Triphylia, but that of right it ought to bee restored unto Philip: as being one of them, which in the generall counsell and assembly of the Arcadians, were assigned and set out for the building of Megalopolis. And thus verily he entertained firme alliance with the Achaeans. As for the Macedonians he gained their hearts unto him, by occasion of Heraclides: for seeing that by meanes of him he incurred their exceeding ill will and hard conceit, and that he was charged with many greevous crimes, he cast him in prison, to gratifie his owne subjects: whereat the people took great joy, and hearts content. Then made he preparation for war, with as earnest endevor, as at any time before: he exercised as well the Macedonians as mercenarie soldiors in pay, namely, to wear their armor,  and handle their weapons; and in the very prime of spring, he sent all his forraine aids and light armed souldiours, under the leading of Athenagoras into Chaonia by the way of Epirus, to seize upon the streight passage neere to Antigonia, which the Greekes call Stena. Himselfe a few daies after followed with his maine armie more heavily appointed. And when hee had well viewed and considered the situation of the countrey, and how it lay, he judged that the quarter coasting upon the river Aous was the meerest place to fortifie and encampe in. This river between two hils, the one by the peasants of the countrey called Aerop^^s, the other Asnaus, runneth within a narrow vale, and yeeldeth but a small passage upon the bancke side. Hee commaunded Athenagoras to gaine and fortifie Asnaus with his light armed souldiours: himselfe encamped upon Aeropus. And looke what way as the hill was senced with broken and cragged rockes, there he kept a small  guard of some few souldiours: but whereas there was more daunger, and easier accesse for the enemie, he fortified with trenches, rampiers, and bulwarkes. He planted also and disposed in convenient places a great number of engines to send out quarrels and other shot, for to keepe the enemies aloofe. The roiall pavillion of the king himselfe, was pight before the rampier upon a banke, in a most conspicuous place of open sight, for to terrifie the enemie, and also to encourage

and harten his owne men, when they should see him so-confident and resolute. The Consudi  advertised by Charopus the Epirote, what passages the king with his armie was possessed of, after he had passed the winter in Corcyra, himselfe likewise in the beginning of Spring, went up into the maine land, and held on his march toward the enemie. And being advanced almost within five miles of the kings camp, he left his legions in a strong fenced place, and went himselfe in person forward with certein lightly appointed in espiall to discover the quarters: and the morrow after held a consultation, Whether he might do better to assay to passe through the place which the enemie kept (notwithstanding he saw evidently before his eyes great trouble and hazard in that adventure) or to bring his armie about and fetch a compasse the same way, whereas the yeare before Sulpitius entred into Macedonie. This deliberation held him for certein daves in even balance and suspence, untill newes came unto him that T. Quintius was created Consull; and having the province of Macedonie allotted unto him, made hast thither, and  was alreadie passed to Corcyra.
Valerius Antias writeth, how Villius was entred the passe aforesaid, and because he could not take the streight and direct way (by reason that the king and his forces had beset all places) followed the valley along, through the middle whereof the river,(...) Aous runneth: and having made a bridge over it, in great hast passed over to the banke, whereas the king was encamped, and there fought a battaile: wherein the king was discomfited and put to flight, and driven out of his camp: that twelve thousand enemies were slaine in that conflict, 2200 taken prisoners, 132 ensignes woon and caried away, besides 230 horse. Also that during the combat, there was a temple vowed unto Iupiter, in case the Consull sped well in the battaile. But all other writers both  Greeke and Latin, at leastwise whose Annales I have red, report that Villius performed no memorable act, and that the Consull T. Quintius who next succeeded, tooke in hand the whole and entier warre himselfe.
Whiles things thus passed in Macedonie, the other Consull L. Lentulus who staid behind at Rome, held a generall assembly for the election of Censors: And among many famous and noble personages who sued for the dignitie, P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, and P. Aelius Patas were created Censors. These two agreeing together in great concord, both elected a Senat without diffaming any person; and also fermed out the toll for portage of all things that were sold at Capua: Item, they set and to ferme let; the custome for passage that way wheras the camp stood, and where now there is a towne built: and enrolled three hundred coloners (for that number  was limited by the Senat) there to inhabit. They sold also the lands of Capua lying under the hill Tifata.
About the same time L. Manlius Acidinus departed out of Spaine, and was prohibited by M. Percius Lecca a tribune of the Commons, to enter at his returne into the citie with the solemne pomp of an Ovation, not with standing he had that honor graunted by the Senate. So he came into Rome as a private person, and brought into the chamber of the citie 1200 pound weight of silver, and thirtie pound weight welneere of gold. The same yeere Cn. Babius Tamphilus, who had received the province of Fraunce from C. Aurelius the Consull of the former yeere, engaged himselfe rashly within the marches of the French Insubrians, and was environed and enclosed round about both he, and in manner his whole armie. He lost above 6600 men. See  what an overthrow was received in a warre, whereof there was no reckning made, and from whence no danger was feared any more. This caused L. Lentulus the Consull to come out of the citie of Rome, who being arrived into a province full of trouble and turnult, after he had received the charge of a frighted and dismayed armie, gave the Pretour a great check and rebuke, and tooke him up roundly with reprochfull termes, yea and commaunded him to get him gone out of the province, and to repaire to Rome. Neither performed the Consull himselfe any exploit worthie of remembrance, by reason that he was called home to Rome for to hold the solemne election of Magistrates: which also was stayed by M. Fulvius, and M. Curius Tribunes of the Commons: who likewise would not suffer T. Quintius Flamininus, having ben but Quaestor, for to stand for a Consulship. Now a dayes say they, the dignities of Aediles and Pretours are  nought set by, and not worth the seeking for: and these noblemen will needs mount into the Consuls place, not by steps and degrees of other offices, wherein they should make prouse and geve good testimonie what their cariage is but leaping over those in the mids, joyned the lowest, and highest together. This debate which began in Mars field in the assemblie of the people,

 came at length to be decided before the Senat. And the LL. ordeined, That for as much as lie which sued for that dignitie, was by law capable thereof, it was reason that the people should have plenarie and absolute power to create him, or whomsoever else they pleased. So the Tribunes submitted themselves under the authoritie of the Senatours. And for Coss. were elected Sex. Aclius Paetus, and T. Quintius Flamininus. Then ensued of the election of the Pretours. In which were created L. Cornelius Merula, M. Claudius Marcellus, M. Porcius Cato, and C. Helvius, who had bene Aediles of the Commons. By whom the Plebeian playes were renued; and a solemne feast made in the honor of Iupiter, in regard of those playes. The Curule Aediles likewise C. Valerius Flaceus, who also was the Flamine Dialis or Priest of Iupiter, and C. Cornelius Cethegus, exhibited the Romane games with great magnificence. The great Pontifies or Bishops Servius Sulpitius and L. Calba, dyedthat yeere: In whose places were enstalled M. Aemylius Eepidus, and Cn. Cornelius Scipio. Now when Sex. Aelius Paetus and Titus Quintius Flamininus the Coss. were entred into their Magistracie, they assembled the Senate in the Capitoll: where the LL. gave order, that concerning the two provinces of Macedonie and Italie, the Consuls should either agree between themselves, or els cast lots whether of them should governe the one of the other: And that he, whose hap was to have the charge of Macedonie, should enroll of Romanes three thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen: Also of Latin allies five thousand foote, and five hundred horse, for to supplie and furnish out the legions. And for the other Consull it was decreed, that he should have an armie, all entier and new. L. Lentulus the Consull of the former yeere, continued still Governor in the province, with express commaundement, that neither  himselfe should leave the government, nor withdraw his forces from thence, before the Consull were come with the new legions. So the Consuls referred themselves to the direction of the lots. To Aelius fell Italie and Macedonie to Quintius. As for the Pretours, who also were guided by lots. L. Cornelius Merula had the jurisdiction of the citie of Rome. M. Claudius governed Sicilie. To M. Porcius was allotted Sardinia, and C. Helvius his lot was to be L. Deputie in Gaule. After this, they began to take musters. For over and besides the Consular armies, the Pretours also were charged to levie souldiours. To Marcellus were assigned foure thousand footmen of Latin allies, and three hundred horsemen, to go into Sicilie. And for Cato three thousand foote of the samekind of souldiours with two hundred horse, to serve in Sardinia: upon condition, that when both these Pretours were come into their provinces, they should discharge  all the old souldiers there, as well footmen as horsemen.
Then the Consuls graunted the Embassadours of king Attalus leave to come into the Senate house: where having audience geven them, after they had declared how their king and maister had assisted the State of Rome with his forces as well by sea as land, and shewed himselfe cheerefull, readie and obedient to this present day for to execute and performe whatsoever the Romane Consuls had enjoined him to do; they said now, that they much feared least from hence forward he should not be able to do the same, by reason he was empeached by Antiochus. For Antiochus taking his vantage, and finding the realme of Attalus disfurnished of garisons, and unprovided of forces both by sea and land, had invaded the same. For which occasion Attalus besought the LL. of the Senat there assembled, that if they minded to use his navie, and employ  the meanes that he could make, in the service of the Macedonian warre, they would then send him a sufficient garison to defend his kingdome: but if they thought not well thereof, his request was to permit himselfe to returne with his fleere and other forces, to the defence of his owne. The Senate gave order to returned this aunswere unto the Embassadours: Whereas king Attalius had succoured the Romane Captaines with his Armada and other meanes of warre, the Senate accepted thereof in the Best part. But as touching Antiochus the king, an allie and friend of the people of Rome, they neither would send any aid against him: not yet deteine the aids of king Attalus in any service of theirs, longer than the king himselfe should thinke it stood with his owne commoditie. For the manner of the people of Rome hath alwayes been, to serve their owne turne with the help and assistance of others, but yet at the good pleasure and discretion  of others. And whosoever were willing to relieve the Romanes, they were at their owne libertie to begin and end when they would themselves. How be it, they purposed to addresse their Embassadors unto Antiochus, to advertise him and let him understand, that the people of Rome employed the help of Attalus his ships and souldiers against Philip, a common enemie: and the Senat would take it kindly at his hands, if for their sakes he forbare the realm of Attalus, and absteined

from warre. For meet and reason it was, that the KK. who were friends and allies to the people  of Rome, should likewise entertaine peace and amitie among themselves.
T. Quintius the Consull made hast to be gone into his province: and when he had levied and mustered his souldiours so, as that he had enrolled those old experienced servitours for the most part, who had given good proof of their valour in the service of Spaine and Affricke, he was deteined so long at Rome by occasion of certaine prodigious signes reported, untill he had taken order for the appeasing of the gods, and expiation of them. The lightening scortched and blasted the great port way from Veij; the common hall likewise of publicke assemblies, and the temple of Iupiter in Lanuvium: also the temple of Hercules in Ardea: the walls besides and turrets of Capua, and the temple there which is called Alba. At Arretium the skie appeared to be on a light fire. At Velitra: the earth setled and sunke downe, leaving a great gaping chinke for  the compasse of three acres of ground. Word moreover was brought that in Suessa Aurunca a l^mbe was yeaned with two heads; and in Sinuessa a porket with a mans head. In regard of these prodigies, there was a procession and supplication one whole day, and the Consuls intended devoutly to their sacrifices: and after they had pacified the gods, they tooke their journey into their provinces. Aelius, together with C. Helvius the Pretor went into Fraunce, and gave unto the said Pretor the armie which he received of L. Lentulus, and should have dismissed and discharged of their service; because he purposed himselfe to employ in his owne wars the fresh and new legions which hee brought with him: but hee performed no action worth the report. The other Consull T. Quintius having taken the sea, and departed from Brundusium sooner than other Consuls were wont, arrived at Corcyra with eight thousand foot and eight hundred  horse. From thence hee crossed the seas with a galleace of five rankes of oares, directing his course for the nearest coasts of Epirus, and by great journies made hast untill he was come to the Romane campe: from whence after he had licenced Villius to depart, and staied there some few daies, untill his forces which were at Corcyra could overtake him, he called his councell together to resolve, Whether hee should keepe on his journey directly, and make way through the middest of his enemies where they lay encamped, or rather without any such attempt (which could not but carrie with it great paine and perill) fetch a compasse about with safetie, and so enter into Macedonie by the way of the Dassaretians countrey and Lingus. And verily, this latter course of the twaine had taken place, but that hee feared, when hee were retired once farre from the sea, and had let the enemie slip out of his hands, if the king happily were minded (as he had  done before) to defend himselfe within the desarts and forest, that he should spend all the long sommer and doe no good. Therefore come what would of it, he resolved to assaile the enemie in that varie place as difficult as it was, with all the disadvantage whatsoever. But as they determined in their intention thus to doe, so they were not so readie in the meanes to execute and effect the same. Thus they sate still and spent sortie daies within the eye of the enemie, and made no attempt. Then Philip conceived some hope to assay a peace, by the means and intercession of the Epirote nation. And after consultation had, there were certaine agents chosen for that purpose, to wit, Pausanias the Pretour, and Alexander Generall of the horse, who brought the Consull and the king together for to parle, unto a place whereas the river Aous is narrowest and the bankes neerest together. The demaunds of the Consull in summe were these, That Philip should remoove his garrisons out of the cities. Item, That whose territories or townes he had pilled and spoiled, he should make restitution againe unto them all those things that were extant and to be found: as for the rest, they should be prized and valued indifferently to their worth. Philip made answere againe, That all those peeces were not of like qualitie and condition. As for such as here had taken himselfe, he would be content to set them at libertie: but for those that were left unto him by his progenitors and predecessors, he would not for goe the possession thereof, since hee held them lawfully in right of inheritance. Finally, if those cities wherewith hee had warred made complaint, that they were every endamaged by him, hee would report himselfe to what cities and states they would themselves, and stand to their award, so they were neuters, or in peace as well with the one side as the other. The Consull here unto replied and said, That for this matter it was needlesse to referre themselves to the arbitrement or doome of any. For who seeth not evidently (quoth he) that he hath done the wrong, who first tooke arms? And that Philip, before ever that he was molested and troubled by any war from others, offered violence first unto all? After, when it was debated what cities should be set free, the Consull named

 first of all Thessalonica: at which word the king was in such a heat of choller, that he cryed out aloud, What harder condition o Quintius, would you impose upon him that you had vanquished? and with all, he flang away in a chase from off the place of meeting and entervieu, and would no longer parle. And much `adoe they had on both sides to hold their hands from shooting one at another, for the river ran in the middest betweene them, that they could not trie it out by the eares. The morrow after, there passed many light skirmishes betwene the corps de guard on both parts by way of excursions, first in a plaine that lay out broad enough for that purpose: but afterwards as the kings men retired themselves into the narrow streights and rough rugged places, the Romanes of an ardent desire to be fighting, entred thither soone after. The Romanes had on their side the benefite of good order and militarie discipline, and were furnished with  such kind of weapons as were fit for to maintaine a medly in a set battaile. The enemies againe for their parts had the vantage of the ground, and the helpe of sundry engins to cast forth short afarre off (as balists and catapults) planted and raunged almost upon every cliffe and rocke as it had beene upon the walles of a citie. After they had on both sides given and taken many a wound, so as divers of them were left slaine on the earth, as if they had sought in a full battaile, the night at length parted them asunder.
Things thus standing in these tearmes, there happened a certaine heardman sent from Charopus a Prince of the Epitotes to be brought before the Consull: who gave him to understand, that he kept cattell a grasing in that forest (which then was overspread with the kings pavillion) and knew all the crankes, all the windings, turnings, and blind wayes of those mountaines;  promising, that if he would send out a band of souldiours with him, he would conduct them thorough a place that was neither daungerous, nor yet difficult and hard of ascent: which if they had once gained, they should be over their enemies heads and able to commaund them. And these things (quoth he) you may surely trust upon; for Charopus willed me to make declaration, That he could wish you the Consull were master of all, rather than any other. The Consull was desirous to beleeve all, but durst not credit him. And thus being troubled in spirit, whiles hee entertained in his heart both joy and feare together, at length the authoritie of Charopus induced him to resolve and give the adventure of this hope thus offered and presented unto him. And to the end that the enemie might distrust and suspect nothing, for two daies following hee never ceased to assaile and provoke him, setting companies of armed souldiours in every place,  to charge upon him, and ever seconding them with fresh men to succeed in the place of the wearied. After this, he delivered to a Tribune or Colonell foure thousand chosen footmen, and three hundred horsemen; with this direction, to lead forward the Cavallerie, as farre as the ground would give leave: and when they were come once to a place where the horsemen could not passe nor match farther, then to plant them in some plain and even ground: willing the footmen to match on as the guide should lead them, and point out their way: but after they were mounted above the enemies heads, according as he undertooke and made promise, then to give a sign by smoke, and not to shout and set up a crie, untill one might guesse, that upon signall of battell by him given, the medley was begun. And the Consull gave commaundement to march by night (for as good hap was, the moone was at full, and shone all night long) and take their refection  and sleepe in the day time. As for the guide aforesaid, hee made unto him may faire and large promises, if it might appeare, that he meant truth, and dealt faithfully: howbeit in the mean time he delivered him bound to the custodie of the said Colonell. When these companies were thus sent away, the Roman Generall travelled and endeavoured so much the more to gain vantage of the enemies guards. All this while, the Romans that were sent out with the Colonell, marched forward; and upon the third day, when they had given token by smoke, that they had won the pitch of the hill as they entended, and held it still: then the Consull devided his forces into three squadrons, and entred the midst of the valley with the main strength of his armie, but he led forth the wings of his battell, both the right and the left, against the very campe of the enemies. Who also for their parts were not behind to reencounter and receive him. And all these whiles that they  advaunced without their fortifications of defence upon a hote desire of conflict, it fell out, that the Romane souldiour had the better a good deale, as being more valorous, more skillfull, and better appointed with weapons for that kind of service. But after that the kings souldiours, whereof many were sore wounded or killed outright, retired themselves to places of safetie, either by naturall situation, or by art of man, the daunger returned upon the Romanes heads, who inconsiderately

were engaged into places of disadvantage, and into narrow streights, from whence they  could not retire with ease. And surely they had not returned backe againe unpunished for their rashnesse, but that the kings men hearing first an outcrie behind their backes, and seeing also a skirmish begun, were astonied at the suddaine terror, and put besides themselves. Some field here and there away: others that made a stand and taried still, for that they rather wanted ground to flie than had heart ynough to fight it out, were environned by their enemies both before and behind. The whole armie might have beene utterly defeated, if the winners had lustily followed the chase. But the streights and the roughnesse of the waies hindered the horse, and the weight of armour combred the footmen. At first the king rode amaine with bridle in horse neck, without regard of anything, or looking behind him: but after he was gotten five miles before, and guessing (as it was indeed) that by reason of the disadvantage of the place, the enemie could not possible  make way after; he rested upon a certaine mount, and sent his people all abroad over hils and dales, to rallie his souldiours together, that were disparkled. Thus with the losse not all out of two thousand men, the rest of the multitude met together, as if they had repaired to a Rendez-vous upon some signall given, and so marched with a great traine into Thessalie. The Romanes pursued them as farre as they might with safetie, killing them, and risling the dead; yea, and ransacked the kings campe, which though it were naked without defendants, yet for the difficult accesse unto it, they had much trouble to win; and that night they lodged in their own camp. The next day the Consull made pursute after the enemie along the streight, whereas the river runneth among the vallies. The king came the first day unto the hold or campe of Pyrrhus (a place so called) in Triphylia, belonging to the territorie of Melotis. From whence the morrow after hee marched a mightie  journey with his whole armie (for needs he must goe that feare drives) and approached the mountaine Lingos. These mountaines are in Epirus, situate betweene Macedonie and Thessalie. The side that heth to Thessalie regardeth the East: that which butteth upon Macedonie, hath the North directly before it. Covered they are and overspread with abundance of woods; yet so as the very tops doe affoord open plaines and running waters. The king keeping his campe there for certaine daies, was much troubled and perplexed in his mind, casting and revolving, whether it were expedient for him to returne immediately into his owne kingdome, or possible to retire himselfe into Thessalie. In summe, his resolution was to bring downe his armie into Thessalie. And so to Tricca he marched, the next way hee possibly could. From thence hee passed in great hast through all the cities that were in his way. As many men as were able to follow, he forced to  quit their habitations and dwelling houses. The townes he set on fire: yet he permitted every one to carrie away with him as much as he could of his owne goods; all the rest fell to the souldiours share. No manner of crueltie there was, that the very enemie could exercise, but hee practised among his owne allies. And Philip himselfe in the execution thereof, greeved not a little, and was vexed at the heart; but alas, he could do not other: yet his desire was, in that country which within a while should be possessed by the enemie, to save the bodies at leastwise of his associats. In this manner were ransacked and spoiled these townes following, Phacium, Iresiae, Euthydrium, Eretria, and Palaephatus. Against his comming to Pherae, the gates were shut upon him. And because it would aske sometime to win that towne by assault, and no leisure he had thereto, he gave over that enterprise, and passed into Macedonie: for the bruite went, that the Aeroliams also approched. Who having heard of the issue of the battell fought by the river AEroliams, first wasted and ransacked all the countrey neere unto Sperchiae and Macra-Come (as they call it) and having from thence passed over into Thessalie, was Cymines and Angeas with the first assault. Howbeit, a repulse they tooke at Metropolis, whiles they harried the fields about it, by reason, that the townesmen ran together to the defence of their walls. After this, they gave the attempt upon Callithera, where they found the like resistance and violence of the enemies but there they persisted longer, and gave not over, nay, they drave the enemies that issued forth, within their walls, and contenting themselves with that victorie, they departed thence, seeing no great hope to force the towne. Then they wan and pilled two villages, Theuma and Calathana. As for Acharrae, it was surrendered by composition. And upon the like feare Xyniae also was abandoned of  her owne inhabitants. These citizens thus driven out of their owne houses, strumbled at a venture upon a garrison which was a leading into Athamania, for the better guard of the forragers that were to purvey corne. This multitude, I say, marching disorderly without armour, pell mell together, with a sort that were unmeet for warre, was hewen in peeces by the armed souldiours, and

 Xyniae was sacked, thus left and forsaken as it was. After this, the Aetolians woon Cyphara, a sort and towne of strength, well seated for to empeach and command Onoblacha. Dolopia. These exploits performed the Aetolians hastily, all in few daies.
Neither rested Aminander nor the Athamans quiet and still, after they heard the newes of the prosperous battaile which the Romanes had sought. But Aminander reposing small trust in his owne souldiours, craved of the Consull a small supply of other forces: and as he marched toward Gomphi, hee surprized forthwith and forced a towne named Pheca, situate betweene Gomphi and the streights that divide Thessalie from Athamania. From thence hee advaunced before Gomphi, and assailed the town, which was defended right valiantly for certaine daies: but after that he had erected scaling ladders against it, hee forced the townesmen within, for very  feare to yeeld and render all into his hands. The surrender of this citie terrified the Thessalians exceedingly: in such sort, that the citizens of Argenta, Pherinum, Thimarum, Lisinas, Stimon and Lampsum, one after another submitted themselves, with other pieces thereby of small importance.
Whiles the Athamanians and Aetolians (secured from all daunger of the Macedonians) made spoile and raised gaine to themselves by the victorie of others: whiles Thessalie was pilled and sacked by three armies at once, and knew nor their friends from their foes, nor whom to trust: the Consull passed over into the country of Albania.Epirus, by the way of the streights which hee had opened and made cleere by reason that the enemies were fled. And albeit he knew full well which way all the Epirotes in generall went, and with whome they had sided, excepting onely  prince Charopus, yet because he saw them not onely carefull to make amends and satisfaction, but also willing and forward to do whatsoever he commaunded, he esteemed and regarded them by their present state, more than by their demeanor past, and so by shewing himselfe inclined to mercie and easie to pardon a fault, he woon their hearts, and gained them unto him for the time to come. After this he dispatched messengers to Corcyra, to will that the bulkes and ships of burden should put into the gulfe of Gel so del Arta.Ambracia, whiles himselfe revailed by easie journies; and the fourth day after pitched his tents upon the hill Styabo saith is is a part of the mountain Ampelos.Cercetius: and thither he sent for Aminonder to repaire with his aids, not for any need hee had of his forces, so as much as of his guidance to direct him in his journey for Thessalie. Most of the Epirotes also, for the same intent were received, who voluntarily offered their helpe and assistance. The first citie that hee assaulted  in Thessalie, was Phaleria, wherein there lay a garrison of two thousand Macedonians. Who at first held out and resisted most manfully, and as much as either armour of the walls were able to doe, defended themselves. But the assault and batterie continuing uncessantly both night and day, overcame at length the constant and resolute valour of the Macedonians. For the Consull made this reckoning, That upon this point depended the hearts and dispositions of all the other Thessalians, if the first should not bee able to abide the violence and force of the Romanes. Phaleria was no sooner woon, but there came embassadors fromA Citie in Thessalie, or rather Macedonie, of which name are (...) more, according to Ortelius.Metropolis and Piera, to render up their cities into his hands, who craued pardon, and obtained it. Phaleria was burnt and sacked. From thence he set forward to Aeginium; but seeing the place defensible with any small garrison; and in manner imprenable, he bestowed some small shot of darts upon the next Corps de guard, and  turned his armie toward the countrie about Gomphi, and from thence he marched downe into the plaines of Thessalie. And because his armie was disfurnished of all necessaries (for that hoe had forsome to make spoile in the territories of the Epirotes) after he had sent out espials afore, to discover whether the hulkes above said were arrived at S. Maura.Leucas or Ambracia, he sent out his companies one after another to Ambracia, for to purvey come and victuals. The way betweene Gomphi and Ambracia, as it is comberous and hard for passage, so againe, it is but short and very compendious. So that within few daies he had transported certaine convoies of victuals from the port of Ambracia, whereby the campe was stored with plentie of all provision. From thence he passed to Rhages, a towne almost ten miles distant from Larissa. The citizens thereof are descended from Perrhoebia, and the citie it self seated upon the river Salampria et Pezin.Peneus. The Thessalians were  nothing afraid at the first comming of the Romanes. As for Philip, like as hee durst not himselfe in person march forward into Thessalie, so having taken a place within The pleasant medows and fields along the river Peneur.Tempe, which he held with a standing campe, he espied into what quarters the enemies intended to go, and ever as he could find any opportunitie and advauntage, sent underhand succour and releese thither accordingly.

Much about the same time that the Consull first encamped against Philip in the streights  of Epitus, L. Quintius also, the Consull his brother, who by commission from the Senat had the charge of the fleere and the government of all the sea coast, failed beyond Corcyra with two Galleaces of five banks of ores: and hearing that the navie was departed from thence, seeing also there was no staying there, he made saile after apace, and having overtaken them at the isle Zamma, he dismissed Apuslius, in whose place he succeeded: from whence he went faire and softly, haling after him the most part of the ships which followed with the provision of victuals, untill he came to Malea. From whence, when he had geven order, that the rest should make as good speed as possibly they could after him, he went with three Quinqueremes lightly appointed, and arrived before at Pyraeeum, where he received the other ships that L. Apuslius the Lientenant had left there for the guard and defence of Athens.
At the same time there were two Armadaes set out of Asia, the one conducted by king Attalus, consisting of foure and twentie saile of Quinqueremes: the other were of Rhodians, and stood of twentie covert ships with decks and hatches, commaunded by Agesimbrotus the Admirall. These fleets joyning together about the island Andros, crossed the narrow seas from thence to Euboea. And first they forraied the territorie of the Carystians: afterwards seeing Carystus strong enough against them, by reason of a garison sent to them in all hast from Chalcis, they approched to Eretria, L. Quintius having intelligence that king Attalius was come, repaired thither also with those vessels which had bene at Pyraeeum, and gave commaundement, that as many ships as arrived thither belonging to his fleete, should bend their course for Euboea. Now was Eretria by all sorcible meanes assaulted, for not only the vessels of three joynt navies  had brought thither all sorts of engins and artillerie devised for to shake and batter the walls of cities, but also the fields and country hard by, yeelded them plentie of timber, and other manner to make new. The townes-men from the very first day shewed no valour and courage in defending their walls: and afterwards when they were wearied, and some of them hurt, and saw withall a part of their wall overthrowne by the ordinance and engins of the enemie, enclined to yeeld: but they had amongst them a garison of Macedonians, whom they feared no lesse than the Romans. Moreover, Philocles a captaine under the king, sent messengers unto them from Chalcis, assuring them, that if they could hold out still and endure the siege, he would in good time be with them, and bring reliefe. Thus hope and feare together constreined them to drive off longer than either they were willing or well able to do. But when they heard once that Philocles had a  repulse by the way, and in great hast and feare was retired and fled to Chalcis again, then immediatly they sent their embassadors unto Attalus, to crave pardon and protection. Whiles they were wholly bent to seeke peace (whereof they had some hope) and foreslacked the affaires of warre-service, opposing their corps de gard on that side only of the wall where the breaches were, and neglecting all besides, behold, Quintius in the night season gaue a cammissado in that quarter which was least suspected, and with skaling ladders woon the towne. The whole multitude of the inhabitants fled with their wives and children into the Castle, which also afterwards was rendred up. As for money, gold and silver, there was no great store to speake of: but images, and peinted tables of antique worke, artificially wrought, and such like ornaments, there were more found, than for the proportion of the bignesse, or other wealth besides, of such a citie as that was. From  thence they set saile once againe for Carystus, where the whole multitude, before the enemies were put aland, having abandoned the citie, were fled into their fortresse: from whence they sent their oratours unto the Romane Generall, humbly craving their mercifull protection. The townes-men presently had their lives and libertie graunted them. But the Macedonians were put to their raunsome, and they compounded to pay 39 shil 7 pence auglishacekning a Sesterce (which is two asses and a halfe) as ^^ d. for thing. three hundred silver sesterces a peece, and to give up their armour and weapons, and so to depart: With this summe of money having redeemed themselves they were set over disarmed into Boeotia. These forces at sea having in few dayes gained two noble and renowned cities in Euboea, coasted about Sunium, a promontorie or cape within the territorie of Attica, and arrived before Cenchreae, a towne of merchandise and trafficke belonging to the Corinthians.
The Consull all this while had a longer and more dangerous peece of service in the siege (of Rhages) than all men looked for. And the enemies within made resistance, where he would have least of all suspected. For he supposed verily that all the trouble and difficultie would be in battering downe the wall, and making some breach. For thus he thought, that if he had once

 opened way for his armed souldiours to enter into the towne, the enemies afterwards would either free or be slaine, as it falleth out commonly in cities when they are forced. Howbeit, when part of the wall by the battery of the Ram lay flat along, and the enemies were gotten over at the breaches and ruines thereof: then began their labour and paines anew, as if they had had no trouble nor toile afore. For the Macedonians in garison, who were many in number, and those approved and select souldiours, thinking how honourable a service it would be to defend the citie by valour and dent of sword, rather than by the strenght of walls, had raunged themselves in a battaile within forth, strongly marshalled into many ranks and files close together: and when they perceived the Romanes were mounting over the breaches to enter the citie, they repelled and beat them back in that place of great disadvantage, where they had much ado to recover  and retire themselves. The Consull hereat was much displeased, and vexed in himselfe: and making this accoumpt, that such a foule foile and disgrace was not only an occasion of a longer tract of time, before he could force that one citie; but also materiall and important for the maine progresse and proceeding of the whole warre, which commonly dependeth upon the occurrences of light matters and of small moment in the beginning: after he had rid and clensed the place which was choked up with the ruines of the halfe broken wall lying there upon heapes, he reared a towne or frame of timber of a huge height to overtop the walls, consisting of many stories and stoores one over another, which conteined and caried a mightie number of armed men, and drave the same upon wheeles and rollers close to the wall. Moreover he sent out certeine ensignes one after another by turnes, to breake through by force (if it  were possible) that strong and close battailon of the Macedonians (which they themselves call Phalanx.) But the place being so streight (for that the breach of the wall was nothing broad) the enemies had the vantage both in regard of the weapons which they used, and of the forme of battaile wherein they were raunged. For when the Macedonians standing close one to another with a continued roufe or fence or targuets over their heads, opposed their pikes before them which were of an exceeding length: the Romanes neither with their darts could hurt them afarre off, nor with their swords drawn come neere them to fight close at hand, or cut their pikes a two: and if it chaunced that they whipt off or snapt any asunder, yet the steele and truncheon thereof being sharp still at the point (headlesse though it were) among the other pikes that were headed, served to make a sense as it were an haie or palaisade. Over and besides, that part of the  wall that stood whole and sound still, was a sure defence unto both flancks of the enemies: neither had the Romanes any large roume at length to returne, and from thence to fetch their beirre, and so geve a violent charge, which is the thing that usually breaketh and disordereth ranks. Moreover there chaunced one thing by meere fortune that encouraged them within: for as the towne aforesaid was in driving over a terrasse or banke whereof the floore was not fast and soundly hardned with the rammer, one of the wheeles hapned to sinke in and make a deepe rut in the ground, whereby the whole frame nodded so forward, that the enemies without thought verily it was readie to fall, and the armed souldiours standing upon it within, quaked for feare, and were put welneere besides their wits. Thus when nothing that was provided might availe and come to any great effect, the Consull was vexed at the heart, to  see himselfe so much overmatched in souldiours, in armour, and in manner of service; and withall hee considered, that hee had no helpe to force the citie and to win it in any shorttime, nor could make meanes to passe the winter in those parts so farre from sea, and left naked alreadie and wast by those calamities that follow warres. Whereupon hee raised the siege: and because there was no haven in all the tract and coast of Acarnania and Aetolia, which was able both to receive and harbour all his hulkes that brought victuals for his armie, and also to yeeld winter lodging for his legions; he thought upon the Isle Anticyra within the countrey of Phocis; which lying toward the gulfe of Corinth, seemed to him most fit and commodious for his purpose; because they should not remove far from Thessalie, and the territories belonging to the enemies: having besides Peloponnesus affront even over against them, divided but by a small  arme of the sea: at their backe Aetolia and Acarnania: and of ech side Locris and Baeotia. At the first assault, the Consull without any resistance wan Panopea in Phocis. Anticyra likewise long endured not the siege. Then Ambrysus and Hyampolis were received by composition. Daulis by reason that it was situate upon an high hill, could neither be scaled nor forced by instruments and engins of batterie. But the Romanes by launcing their darts and shooting arrowes

against them that were in guard, trained them foorth to skirmish; and after some light  seusilings to no effect, whiles one while they seemed to flie, and other whiles to pursue, they brought them to be so carelesse, so negligent and so little respective, that when the enemies fled backe within the gate, they entred pellmell with them, and so were masters of the towne. Other small forts likewise of Phocis yeelded rather for feare than any force offered unto them. Elatia kept their gates shut, and made a countenance, that unlesse they were driven thereunto, they would receive within their walles neither Romane captaine nor armie.
Whiles the Consull lay at the siege before Elatia, there was presented unto him the hope of a greater matter, namely, of withdrawing the nation of the Achaei from the kings alliance to the amitie of the Romanes. For they had expelled and banished Cycliadas the chiefe of that faction that sided with Philip: and Aristhenus who friended the Romanes and sought to be consedered  with them, was Pretour for the time.
Now the Romane Armada, together with Attalus and the Rhodians, rode at ancre in the haven of Cenchreae, and they all were agreed in common to assail Corinth. But the Consul thought good, before that they should put that designment in action, to send embassadours to the State of Achaia, promising, if they would revolt from the king and turne to them, to deliver Corinth into their hands, for to be incorporate into the auncient league and councell of their nation. And so by the advise of the Consull, there were embassadors addressed to the Achaeans from his brother L. Quintius, from Attalus, the Rhodians, and the Athenians. And at (...) Sicyone was there a counsell and Diet held, for to give them audience. Now the Achaeans were not all of one mind and alike affected. The Athenians (a dangerous, an ordinarie, and continuall enemie  of theirs) put them in feare of one side: the Romanes they had in dread and horrour of an other. To the Macedonians they were obliged and bound by many good turnes and favours, as well old as new. The king himselfe they held in jealousie for his crueltie and treacherie: and casting a proofe and conjecture by those courses which he then tooke, and by his practises for the time, they foresaw well, that after the war ended, he would be intollerable and a very tyrant over them. They were besides not onely ignorant, what every man had said in the severall councels of every particular State, and in the generall Diets of the whole nation, when they were required to deliver their opinions; but also uncertaine and unresolute among themselves in their owne minds what to will or wish. Vnto men thus doubtfully disposed and unsetled, the embassadours above said were admitted, and license was given them to deliver their message. First, the Romane  embassadour L. Calphurnius; after him, those that were for king Attalus: and in the third place, the Rhodians spake and made discourse: and consequently, the embassadors of Philip were permitted to parle. The Athenians had audience given them last of all, and were reserved of purpose to confute whatsoever should be spoken and alledged by the Macedonians. And these Athenians inveighed most sharply and bitterly against the king, for none had received either more wrongs, or suffered the like indignities at his hands as they had. So this assembly verily for that time (by reason that the day was spent in hearing the continued orations of so many embassadours) brake up about sun-setting. The morrow after, they assembled againe: where the magistrates by the voice of the Bedle or publique cryer (after the custome of the Greekes) gave libertie to every person to deliver his mind, and no man stepped foorth. Great silence there was, and not a word among them for a long time, looking wistly one upon another who should begin first. And no marvaile, if they whose spirits were astonied in some sort within them, when they of their owne accord cast and tossed in their minds things so different and contrarie, were now more troubled and perplexed by those orations besides that had lasted all the long day, broching, uttering, and advising many matters so harsh, so difficult, and unpleasant unto them. At length because the Councell should not be dissolved without some speech and parle, Arisbenus the Pretor of the Achaeans began to speak,The oration of Aristhenas. and said:What is become (my masters of Achaea) of those hearts of yours and couragious stomacks, whereby at all your (...) and in your privat meetings (when talk is ministred of Philip and the Romans) you can hardly hold your hands, but are readie to flie one in anothers face? And now, when as this honourable court of parliaments is  published and holden for the same purpose only: when ye have heard the reasons and allegations of the embassadors of all parts; when the magistrats propound the matter to be debated in councell; when the publick cryer calleth you to give your opinions, ye are mum and mute? If the regard of the common good and welfare of us all, will not cause you to open your lips; cannot

 the privat respects and affections neither (which have inclined and caried your minds to the one side or the other) fetch out a word from any of your mouthes? Considering especially, that no man is so grosse and blockish, who can be ignorant that now is the very time or never, for each one to say and deliver his mind as he will himselfe, and as he thinketh best, before we resolve and determine of any course: and when a decree of act is once passed, that all men are bound (even they themselves that before misliked it) to defend and maintaine the same, as a good and profitable accord. This admonition of the Pretour was so farre short of drawing any one of them to utter his opinion, that it caused not so much as the least noise or humming in so frequent an auditorie and congregation of so many States together. Then Aristhenus the Pretour began againe and followed his speech in this manner. It seemeth (my masters and friends of Achaea  here assembled) that yee are not so much to seeke for counsell and advise, but ye are as short of your tongues and loth to speake. And every one here is unwilling to provide for their generall good, for feare least hee should incure some particular perill. My selfe likewise peradventure would be silent and hold my peace if I were a privat person: But now being Pretour, I see thus much, That either there should have no audience at all beene given unto the Embassadours, or else, that they ought not to be sent away from hence without an answere: and answere them how can I, without your ordinance? Now seeing that there is none of you all, who have beene summoned hither to this Councell, that either will or dare say a word to the cause: let us examine throughly and consider well in lieu of your opinions, those speeches which yesterday were pronounced by the embassadours: let us (I say) revise them so, as if they had not demaunded  those things which concerned their owne good and commoditie, but as though they proposed such points as they esteemed profitable and expedient for us all. The Romanes, the Rhodians, and king Attalius require our alliance and amitie: and in that warre which they wage against Philip, they thinke it reason to be aided from us. Philip againe, putteth us in mind of our societie with him, and of our oath. One while he requireth us to stand and band with him: otherwhiles, hee faith hee will be content that wee should sit still, and meddle neither one way nor other. Is there no man here knoweth the reason, why they that are not yet our allies, demaund and crave more than hee that is our allie alreadie? It is neither the modestie of Philip, nor the impudencie of the Romanes that is the cause hereof. The ports and haven-townes they be of Achaea, which minister confidence and assurance to those demaunders, and take away the same from  them againe. From Philip wee see nothing but only an Embassadour. The sea-forces of the Romanes and their fleet, ride in the harborough of Cenchreae: they carrie afore them in shew, the spoiles of the citties in Negropont.Euboea. The Consull himselfe with his land armie of the legions, we see disjoined from us by a small arme onely of the sea, raunging at their pleasure all over Phocis and Locris. Marvell now longer if you can, why Cleomedon the embassadour of Philip demaunded erewhile so coldly and dissidently, that wee should take armes for the king against the Romans: who, if we by vertue of the same league and oth, where with hee seemed to charge us in conscience, required of him againe, that Philip should defend us both from Nabis and the Lacedemonians, and also from the Romans; would bee to seeke not onely of a garrison and power of armed men to shield us, but likewise of a very aunswere to shape us. And verily hee  would be no more readie to satisfie us, than Philip was himselfe the last yeere; who notwithstanding he frankly promised to levie warre against Nabis, and thereby assaied to traine and draw the floure of our youth from hence into Euboea: after that hee saw once that we neither agreed to send him that power, nor yet were willing to entangle our selves, and be interessed in the Romane warre, forgat soone that societie that now he standeth and vaunteth so much of, and left us to the mercie and devotion of Nabis and the Lacedemonians, to bee spoiled, pilled, and wasted at their pleasures. And certes, so much as I can conceive of Cleomedon his Oration, me thinks it hangeth not well together, and one peece thereof forteth not well with another. He seemed to speake of the Romane warre contemptuously, as if it were a matter of nothing: saying the event and issue thereof would be like the former, which they maintained with Philip. How is it then, that he keepeth  himselfe away, and in his absence demaundeth our helpe, rather than with his personall presence protecteth us both from Nabis and the Romanes? Vs, I say, his auncient Allies? But what speake I of us? Why hath he suffered them so to force and win Eretria and Carystum? why endured he, that so many cities of Thessalie should bee lost? How could hee abide Locris and Phocis to be overrun so, as they are? and Elatia now at this day so streightly besieged, and hotly

assaulted? Why quit he the streights of Epirus, and abandoned those imprenable holds upon  the river Aous, by force, for feare, of his owne accord, or howsoever? and when hee had forgone and disseised himselfe of that passe which hee held, why retired hee into the inland parts of his realme for his safetie? If willingly and of his owne accord hee abandoned so many of his allies, and left them to be spoiled and ransacked by the enemie, what can hee alleadge or say for himselfe, why those allies aforesaid may not provide for themselves the best they can? If for feare, let him pardon us likewise, if we be afraid. But if he were vanquished by force of armes, and therfore retired backe, shall wee, good Cleomedon, sustaine and endure the Romane puissance and their mightie armies, against which yee Macedonians were not able to stand? Or would you have us to beleeve you, that beare us in hand, how the Romanes warre not at this present, either with greater numbers or stronger forces than they have done heretofore, rather than trust our owne  eies, and that which daily wee see before our faces? In those daies they succoured the Aetolians with their navie, and warred neither under the conduct, nor with the armie of a Consull. The maritime cities of the confederates of Philip, were then in trouble and tumult: but all the mediteranean parts within the continent, were so secure and warished from the Romane forces, that Philip spoiled and forraied the Aetolians, imploring and seeking for helpe of the Romanes, but all in vaine. But now at this day the Romanes having finished the Carthaginian warre, which for sixteene yeares space they supported in the very heart and bowels of Italie, have not sent a garison to succour and maintaine the Aetolians in their warres, but are come themselves, as leaders and commaunders Generall, and by land and sea at once have warred upon Macedonie. And this is the third Consull of theirs, who at this present maintaineth mortall warre upon it, to the  uttermost of his power. Sulpitius hath encountred the king in the middest of Macedonie, bidden him battell, discomfited and put him to flight, after hee had laid wast and desolate the wealthiest quarter of all his kingdome. Quintius lately hath driven him out of campe and field, notwithstanding he were possessed of the streight avenues of Epirus, and bare himselfe boldly and confidently upon the naturall situation of the ground, of his strong defences, and force of a complete armie: and having pursued him as hee fled into Thessalie, hath taken the garrison townes of the king, and in manner within his owne sight, woon by fine force his confederat cities. Suppose and say, that all those things which the Athenians erewhile have alleadged concerning the crueltie, the avarice, and unbridled lust of the king, bee not true, but supposed slaunders; admit that those enormities and wicked parts committed within the Atticke land, against the gods of heaven  above, of the infernall spirits beneath, touch not us at all, and are much lesse pertinent, than those outrages which the Elaeuntij and the Abydenes, so far remote from us, have endured. Forget we our selves, if yee will, the hurts, the wounds, and losses that we have received, the murders, the pilling and rifling of the goods of Messena in the middest ofMo^^a. Peloponnesus. Likewise, how his friend and host Garitenes at Cyparissia, was killed against all law of god and man, even in a manner sitting at the board with meat in his month. Say we nothing also of Attalus the father and sonne, both Sicyonians, who were cruelly massacred, and yet he was wont to call the silie and wretched old man, Father. Also forbeare we to speake of the sonnes wife, who was carried away into Macedonie, to make her his harlot and concubine, and to abuse her at his pleasure. Let other rapes of virgines, forcings of honourable dames be forgotten: let us imagine that wee have nothing  to doe, not to meddle with Philip, for feare of whose crueltie ye were all so mute, and could not open your mouth. For what other cause of silence had yee, being called hither to this counsell? Let us put the case, that we were to debate the matter with Antigonus, that most mild and just prince, at whose gracious hands wee have received so many favours and pleasures above all other kings: would he demaund, thinke ye, that wee should doe that which possibly then could not bee done? Peloponnesus is a demie island, joined to the firme continent and maine land, by the narrow streight or banke of Isthmus, lying open and exposed to nothing more than to sea-forces. If one hundered covert and decked ships with hatches, and fiftie lighter vessels which are open, together with thirtie Brigantines or foists of Issa, should come to pill and spoile our sea coasts, and begin to assaile our townes and citties that lie open upon the river, even on the very strond  and sea bankes; should we retire our selves; thinke yee, into our cities within the land? Why? what els? As though we were not alreadie afflicted and plagued with intestine war, which sticketh even within our ribs and bowels? When Nabis and the Lacedemonians by land, the Romane navie by sea shall lie upon us, to doe us all annoy, how should I call upon the kings societie, or soothe

 helpe of the Macedonians? Or shall wee of ourselves, by our owne strength and meanes save our cities which shall be assaulted, against the puissance and power of the Romans? For in the former war we bravely defended (did we not?) the citie of Dymae. We have examples ynough of the fearful calamities and losses of others, that we need not to make our selves examples unto others. Take heed (I beseech you) how you set light and disdaine, that the Romanes have of their owne motive offered their friendship and alliance, which indeed yee were to wish for, and seeke all that ever ye could. It is for very feare (no doubt) that they are driven, being in a straunge land, to flie unto you for your alliance, because they would gladly shroud themselves under the shadow of your wings, be harboured within your havens, and sustained by your victuall and provision. No no, lords they are first of the seas, who can denie it? there is not a land they set foot into, but immediately  it is their owne, and in subjection unto them: whatsoever they seeme to request, they can commaund if they list. And because they are willing to spare and forbear you, therefore it is that they suffer you not to enter into any action that might be cause of your ruine and overthrow. For whereas Cleomedon erewhile seemed to shew and lay before you a meane and indifferent course, and that forsooth, which should be the safest way that you could take, namely to enter into no armes at all, to sit still and sleepe in a hole skin; that, I say, is no middleway, no nor (to speak truth) any way at all. For besides this, that yee must either accept or refuse the alliance with the Romanes, what els will become of us, but to be a prey unto the conquerour, having lost the grace and favour both of the one and the other? as men that like neutres, expecting the issue of the warre, frame our designements and counsels to the blind direction of fortune. Well, once again  I say, take heed you thinke not scorne of that which with all your heart you should wish and pray for, onely for that it is tendered and presented unto you. And never thinke, that because to day you have the choise of both in your owne hands, therefore yee shall ever have the same libertie hereafter. Occasions and opportunities are not alwaies the same, neither do they continue long. All this whiles have yee had a desire to save and free your selves from Philip, but evermore by wishes and praiers in secret heart, rather than by taking armes in open hand. Now there are those which with great armies and armadaes have passed the seas, who without your paine and perill are readie to deliver you from his hands. These men, if yee reject and refuse for your allies, yee are not well in your wits, and have them you must either your allies or your enemies, there is no remedie.
 After this Oration of the Pretour, there arose a muttering and noise in the assemblie, whiles some approved and gave assent unto that which he said, others rebuked in churlish wise those that accorded. Insomuch, as they jangled not one with another in particular, but the very States there assembled were at variance, yea, and this debate betweene the magistrates of the whole nation (whom they call Demiurgi, and ten they are in number) was as hotely mainteined, as among the multitude. Five of them said, they would propound unto the people, and debate with them in counsell about accepting the alliance of the people of Rome, and put it to voyces. The other five protested, that this was directly against a law, in that case provided, forbidding expressely that no magistrates should either propound or determine ought in any Diet, prejudiciall to the societie and league with Philip. Thus was this day also spent in debating and wrangling, and nothing  done. There remained one day yet of a full Diet and counsell, for by law they were to conclude and decree somewhat within three dayes at the farthest. Against that time, the parties were so hotely bent one against the other, that the fathers could hardly forbeare to offer violence to their very children. There was one Rhisiasus of Pellenae, who had a sonne named Memnon, and he was a Demiurgus, who tooke part and sided with them that would not permit the matter to be put to question, and determined by a scrutinie of voices. This Rhisiasus having instantly a long time importuned his sonne, and besought him to suffer the Acheans to provide for their weale publick, and not by his peevish frowardnes undo the state of the whole nation: when he saw once that all his prayers prevailed nothing, he sware a great oath that he would kill him with his owne hands, and not take him for his sonne, but for an errant enemie. By which his menaces, he  gained thus much in the end, that content he was the next day to joyne with them that put the matter to question: who now being more in number than the other, made a report, and proposed the cause to the assemblie: and when all the States in manner there met, enclined thereto, and approved thereof, so as they avowed openly what they would ordeine; the Dymaeans, Megapolitanes, and certeine Argives, before the decree was enacted, rose up all at once, and departed

out of the assembly, and no man either wondered at it, or blamed them for it. As for the Megapolitanes, no longer ago than in their grandfires dayes, at what time as they were expelled out of their country by the Lacedemonians, K. Antigonus had restored them again. The Dymeans being but lately taken prisoners, and ransacked by the Romane armie, Philip having given order that they should be redeemed wheresoever they were in slaverie and bondage, he not only set free, but also replanted in their owne countrey. The Argives last of all, besides that they are of a settled opinion and beliefe, that the Macedonian kings are descended from them, were for the most part linked unto Philip in the right and regard of private hospitalitie, and familiar friendship. In these respects, they went out of that assembly which inclined to the contract of alliance with the Romanes, and were held excused for this departure; being thus obliged unto Philip the adverse part, by great favours and benefites, yea and those newly received at his hands. All the other States of the Achaeans, when they were demaunded their opinions, without delay confirmed by their immediat decree, the societie with Attalus and the Rhodians: but the league with the people of Rome, because it could not be ratified and established without the Act of the people, was referred and put off untill the time that embassadors might be sent unto Rome. But for the present it was thought good that three embassadors should be addressed unto L. Quintius, and that all the forces of the Achaeans should march toward Corinth, for that Quintius having woon the port of Cenchreae, was alreadie at the siege and assault of that citie.
These Achaeans encamped themselves over against that gate that openeth toward Sicyone: the Romanes lay against that part of the citie which looketh toward Cenchreae, and Attalus having led his armie through the narrow streight of Isthmus, assailed them of Lechaeus side, which is an haven of the other sea. At the first they made no hote assault, hoping that there would be some mutinie betweene the townes-men and the kings garison. But perceiving they were all of one mind and resolution, and that both the Macedonians defended the citie, as their owne native countrie: and also the Corinthians were content to be at the full commaund and direction of Androstheus the captaine of the garison, as well as if he had bene their fellow-citizen, and lawfully chosen by their owne election and suffrages: then the assailants had no other hope but in the violent force of armes and engins. And of all sides they had raised banks and mures, and were come close to the walls, although with hard accesse thereto. Now had the Ram from that quarter where the Romanes lay, beaten downe a good part of the wall. To which breach, because it lay naked without defence, all the Macedonians ran to guard and defend it  by strength of armes: where there was a cruell fight between them and the Romanes. At the first the Romanes were soone repulsed by meanes of the great numbers of defendants: but after the succours of the Achaei and Attalus came unto them, they received them with equall valour: neither doubted they but to be able with ease to drive the Macedonians and the Greeks from their standings, and force them to recule. But there were within the towne a multitude of Italian fugitives revolted and fled from the Romanes: part of them, a residue left of Anniball his armie; who having transgressed the lawes, for feare of punishment were fled from the Romanes, and tooke part with Philip: part also were marriners and seafaring men, who for hope of more honorable interteinment and service, had abandoned their ships, and were gotten into the citie of Corinth. These fellowes past all hope of life, if the Romanes happly should have the better  hand, fared more like mad men than hardie and audacious souldiours. Now there is overagainst Sicyone a promontorie of Iuno, which they call the cape of Acreae, and it runneth into the sea: from whence the passage over to Corinth is a cut almost of seven miles. Thither Philocles, a captaine also under king Philip, had conducted through Boeotia 1500 souldiours: and certeine Brigantines of Corinth were there readie to embarke that supplie of aid, and to transport them to Lechaeus. By this time Attalus advised to set on fire the engins and fabricks that they had made, and presenly to geve over the siege. Quintius persisted yet more obstinately in his enterprise begun. But he also seeing the kings guards raunged and quartered at every gate, and that if they should happen to sallie out, their violence would hardly be susteined, was of the same mind with Attalus. So without effecting anything, the Achaeans were dismissed, and the  rest returned to their ships, Attalus to Piraeeum, the Romanes to Corcyra.
During this service by sea forces, the (other) Consull who lay in camp before Elatia in Phocis, first assayed to gaine the citie by conference and parlie with the principall citizens thereof: but after answere made, that it lay not in their hands, and that they who were for the king, outwent

 the townes-men both in number and strength; then at once from all parts he gave an assault unto the citie both by force of armes, and also by engins of artillerie. The Ram was bent against the walls, and as much thereof beaten downe with a mightie crash and fearefull noyse, as stood between the towres: whereupon the towne was dismantelled and laid naked; and withall a cohort of Romane souldiours entred at the open breach; so as from all parts the defendants abandoned their guards, and ran to that place that thus was distressed by the enemies. And at one instant the Romanes advaunced themselves over the breach, and set up skaling ladders against the wall which was standing: and whiles the enemies were amused wholie, and had their eie only upon that one place where the conflict was, the wall in many parts was skaled, and armed souldiours mounted into the citie. At which sodaine tumult and alarme, the armed men having  quit the place which they guarded with a thick troupe, fled all into the castell for feare, and the unarmed and naked multitude followed after. Thus the Consull was maister of the citie: which being ransaked, he sent unto the castell certeine messengers, promising life to as many of the kings garison as would depart away without armes, and offring libertie to the Elatians: and after securitie given hereof, within few dayes the castle also was rendred into his hands. Moreover, by the arrivall of Philocles (a commaunder for the king) in Achaea, not Corinth only was delivered from siege, but the citie also of the Argives, was by certeine of the principall rulers betrayed unto Philocles, who before had sounded and sollicited the minds and affections of the common people. There was a custome in this citie, that upon the first day of their generall assemblies, the Pretor should in token of good luck pronounce the names of Iupiter, Apollo, and Hercules: and  afterwards ordeined it was besides by a law, that the name of Philip should make up the fourth. Now after the alliance accorded betweene them and the Romanes, it hapned that the beadle or publick cryer left out the name of Philip: wherat the multitude first began to mutter and grumble: then arose a loud cry of those that put him in mind to name the king, willing him to geve him his honor due by law: untill at last his name was also pronounced with great applause and consent. Vpon the confidence and assurance of this favour, Philocles was sent for, who by night seised upon an hill that commaundeth the citie, which commonly is called the fort of Larissa; and having put a garison there, the next morning betimes he advanced forward with banner displaid, and came downe toward the common place lying under the fortresse aforesaid: where there encountred him a band of armed men well appointed in order of battaile. These were the garison of the  Achaei lately there placed, to the number of five hundred elect men chosen forth of all the States of Achaea: and one Atnesidemus a Dymean was their commaunder. Vnto him Philocles (one of the kings captaines aforesaid) addressed a speciall messenger to persuade and exhort him to quit the citie; giving him to understand, That hee and his companie were not able to match the townesmen alone, who caried the same mind that the Macedonians had done: much lesse then should they stand out when the Macedonians were joined unto them; the Macedonians (I say) whome the verie Romanes themselves could not sustaine at Corinth. At first he did no good either with leader or souldiour: yea and when within a while they beheld the Argives also marching armed against them with a great troupe from another part, and saw present death before their eies, yet it seemed they would have put it to the hazard of a conflict, and  sought to the last man, in case their captaine would have stucke to it, and not relented. But Aenesidemus for feare least togither with the citie, the floure of all the youth of Achaea should perish, capitulated with Philocles, that they might be permitted to depart and goe their way: but himselfe kept his ground still in his armour, with some few of his followers and vassals, and remooved not a foot. Then Philocles sent out unto him, to demaund, What he meant thereby? Vnto whom he gave no other words, but holding forth his shield before him made answer, That armed as he was he would live and die in the guard and defence of that citie which was committed to his charge. Then by the commaundement of the captaines, the Thracians launced their darts and shot at him, and so both he and the companie about him were slaine every one. Thus after the accord of alliance betweene the Achaeans and Romanes, two most noble and famous  cities (Argi and Corinth) came under the subjection of the king. These were the actes atchieved by the Romanes as well by land as sea this summer.
In Fraunce there was no exploit performed worth remembrance by Sext. Aelius the Consull, notwithstanding he had under his government two entire armies: the one that he retained still with him, which by order hee should have discharged, and was the same that had before beene

commaunded by L. Cornelius the Proconsull, and now by him was committed to the charge of  C. Aelius: the other, that he brought himselfe with him into the province. So that hee imployed the whole yeere almost in compelling the men of Cremona and Placentra to returne into their colonies, from whence by sundry casualties of warre they were chased and dispersed. As Fraunce that yeere was in quiet beyond all hope and expectation, so about the citie of Rome there had like to have beene a commotion and tumult of bondsluves. The Carthaginian hostages were in guard and kept at Setia, where they had attending about them (as meet was for the children of the chiefe nobles and princes of Carthage) a mightie traine and retinew of servants. The number of them was the greater by occasion of the late Africane warre; during which time and presently after, the Setines also themselves had bought up many of that nation which were taken captives, and came in port-sale with the rest of the prizes. These having conspired togither, sent out certaine of their owne companie to sollicite also the other slaves that were in the territorie of Setia, and so forth, as many as they could find about Norba and Circeij. Their plot was, that when all things were provided aforehand, they should upon the very day of the solemne games and plaies (which shortly were to be exhibited and set forth in Setia) take the opportunitie of the time, when as the people were busie in beholding the spectacle and shew represented unto their eye, and to run upon them: and when they had by massacre in this sodaine hurlyburly possessed themselves of Setia, then to go forward and surprise Norba and Circeij. This horrible complot and conspiracie was detected, and information given at Rome to L. Cornelius Merula Pretour at that time of the citie. For two bondsiaves early in a morning before day, presented themselves unto him, and opened from point to point in order, namely, what had ben contrived  and done, and what remained yet to do. The Pretor having taken order for their safe custodie at home within his own house, called the Senat togither; where, after he had recounted and declared unto them what these enformers had revealed, he was commanded to goe abroad to search out and represse this conspiracie. Forth he marched with five lieutenants of the campe, and looke how many he could meet with in his way all over the fields, villages, and hamlets, he tendred unto them a militarie oth, and constrained them to arme and follow him. Thus in this hastie manner of levie, he armed well neere two thousand, and with them all together (who knew not whither he meant to goe nor to what peece of service he led them) to Setia he came. At his first entrance, he sodainly in great hast apprehended the principall heads of the conspiracie; wherupon the slaves fled out of the towne. Then were sent out certaine into the fields, to trace and to find  them out by their tracks. In this businesse there were two bondslaves and one free man that performed singular good service. Vnto him the LL. of the Senate gave order, that there should be paid 100000 Asles in brasse coine:See the account of the (...) ab. 1. but unto the slaves 25000 and their freedom. For the redemption of whom, their masters were contented their full price out of the chamber of the citie. Not long after, it was reported that the remnant of this conspiracie purposed to surprise Preneste. Thither marched L. Cornelius the Pretour of the citie, where he executed about five hundred persons who were found guiltie. The citie was in great feare to see how the hostages and captives of the Carthaginians practised such troubles. Therfore in Rome a standing watch was kept in every street: and the inferior magistrates were charged to see to it and to walke the round, and the Triumvirs likewise (or three Sheriffes) to have a better eye and looke to the Quartie-prison. The Pretour also directed his letters into all quarters of the Latine nation to this effect, That all the hostages should be kept within doores, and not suffered to goe abroad into the streets: that all captives and prisoners should have gyves about their heeles of ten pound weight at least, and be kept in no other ward but in the common goale.
The same yeere came embassadours from king Attalus, who presented in the Capitoll a golden crowne of 246 pound weight,(...) with great thanksgiving unto the Senat, that king Antiochus in regard of the authoritie and countenance of the Romane Embassadours, had withdrawne his forces out of the confines of Attalus. The same sommer two hundred men of armes, ten Elephants, and 200000 Modij of wheat sent from king Masaniss^, arrived at the campe in Greece. Likewise out of Sicilie and Sardinia, there was sent great store of victuall and liveries for the armie. In Sicilie M. Marcellus was L. governour, and in Sardinia M. Porcius Cato, an upright man and living without touch and reproch, save onely he was thought somewhat too severe in restraining of usurie. Hee banished out of that Iland all usurers: hee abridged also and cut off cleane, the charges which the allies were woont to desray for the entertainment of the Pretour.
Sex. Aelius the Consull being returned to Rome out of Fraunce in regard of the generall assembly for election of magistrates, created Consuls Cn. Cornelius Cethegus and Q. Minutius Rusus. And two daies after, the election was held for Pretours. This yeere first were chosen six Pretours, by reason that the number of provinces encreased, and the Romane Empire and seignorie extended farther. And these were they, to wit, L. Manlius Volso, Cn. Sempronius Tuditanus,Six Pretors fast (...). M. Sergius Silus, M. Helvius, M. Minutius Rufus, and L. Acilius. Of these, Sempronius and Helvius were Aediles of the Commons; Q. Minutius Thermus and T. Sempronius Longus Aediles of the chaire. The Romane games this yeere were foure times renewed. Cn. Corneli^s and Q. Minutius beeing Consuls, above all things went in hand with the provinces of Consuls and Pretours: and first they dispatched those that concerned the Pretours (a matter that might be decided by  casting lots.) To Sergius fell the jurisdiction of the citie, and to Minutius the foreine, over strangers. Acilius was appointed to Sardinia, Manlius to Sicilie, Sempronius to that part of Spaine betweene Italie and Iberus; and Helvius unto the other beyond the river.

When the Consuls were upon the point to cast lots likewise for their provinces, namely, Italie and Macedonie, L. Oppius, and Q. Fulvius Tribunes of the Commons, interposed themselves and staied them, alleadging, That Macedonie was a province lying farre off, and there was no one thing that had more empeached and hindered the proceeding of warres to that day than this, That in so remote parts, the Consull ever of the former yeere was called home before hee were setled in his affaires, and when hee should bee emploied most in warres. Now have there foure yeeres alreadie gone over our heads, since we decreed and concluded to follow the Macedonian  warre; during which time, Sulpitius spent the greater part of his yeer, in seeking after the king and his armie; Villius, when hee should encounter the enemie, was called away before hee had effected any exploit; as for Quintius, he was kept at Rome still for the most part of the yeer, in attendance about church matters and sacrifices: howbeit the affaires of warres under his conduct were managed so well, that if either he had gone sooner into his province, or the winter had been later, he might have dispatched the warres there: and now, that he is readie to retire into his standing campe and wintering harbours, the report is, that hee hath brought the warre to that good passe and forwardnesse, that unlesse hee bee not hindered by a new successour, in all likelyhood and apparence, he will make a finall end there of the next summer.

With these speeches they prevailed so much, that the Consuls for their part promised to bee  ordered and set downe by the Senat in this behalfe, upon condition, that the Tribunes would be content to doe the like. Now when of both sides they had referred themselves to a free and absolut consultation, the LL. of the Senat assigned to both the Consuls the government of Italie, and continued the commaund of the armie still with T. Quintius, untill there came another to succeed him. Two legions were appointed for the Consull, with commission to war upon the Gauls betweene Rome and the Alps, who had revolted from the people of Rome. And for Quintius ordained it was, that there should be sent into Macedonie unto him, a new supplie of five thousand foot, three hundred horse, and three thousand sea-servitours and marriners. And likewise, that the same L. Quintius Flamininus should be Admirall of the navie, as before. For the Pretors who were to go into Spaine, there was an allowance of eight thousand footmen out of the allies of the  Latine nation, and foure hundred horsemen, so that they dismissed the old soldiors out of Spain: and enjoined they were to limit and set out the bonds of their severall provinces, whereas the higher Spaine and the lower should part. And for Macedonie there were two lieutenants more for the armie appointed, to wit, P. Sulpitius and P. Villius, who had ben Consuls both, and in that province.
Before that either Consuls or Pretours went out into their provinces, it was thought good to take order for the prodigious tokens which happened. For at Rome the temple of Vulcane and Summanus; at Fregellae, the wall and a gate of the citie, were stricken with lightening. At Frusino it appeared light (as it had been cleare day) in the night season. At Asculum a lamb was yeaned having two heads and five feet. Also at Formiae two wolves entred into the towne, and worried  some that were in their way. Last of all, at Rome there was a wolfe, that not onely came into the citie, but went forward as far as to the Capitoll.
C. Acilius a Tribune of the Commons proposed a law, that there should bee five colonies conducted to the sea side, and there planted: two at the mouth of the rivers Vulturnus and Liternus, one at Puzzele. Puteoli, another in the Burrough town of Salernum, and to make the fift Pisentia Nigro, or Fonsia, Ligorio. Buxentum

was adjoined to the rest. Into every Colonie order was taken, that there should bee thirtie housholds  sent. The three Commissaries, called Triumvirs, for the conducting of these colonies were created, namely, M. Servilius Geminus, Q. Minutius Thermus, and T. Sempronius Longus. These three had commission to continue in the charge of this office three years. After the muster, and all other matters accomplished, pertaining to God and man, that were by the Consuls to be performed, then they set forward both, into their provinces. Cornelius tooke his way directly against the Insubrians, who accompanied with the Cenomanes, were entred at that time into armes: Q. Minutius in his journey bare on the left hand of Italie toward the nether sea; and conducting his armie to Genua, began with the Ligurians to make warre. Claslidium and Litubium, townes both of the Ligurians, likewise two States of the same nation, the Celelates and the Cerdiciates surrendred unto him; insomuch as all the countrie on this side the Po, were in subjection to the  Romanes, except the Boians among the Gaules, and the Iluates among the Ligurians. By report there were fifteene townes containing twentie thousand men, which yeelded unto them. From thence he led the legions into the territorie of the Boians. The armie of the Boians had passed over the Po a little before, and joined with the Insubrians and Caenomanes: for hearing that the Consuls would warre jointly with both their forces, they intended likewise to make themselves more strong, by uniting and bringing their power together. But the bruit being blowne abroad, that one of the Consuls invaded and fired the countrie of the Boians, presently there arose a tumult. For the Boians demaunded, that they all in generall would helpe them in their distresse. The Insubrians refused and said, That they would not abandon their own confines: by which occasion they disbanded. The Boians went to the defence of their owne countrie, and  the Insubrians with the Caenomanes, sat them downe upon the bankes of the river Mincius. Five miles beneath that place, the Consull Cornelius also encamped himselfe neere the said river: from whence he sent certaine messengers all about the villages, and to Brixia, the head cittie of that nation: and being advertised sufficiently that the youth was up in arms, without the warrant and consent of their auncients; and that the Caenomanes joined not with the Insubrians in their rebellion by vertue of publick counsell and authoritie; he sent for the principall persons among them, and began to labour and deale with them, that the Caenomanes would forsake the Insubrians, and openly with their ensignes advaunced, either to returne into their owne countrie, or turne to the Romanes. This they could not bring them to: howbeit they assured the Consul, that in the field they would either sit still and doe nothing, or els, if any good opportunitie was presented  unto them, they would aid the Romanes. The Insubrians knew nothing of this compiot: and yet, some doubt and suspition they had, that their allies haulted, and were not found of al four: and therefore when there was occasion to lead foorth to fight a field, they durst not trust them with either of the two wings and points of the battell, for fear if they reculed like false brethren, they should hazard the maine chaunce: but placed them behind the ensignes in the arriergard. The Consull in the beginning of the battell vowed a temple to Iuno Sospita, in case he discomfited the enemies that day, and put them to the rout. The souldiours set up a shout, and cried aloud that they would bring it to passe that the Consull should have his desire, and therewith charged the enemie right fiercely. The Insubrians could not abide the first shocke. Some write, that in the very conflict the Caenomanes also suddainely set upon their backe, whereby they were distressed  and in daunger both before and behind; and that there were slaine enclosed in the mids five and thirtie thousand of the enemies, and seven hundred taken prisoners, and among them Amilcar the Generall of the Carthaginians, who was the cause of this war: also that there were a hundred and thirtie ensignes carried away, and of chariots above two hundred. All the townes that followed this revolt, yeelded to the Romanes.
Minutius the Consull, at the beginning made excursions into the countrie of the Boians, wasting and spoiling it all over: but afterwards when they had forsaken the Insubrians, and were retired home to defend and save their own, he kept himselfe within campe, making full account to trie a set battell with the enemie. Neither would the Boians for their part have been behind but readie to have answered them, had not the rumor of the Insubrians overthrow, daunted and broken their  hearts. Whereupon they forsooke their leader, quit the campe, and bestowed themselves in the townes and villages to guard every man his owne, and quite altered the course of their enemie his warre, and put him besides his account. For the Consull past all hope now to determine the quarrell in one raunged battell, began againe to forray the fields, burne all buildings,

 and force townes by assault. Much about the same time Clastidium was set on fire. And from thence the legions were conducted against the Iluates among the Ligurians, who onely stood out and would not come in, and yeeld obedience. Which nation likewise hearing that the Insubrians were defeated in a battell, and that the Boians were so scared, that they durst not venture the fortune of a field, submitted themselves. At the same time the letters of the Consuls, containing their happie affaires in Fraunce, were brought to Rome. M. Sergius the Pretour of the citie first red them in the Senate, and afterwards by the advise of the Senate, rehearsed them in a full audience and assembly of the people. And a procession was decreed for the space of foure daies.
Now was winter come, and whiles T. Quintius after the winning of Elatia, wintered his armies  in divers harbors within Phocis and Locris, there arose a mutinie in Opus. The one faction sent for the Aetolians their neere neighbours to side with them: and the other for the Romans. The Aetolians came first, but the mightier faction would not suffer them to enter in: for having dispatched a messenger to the Romane Generall, they held the town untill his comming. The kings garrison kept the fortresse, neither could they be brought to abandon it either with the menaces of the Opuntians, or the authoritie and countenance of the Romane commaunder. The onely let and stay why it was not immediatly assaulted was this; Because there was come an herald from the king, requesting time and place of a parle, which with much ado was graunted to the king: not because Quintius of himselfe was not desirous and wished that hee might bee thought to have ended this warre, either by force of armes or conditions of peace; for as yet he knew not  whether one of the new Consuls should be sent to succeed him, or his gouernment continued still unto him (according as he had given his friends and kinsfolks in charge to bring that about by all the endeavour and meanes that he could make:) but hee supposed verily, that this parling would be to good purpose for him, if it might be in his libertie to drive matters unto warre if he stayed still, or draw to a peace if he departed home. So upon the strond and shore of the gulfe Malea, they chose a place neere unto Nicea. Thither came the king by water from Demetrias with five brigantines or pinnaces, and one ship of war with a brasse beake-head. There accompanied him the chiefe LL. of Macedonie, and Cycliadas a noble personage of great mark among the Athaeans, and one that was from thence banished. With the Romane Generall were king Aminander, Dionysidorus an embassador of king Attalus, and Agesimbrotus Admiral of the Rhodian  fleet, Phaneas the chiefe and principal magistrat of the Aetolians, and two Achaeans Aristhenus and Xen^phon. The Romane Generall in the mids of these, advanced himselfe forward to the edge of the very shore, even to the banke side, whiles the king came forward to the foredeck of his ship standing at anker: and thus he began and said unto the king, Sir, you may do better to come ashore that wee may commune and conferre together close, and both speake and heare one another more easily. The king refused so to do: and why so? quoth Quintius, who is it that you scare, if a man may know? Then with an hautie spirit and kinglike: I feare none (quoth he) but the immortall gods; but I trust not the fidelitie of all that I see heere about you, and namely the Aetolians least of all other. Why (saith Quintius againe) this is the common case of all them that come to parlie with enemies, namely, to be in danger one of another. Yea mary, quoth the king,  but by your leave Quintius, the price and recompence of trecherie and falshead (if it should come to that) is not all one for killing Philip and Phaneas: for the Aetolians should not find it so hard a matter to substitute another Pretor, as the Macedonians to create another king in my roume. This said, there was not a word more to the point: while the Romane generall thought it reason that he should begin who sought for a parle; and the king supposed it meet that it was his part to speake first who should give conditions, and not for him that stood at receipt, and was to accept therof. Then Quintius began and said, that his speech should be plain and simple: for he would say no more, but propose only those points, which if they might not be performed, there wold be no peace upon any condition at all. First, that the king must withdraw his garrisons out of all the cities of Greece. Item, That he is to deliver up all the prisoners and fugitive revolts that hee hath,  unto the allies of the people of Rome. Item, That he restore again to the Romanes all those peeces in Illyricum, which after the peace concluded in Epirus, he had seized upon. Last of all, that he surrender unto Ptolomeus king of Aegypt, all those cities which he possessed himselfe of, after the death of Ptolome Philopator. These (saith he) are the conditions, that I and the people of Rome doe demaund: but meet it is besides, that you heare the demaunds also of the allies. Then the

Embassadour or agent for king Attalus required, that the ships and captives which had beene  taken in the sea-fight before Chius, should be rendered, and that Nicephorium and the temple of Venus, which hee had pilled and spoiled, should bee restored as good and entier, as they were before. After him, the Rhodians made claime to Peraea (a countrie in the continent right over-against their Isle, and an auncient appertenance of their siegnorie) and demaunded withall, that the garrisons should quit Iassus, Bargyllae, and the citie of the Euromensians, and about Hellespontus, likewise the cities of Sestos and Abydos. Item, that Panopolis should be restored unto the Bizantines, with the auncient chartre of their franchises and liberties. Finally, that all the Merchant townes and Ports in Asia might be freed from paying custome. Then came upon him the Achaei, and chalenged Corinth and Argi as their owne. After them, when as Phaneas (the Pretour of the Aetolians) had demaunded in a manner the same that the Romanes had before, namely, that the kings forces should depart out of Greece, adding moreover, that those cities should be rendred unto the Aetolians which in times past belonged to their dominion and jurisdiction: then one of the heads of the Aetolians named Alexander, an eloquent man among them, as any other, presently inferred and said, That he had a long time sitten still, and opened not his mouth, not because he thought that in all this conference they would grow to any point or conclusion, but for that he would not interrupt any of his allies in their speech. And as for Philip quoth he, he dealeth not soundly and bona fide in treaties of peace, no more than ever heretofore he hath managed his warres with vertue and true valour. For in all these parlies and conferences he layeth traines, and lieth to catch advantages: in warre he never striketh a battaile in plaine field, nor commeth to close fight hand to hand; but in his retreats and flights, burneth  and sacketh cities: and thus being himselfe vanquished, spoileth and maketh havock of that which by right is the due reward and recompence of conquerours. But the noble Macedonian kings in old time, tooke no such courses. Their manner was to fight it out in open field, and to spare cities and townes, all that ever possibly they could; to the end that their dominion might be more wealthy and puissant. For what kind of pollicie is it, for him to ruinate and destroy utterly that, about the possession whereof he is in question, and reserve nothing for himselfe but only warre? This Philip the yeere past hath laid desolate in Thessalie more cities of his allies there, than all the enemies have done that ever Thessalie had: and hath taken more from the Aetolians themselves, while he was a confederate friend with them, than all the time that he was their professed enemie. Hee hath seized upon Lysimachia, expelled their Pretour, and chased  out the garison of the Aetolians. Chios also, a citie under his owne subjection he hath rased subverted and quite destroyed. By semblable falshood and deceit he is possessed of(...) Thebes in Phthia, Echinum, Larissa, and Pharsalus. Philip netled and galled at these words of Alexander, commaunded that his ship should approch neerer to the banke, to the end that himselfe might be better heard. And as he began to frame bitter invectives against the Aetolians principally, Phaneas cut him off, saying, That the quarell was not to be decided by word, but with the sword: and either he must win it by fine force, or yeeld obedience to the mightier. That is true quoth Philip, and so evident, that a blind man may see it; jesting merily at Phaneas, who was troubled with a paire of bad eies. And geven he was by nature to be pleasantly conceited, yea and fuller of his frumps ywis, than beseemed the majestie of a king: so as many times even in treatie  of serious matters and of great consequence, he could not forb^are but make himselfe mery and laugh a good. Afterwards he fell to a fit of choler and indignation, that the Aetolians should take upon them like Romanes to commaund him out of Greece, who if they were put to it, were not able upon their knowledge to set downe the bounds of Greece, and limit how far it reached. For as much as the Agrei, the Apodeotes and Amphilochi, which take up a great part of Aetolia, are not within Greece. And what just cause (quoth he) of complaint have they, in that I have not spared some of their allies? Why? even they themselves hold this old custome for a law, namely, to permit their youth to take armes and serve against their owne allies, so they do it without the publick order and warrant from the State: and very often a man may see Aetolians in contrarie armies, and come to aid as well the one side as the other: As for Chius, it was not I  that forced it; I did no more but aid Prusias my friend and ally, in the siege and assault thereof. And as touching Lysimachia, I defended it against the Thracians: but for as much as of necessitie I was called away from the guard thereof unto this warre, the Thracians now hold it. Thus much by way of answere to the Aetolians. Now concerning Attalus and the Rhodians, by right I owe

 them nothing: for it was not I but they, that began the warre. Howbeit, for the honor that I beare to the Romanes, I will make restitution to the Rhodians of Peraea, and restore I will to Attalus the ships and the captives as many as are forthcomming and may be found. As for the restitution and making good againe of Nicephorium and the temple of Venus, what answere should I returne to them that demaund it, but this, that I will endevour and be at charge of planting new trees (which is the onely way and meanes whereby groves and woods that are cut downe and fallen, may be recovered againe) seeing that ye will needs have it, that kings (forsooth) must commun and reason to and fro about such matters as these. In the last place, he framed his speech to answere the Achaeans: wherein, first he began with the benefits and pleasures that Antigonus had done unto that nation; then, of the favours and good turnes they had received from  his owne selfe; and withall he commaunded their decrees and edicts to be red, conteining all kind of honors as well divine as humane: adding moreover the late and fresh revolt of their armie from him: and albeit he inveighed sharply against their disloyaltie and treacherie, yet he promised to render Argos unto them. As for Corinth, he would conferre and consult with the Romane Generall, and demaund of him, whither he thought it reason that he should depart from those cities which he wan by armes, and held by right of conquest, or dispossesse himselfe of those also, which he received from his progenitours as his lawfull inheritance? The Acheans and Aetolians addressed themselves to answere those points; but the sunne was welneere downe: whereupon the conference was adjourned untill the morrow. Philip retired to the harborough from whence he came, and the Romanes with their allies to their camp. The day following, Quintius at the time appointed was readie before the citie of Nicea (for that was thought a convenient place.) But Philip appeered not, nor for the space of certeine houres came there any at all from him, not so much as a messenger. Now when they were out of all hope of his repaire thither, behold of a sodaine his ships were descried. For himselfe he said by way of excuse, that considering how hard, how grievous and intollerable indignities were imposed upon him, he had employed all that day time untill then in consultation, and could not resolve. But it was generally thought among them all, that he had of purpose prolonged the time, and made it so late even toward evening, because the Achaeans and Aetolians should have no leisure to answere unto him. And this opinion of theirs himselfe confirmed, in that he requested that he alone might parlie with the Romane Generall himselfe, and that all others should go aside and absent  themselves; to the end they two might spend and loose no more time in debate and wrangling, but go briefly to the point, and make an end one way or other. This petition of his would not at first be accepted by Quintius, pretending that he would not have it seene that the allies were excluded out of the conference. But afterwards upon his importunate suite, by the advise of them all, the Romane Generall together with Ap. Claudius a Colonell, when the rest were voided away, avanced forward to the banke side: the king with the other two whom he had with him the day before came aland. There after they had parled in secret together a certein time, they parted. What Philip related unto his companie is not certeinly knowne: but Quintius made report unto his allies of their conference in this wise: namely, that Philip was content to quit the whole coast and tract of Illyricum, for the Romanes to enter upon. Item, to send back all the  traiterous renegates, and as many captives as were to be found. Item, to redeliver unto Attalus the ships and the mariners taken prisoners therein. Item, to render unto the Rhodians the countrey of Peraea: but in no wise to be deseized of Iassus and Bargyllae. Item, to deliver unto the Aetolians Pharsalus and Larissa, but not Thebes in any case. Last of all, to part not onely with Argos, but with Corinth also, for the behouse of the Achaeans. There was not one of them all well pleased at this limitation and setting out of particular parts, which hee would deliver, and which he would not. For in this reckening and account they should be more loosers than winners. For unlesse (say they) hee remoove his forces and garrisons out of all Greece throughout, he will never cease to give or take occasions of quarrell. As they all cried out from the whole assembly to this effect, their high voice was heard of Philip, albeit he stood  aloofe. Wherupon he requested Quintius to referre the whole matter once more unto the next day; and then certainly without faile, he would either persuade him and his allies and bring them to his mind, or else would come off and suffer himselfe to be persuaded and overruled by them. The place of meeting was appointed upon the strond neare Thronium; and thither they repaired on both parts betimes. There Philip first and foremost, besought both Quintius and all

those that were present, not to disturbe the hope of peace, but that it might come to some effect: and in conclusion, craved time wherein he might send his embassadours unto the Senate of Rome; assuring them, that if he could not obtaine peace under those articles above said, hee would accept of any other conditions, which it should please the Senate to put upon him. All the rest misliked hereof, supposing that he sought for nothing else but delaies and tract of time, whiles he might gather his forces togither. But Quintius inferred againe, That well it might so be, and a truth indeed that they alledged, if it were sommer time and a season fit for warre and martiall exploits: but now, considering winter was at hand, they could loose nothing by graunting him respite to addresse and embassage. For neither (quoth hee) will any capitulation and composition which wee should make with Philip stand good and firme without the approbation of the Senat: and in this one winter (when of necessitie we must surcease from warre) it may  be knowne what the Senate by their authoritie will approove. To this advise the chiefe of the confederates accorded, and therein rested. So there was a cessation of armes for two moneths graunted: in which meane time it was thought good, that ech of them likewise should dispatch one embassadour to advertise the Senate, to take heed they were not over-raught by the subtiltie and fraud of the king. But provided it was in the covenant of the truce aforesaid, That incontinently the kings garrisons should void the territories of Phocis and Locris. Quintius also himselfe sent (together with the Embassadours of the allies) Aminander king of the Athamanes; and to make the embassage more honourable, Q. Fabius (his owne wives sisters sonne) Q. F^lvius and P. Claudius accompanied the king.
When they were arrived at Rome, the Embassadours of the allies had audience given them  before those that were sent from king Philip. Most of their speeches were spent in railing against the king: but in this one point they most of all mooved the Senat to give eare unto them, namely, when they described by demonstration (as in a map) the situation of those countries as well by land as sea, that all men might plainly see, that if the king might hold in his hands the citie Demetrias in Thessalie, Chalcis in Euboea, and Corinth in Achaia, Greece could not possibly be at libertie, considering that Philip himselfe was woont to tearme them (no lesse truly than tauntingly) The shackles and setters of Greece. After them were the kings embassadours permitted to enter into the Senat house: and having begun to make a long oration, their speech was cut off with this one briefe and short interrogatorie, Whether Philip would quit those three cities aforesaid or no? Whereunto they made this answere, That they had no expresse warrant  in their commission touching that matter by name. So the kings Embassadours were seut away without conclusion of any peace: and Quintius had full authoritie to determine of war or peace at his pleasure. Who seeing plainly by this, that the Senate was not wearie of warre, and being himselfe more desirous of victorie than peace, he would never after graunt Philip any more parlies, but gave him to understand, that he would admit no other embassage from him, but that which should bring him newes of his departure quite out of Greece.
Philip seeing no other way now but that he must needs fight and trie the issue by a maine battaile, and that hee was to gather his forces together from all parts: beeing perplexed most of all for the cities of Achaia (a countrey farre remote from him) and yet more carefull in regard of Argi than Corinth; he thought it best pollicie to make it over (as it were upon trust) into the  hands of Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedemonians, upon condition, That if hee obtained the victorie, Nabis should deliver it up unto him againe; but if ought should come to him but well, then Nabis himselfe to have and hold it as his owne. Vnto, Philocles, governour of Corinth and Argi, he dispatcheth his letters, That hee should himselfe in person commune with the tyrant above-named about it. Philocles, besides that hee came now with a present, added moreover of his owne head (for the better assurance and pawne of amitie betweene the tyrant and the king) That Philip would give his daughters in marriage to Nabis his sonnes. The tyrant refused at the first to accept of that citie, unlesse hee were sem for, by a decree of the Argives themselves^^ come for to aid the citie. But afterwards when he heard say, That in a frequent assembly there, they not onely rejected him, but also detested and abhorred the very name of a tyrant, as an execrable  abhomination; supposing now that he had a good occasion and quirel offered to make a spoile of them, he willed Philocles to deliver the citie unto him when hee would. So the tyrant was received into the town in the night season, without the privitie and knowledge of any person: and by breake of day hee seazed upon all the higher places. The gates were shut, and few

 of the principall heads in the beginning of the tumult made shift to escape. Those that were absent had their houses ransacked and their goods pilled: as many as were present, had all their gold and silver taken from them; besides, great summes of money were imposed upon them to be paid. They that made speed and were not long about it, but tendred readie coine, were let goe without any outrage or hurt done unto their bodies: but such as were suspected either to hide or keepe ought backe, were mangled and tortured like bondslaves. After this, hee assembled the people together and published two lawes; the one, for crossing all debt-bookes and cancelling obligations: the other, for division of lands among the people by the poll: two firebrands to serve their turne that seeke for change and alteration in a State; enough to set on fire the Commons against the Nobles and chiefe of a citie.
 When the citie of Argos was thus brought in subjection under Nabis, the tyrant never remembring at whose hands, not upon what condition he had received it, sent Embassadours to Elatia unto Quintius, likewise to Attalus wintering then in Aegina, certifying them, That Argos was in his hands and at his devotion; and if Quintius would repaire thither to parle with him, he doubted not but they two should agree well enough in every point. Quintius graunted to come thither, to the end, that by this meanes he might disfurnish Philip of that garrison: and he sent likewise to Attalus, willing him, that he would depart from Aegina and meet him at Sicyone: himselfe losed from Anticyra, and with ten galeaces called Quinqueremes; which (as hap was) L. Quintius his brother some dayes before had put to sea out of the wintering harborough of Corcyra, crossed over to Sicyone. Now was Attalus there alreadie, who making remonstrance  unto Quintius, That it became a tyrant to come unto a Romane Generall, and not a Romane Generall to goe unto a tyrant, induced Quintius to condiscend unto his opinion, and not to enter the citie of Argos. Not farre from the citie is a place called Mycenica, where they agreed to meet and commune together. Quintius came to the place, accompanied with his brother and certaine colonels. Attalus was guarded with his princely and roiall traine. Nicostratus the Pretour of the Achaeans repaired thither, attended with some few auxiliarie souldiours: and there they found the tyrant expecting their comming with all his forces. And armed as he was, with his guard likewise armed, he advaunced himselfe into the middest (well nere) of the plaine that lay betweene. Quintius unarmed, came forward with his brother and two colonels. King Attalus likewise betweene the Pretour of the Achaeans of the one hand, and a courteour of his  on the other, both unarmed. The tyrant began the speech with an excuse, That beeing in armes and attended with a guard of armed men, he presented himselfe to a parle, seeing the Generall of the Romans and king Attalus unarmed: and said, that he stood not in feare of them, but of certaine exiled persons of the Argives. After this, when they came to treat as touching the conditions and covenants for the contract of an amitie, Quintius the Generall demanded two things: the one, That Nabis would make an end of warring with the Achaei: the other, That he would send with him certain aids against Philip. And verily to send succour he graunted: and in lieu of peace hee was content there should be a truce, untill the warre with Philip was dispatched. Also about Argos king Attalus began to enter into some question, saying: That having the citie treacherously betrayed unto him by Philocles, hee now held it by force of armes: but  hee answered againe, That hee was sent for by the Argives themselves, for to protect them. Then the king required that the Argives might be assembled together, that he might know the truth. The tyrant made no deniall thereof. The king replied againe, that the assembly should be free, and at their libertie to speake, and to that effect the garrisons were to be removed out of the city, and no Lacedemonians intermingled among them; to the end that the Argives might frankly speake their mind. But the tyrant flatly denied to withdraw from thence the guards. So this arguing came to no conclusion, and the conference brake up, after that the tyrant had given the Romane Generall sixe hundred Candiotes, and a truce made for the tearme of foure moneths, betwene Nicostratus Pretour of the Acheaeans, and Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedemonians. From thence Quintius departed to Corinth, and approched the gate with a regiment of Cretensians,  that it might appeare to Philocles the kings captain there, that the tyrant was revolted from Philip. Philocles also entred into a parle with the Romane Generall, and when hee was exhorted by him to depart out of hand and yeeld the cittie, he returned such an answere unto him, that hee seemed rather to deferre, than to denie the thing. From Corinth Quintius crossed the sea to Anticyra, from whence he sent his brother to sound the nation of the Acarnanians. And Attalus

departed directly from Argos to Sicyone. Where the citie not onely encreased the auncient  honours of the king, with the addition of new: but also the king over and besides that hee had purchased for them in time past, the sacred land of Apollo, with a great summe of money; because hee would not seeme now also to passe by this friend cittie allied unto him, without some roiall bountie and munificence, he gave freely unto them sixe talents of silver, and ten thousand Medimnes of corne: and so returned to his ships at Cenchreae. Nabis also having strengthened the garison in Argi, returned to Lacedaemon: and after himselfe had robbed the men of their monie and goods, hee sent his wife thither to doe the like by the women. Who sending for the honourable and worshipfull dames of the citie, inviting them one by one to her house, and otherwhiles many together at once, such as were of kin one to another, by flattering and by threatning gat from them not only all the gold that they had, but in the end stript off their apparell also, and  all the jewels and ornaments that they ware.


THE XXXIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the three and thirtith Booke.
TItus Quintius Flamininus the Proconsull, ended the warre with Philip, after hee had vanquished  him in a pight field neere Cynocephalae in Thessalie. L. Quintius Flamininus, brother to the said Proconsull, having forced Leucas the head citie of Acarnania, received the Acarnanians upon their submission and surrender. C. Sempronius Tudisanus the Pretour was slaine, and his armie defeated by the Celtiberians. Attalus being fallen suddainely sicke, was remooved from Thebes to Pergamus, and there departed this life. Peace was graunted to Philip upon his suite, and libertie restored to Greece. L. Furius and C. Claudius Marcellus, the two Consuls, subdued the Boians and Insubrians in Gaule, Marcellus triumphed. Anniball having practised in Affrick to raise war, but to no effect, was therupon accused unto the Romanes, by letters sent from the principall of the adverse faction: but for feare of the Romanes, who had dispatched their embassadours to the Carthaginian Senate about him, be fled unto Antiochus king of Syria, who also prepared then to make warre upon the Romanes.

The beginning is not extant in the Latine.
adjoining in those quarters to Acarnania. There was a streight passe or gullet there, halfe a mile almost in length, but not halfe a mile in breadth: at the end of this streight standeth the citie Leucas planted against an hill that turneth to the East, and looketh toward Acamania. The base town is built upon a plain, reaching along the sea that devideth Leucadia from Acarnania. Wherupon the citie, as well on the land side as by sea is easie to be forced. For the fourds of the water resemble a standing lake rather than a sea, and the whole soile is a light earth, minable and easie to bee wrought into, so that in many places at once the wals either undermined or shaken with the ram, came tumbling down. But as the town it selfe was assaultable, so the hearts of the townsmen were invincible. For night and day they gave not over, to repaire the cracks of the shaken wal, to fill up the open breaches and ruines, to make head lustily, and skirmish with the enemie, and rather to defend the walls by force of armes, than to save themselves by strength of their walls. And surely

 a longer siege they would have made of it than the Romanes hoped, but that certaine banished persons, Italians borne, dwelling in Leucas, let in and received armed soldiors on the castle side. Howbeit, the Leucadians embattelling themselves in their market place, encountred them as they ran downe from the higher ground with a great crie and noise, and maintained battell with them for a long time. In this meane while, the walls in diverse places were skaled with ladders, and the enemies mounting over the heapes of stones that lay at the breaches, entred the towne. And now by this time the lieutenant in person, with many companies environed them as they fought: some were slaine in the middest, others flung away their weapons, and yeelded to the conquerour. After few daies, upon the newes of the field fought at Cynocephalae, all the States of Acarnania came in, and submitted themselves to the lieutenant.
 At the same time, whiles fortune turned thus about, and bare downe a side all at once; the Rhodians also sent out Pausistratus their Pretour, with eight hundred footmen of Achaea, and about 1900 souldiours well armed, gathered out of all sorts of auxiliaries, to regaine and reconquer from Philip the country of Peraea, lying in the maine and firme land, which had been held sometime, and possessed by their auncestours. And these aids were compounded and mixed of French, Nisuetes, Pisuetes, Tanians, and Areans of Affricke, and Laodiceans of Asia. With these forces Pausistratus encamped in the territorie of Stratonicea, and there hee seized of a commodious place, and very good for his purpose, unwares to the kings companie that had holden the same. Thither came also to aid them in very good time, a regiment of a thousand foot and a hundred horse of Achaeans, levied for that purpose, and were commaunded by Theoxenus. Dinocrates a captaine under the king, willing to recover the said hold againe, first pitched his tents, hard against the enemie campe. But afterwards hee remooved to another fort in the territorie likewise of Stratonicea, which they call Astragon: and having rallied together all the garrisons, dispersed asunder in divers places, and sent for the auxiliarie bands also of Thessalians, even from Stratonicea, he took his way and marched toward Alabanda, where the enemies were. The Rhodians likewise for their part were readie for battell, and after they were encamped of both sides neere together, immediately they entred into the field to fight it out. Dinocrates placed in the right point five hundred Macedonians, and the Agrians he put in the left, in the maine battell hee bestowed all those that hee had gathered together out of the garrisons belonging to the forts above said, who for the most part were Carians, the points he flanked round about with his  cornets of horie. The Rhodian cohort was marshalled in this manner: The auxiliaries of the Candiotes and Thracians kept the right point, the hired souldiours (and they were a power of elect footmen) stood in the left, in the middest were the aids (a medley of many nations:) the Cavallerie and all the light armed souldiours that were, compassed the corners like wings. All that day the two armies stood only upon the banke of a brooke which ran between them with a small and shallow water: and after some loose shot discharged, they retired into their tents. The next day they were raunged in like order, and strucke a battaile exceeding the proportion of their number; for on each side there were not above three thousand foot, and upon a hundred horse: but they were even matched not in number only and armour, but also in equall courage and hope alike. The Achaei first passed over the said brooke, and charged upon the Agrians: afterwards  the whole armie ran as one would say, over the river. The fight continued long doubtfull. The Achaei being of themselves in number a thousand, disordred some foure hundred of the other, and forced them to recule, and afterwards the entier right point of the battaile began to shrinke and geve ground. As for the Macedonians, so long as their battaillon called Phalanx, kept their array and stood close together, could not possibly be stirred or removed; but after their left side was laid naked, and they began to reach out on all hands their long pikes against the enemie, charging them acrosse upon the flanke, they were presently troubled: and first they put themselves in disaray, afterwards they turned their backs, and last of all flung their weapons from them, and ran away for life, untill they were come to Bargilia. Thither also was Dinocrates fled. The Rhodians having followed the chase as long as they had any day to see,  retired into their camp. And for certeine it is knowne, if in this traine of victorie they had presently made speede to Stratonicea, they might have bene maisters of the towne, and never drawne sword for it: but whiles they spent time in recovering the burrough townes and forts of Peraea, they let this opportunitie slip out of their hands, and lost it for ever. For in the meane space, they that lay in garison and held Stratonicea, were encouraged, and tooke better heart.

Dinocrates also anon with those forces of his that remained, put himselfe within the walls. Then  was the towre besieged and assailed, all in vaine, neither could it be forced and woon but by Antiochus, a certeine time after. Thus went the affaires in Thessalie, in Achaea, and in Asia, much about one and the selfesame time.
Philip being advertised that the Dardanians were entred within the confines of his realme, and wasted the high countrie of Macedonie, albeit he saw that almost in all parts of the world unhappie fortune still followed and coursed both him and his wheresoever they were: yet esteeming it more grievous and heavie than death it selfe to be disseized of the possession of Macedonie also, he made a levie in great hast out of all his cities of sixe thousand foote, and 500 horse; with which power of Macedonians, he sodainly surprised the enemie (unprovided and not ware of his comming) about Stobi inOrherrisecalled Tripolei^, of three cities therein* Pelagonia. Great numbers of men were slaine in conflict, but more in the fields, such as were disbanded, and raunged abroad for greedinesse of bootie and pillage. But as many as could make meanes to flie more readily and easily away, never stood out the triall of a battaile, but returned home into their owne countrey. Having thus put life as it were againe into his men by this one expedition and exploit (a matter of no consequence to the totall adventure of his whole estate) he retired himselfe to Thessalonica.
The Punick warre was not atchieved and brought to an end so happily and in so good a time for the Romanes (who otherwise should have warred at once both against the Carthaginians and Philip) but it fel out as well and in as fit a season, that Philip was now vanquished; just against the time that Antiochus in Syria prepared to levie warre against them. For besides that the service was much more easily managed against them single and apart, than it would have bene  if they had banded both at once, and brought their forces together, it chaunced also that Spaine about the very same instant brake out to a tumultuous insurrection.
Antiochus being returned to Antioch there to winter, after he had the summer before brought under his subjection all the cities belonging to Ptolomoeus, within the country ofBoca, cr Bo^^^ ba^^^. CoeleSyria, was yet never the more at quiet, and mindfull of peace afterwards. For when he had assembled a puissant power both of land and also of sea-forces, and purposed to employ the whole strength of his realme, he sent afore by land in the beginning of the spring, his two sonnes Ardues and Mithridates with a mightie armie, commaunding them to attend him at Sardis: himselfe in person set forth a voyage by sea, with a fleete of a hundred saile of couvert ships with decks and hatches, besides two hundred lighter vessels, as Galions and Brigantines, purposing at one  time to assay all the cities inTurcomania, and ^^^^chia, Cilicia and Caria, coasting along the sea side, which were within the dominion of Ptolomaeus: and with all to aid Philip as well with shipping as souldiours, for as yet Philip was not utterly subdued, not the warre with him brought to a finall end. Many brave and worthie exploits enterprised the Rhodians both by sea and land, in their loyaltie and faithfulnes to the Romanes, and for the safegard and defence of all the Greekish nation. But no one thing shewed their magnificence more than this, that being nothing terrified at that time with such a world of warres threatned against them, they sent embassadors to the king, to let him understand, that if he sailed forward and stayed not his Armada, they would encounter him at the Bay of Nephelis (which is a promontorie or cape of Cilicia, renowmed for the auncient league of the Atheniens.) And this they did, not upon any hatred they bare to his person, but to impeach  him only for comming to joine with Philip, thereby to hinder the Romanes in their good course of setting Greece at libertie. At the same time Antiochus was busied in the siege and assault of Coracelium, against which he had placed all ordinance and engins of batterie: for he was alreadie master of the cities ofSeardehra. Zephyrium, Soli,S. Theodero. Aphrodisias and(...) Corycus, and having doubled the point of(...) Anemurium (a cape or forland also of Cilicia) he had woon likewise the citie of (...) Selinus. All these, and many other forts of that coast being yeelded unto him by composition, either for feare or willingly, without any assault, only Coracesium shut their gates against him, and staid his progresse beyond his expectation. There the embassadours of the Rhodians had audience. And albeit that embassie was such as might have set a king into a fit of choler and chased his bloud, yet he tempred his anger, and made answere that he would send his embassadors  to Rhodes, and give them in charge to renew the auncient rights and privileges as well of his owne as of his auncestours with that citie and State, and to will them not to stand in feare of the kings comming, for that neither they nor any allies of theirs should susteine harme or damage by him. For it was no part of his meaning to infringe and breake the amitie which he had

 with the Romanes, as it may appeere as well by his late embassie sent unto them, as also by the honorable decrees and answeres made by the Senate and sent unto him. For it fortuned that even then the embassadors of king Antiochus were returned from Rome, having had a friendly audience there, and a gracious dispatch, according as the time required: for as yet the issue of the warre against Philip was uncerteine. Whiles the kings embassadors, delivered these points in the assemblie of the Rhodians, there arrived a post with newes, that the warre was ended by meanes of a victorie' atchieved by the Romanes against Philip at Cynoscephale. These tidings being once heard, the Rhodians past all feare now of Philip were of advise to meet Antiochus at sea with their navie. For they had a second care besides which they neglected not, to maintaine the libertie of those allied cities perteining to king Ptolome, against which,  warre was menaced from Antiochus. Some they succoured with sending aid unto them, and others by fore-cast and geving them warning of the designements and enterprises of their enemies: whereby they were a cause, that the Caunij, Myndij, they of Halicamassus and Samos enjoyed still their entier freedome. But needlesse it is for me, to prosecute all the occurrents and affaires that passed in these parts, considering how I shall have enough to do, and hardly be able to set downe and go through with those that properly concerne the Romane warre. At the same time also king Attalus was brought sick from Thebes to Pergamus, and there departed this world in the 71 yeere of his age,The cenmendadecion of king sitalus. when he had reigned 44. This man was beholden to fortune for nothing els but riches, that might commend him to the hope of a kingdome. He employed the same with such wisedome and magnificence, that first in his  owne conceipt, and afterwards in the judgement of others,
 he was not thought unworthie to be a king. Afterwards when he had vanquished in one battaile the Gaules (a nation at that time newly arrived in Asia, and therefore the more dread and terrible) he tooke upon him to be stiled king, and ever after caried a mind answerable to the grandeur and majestie of that name. His owne subjects he governed with singular justice. To his allies he shewed himselfe most fast and faithfull. His friends he used with all kindnes and bountie. A wife and foure children he had living when himselfe died: and left his kingdome so sure and well setled, that the possession thereof continued firme to the third discent and generation after him.
Whiles things stood thus in Asia, Greece and Macedonie, and the warre with Philip scarcely ended, or at leastwise, peace not fully concluded, there arose a mightie warre in the province  of Spaine beyond the river Iberus. M. Helvius at that time was governour there, who by his letters advertised the Senate, That Colcas and Luscinus, two princes in those parts, were gone out, and had taken armes; that with Colcas there banded seventeene townes, and with Luscinus the strong and puissant cities Cardo and Bardo; that the whole sea coast, which hitherto by open revolt shewed not their rebellions heart, would doubtlesse upon the commotion of those their neighbours, make likewise an insurrection together with them. After these letters were red by M. Sergius the Pretour, who had the jurisdiction betweene citizens and aliens, the LL. of the Senate ordeined, that after the election of new Pretours was past, he to whose lot the government of Spaine fell, should propose unto the Senate in all convenient speede as touching the warre in Spaine.
 About that very time the Consuls repaired to Rome, (from their provinces) who held an assembly of the Senate in the temple of Bellona: and when they demaunded triumph in consideration of their good service, and happy exploits in warre atchieved: C. Atinius Labeo and C. Visanius, Tribunes of the Commons required, That the Consuls should speake severally by themselves concerning triumph: for suffer them they would not jointly to propound that thing in the house, to the end, that equall and semblable honour should not be conferred upon persons of unlike qualitie, woorth, and desert. And when Minutius inserred againe and said, That the province of Italie fell unto them both in one commission, and Cornelius seconded him with all, avening, That hee and his companion in government had managed all their affaires with one mind by common counsell and advise; that the Boians who passed over the river Po against him  for to succour the Insubrians and Caenomans, were forced to turne backe againe to defend their owne, by reason that the other Consull his colleague made such wast and pillage in their fields and villages. The Tribunes confessed, that Cornelius indeed had atchieved so worthy exploits in warre, that there was no more doubt to be made of his triumph, than of rendring praise and thanks to the immortall gods: but neither hee nor any other citizen stood ever at any time in

such grace, favour and credit, that having obtained the honour of a triumph for himselfe, hee  should impart that glorie unto his colleague and fellow, if hee were so shamelesse as to crave it. As for Q. Minutius (say they) he made some sleight skirmishes with the Ligurians not worth the talking of: mary in Fraunce he lost a good number of his souldiers. And with that they named T. Invencius and Cneus the brother of Labeo, two colonels or Tribunes of the campe, who were slaine in an unfortunate battaile, with many a brave and hardie man besides, as well citizens as allies. And to conclude, there were some few towns and villages colourably yeelded and rendred up for the time, without any assurance and securitie. These janglings and debates betweene the Consuls and the Tribunes continued for two daies: but in the end, the Consuls being overcome with the importunitie of the Tribunes, were content to propose the matter distinctly by themselves. And with the generall voice and accord of all, a triumph was decreed for Cn. Cornelius. The Placentines also and men of Cremona, were a great cause that this Consul found more favour, by reason that they gave him thankes, and reported on his behalfe, that they were delivered by his good meanes from the siege, yea and most of them recovered from servitude out of the hands of their enemies. Q. Minusius having only cast a proffer and made an assay of proposing his cause to the Senate, seeing them wholly banded and set against him, said aloud, That in maintenance of Consular authoritie, and by vertue of that place, yea and according to the good example of divers noble and renowned personages, he would triumph, and aske them no leave, in the mount Albane. But Cn. Cornelius whiles he was still in office, triumphed over the Insubrians and Caenomanes. He carried in pompe before him a number of militarie ensignes: he caused great store of French spoile and pillage to passe in a pageant upon charriots taken  from the enemies. Many noble men of Fraunce were led in a shew before his owne triumphant chariot: among whom (as some write) was Amilcar Generall of the Carthaginians. But above all others, the goodliest fight was, a number of coloners and inhabitants of Cremona and Placentia, who withIn taken that they were by him find from cap^^^^^^. bonets or caps of libertie on their heads, followed his chariot. Hee bare in triumph 237500 Sesterces, 79000 Bigates of silver coine. He divided among his footmen seventie Asses apeece, to every horsman he gave double, and to ech Centurian triple so much. Q. Minutius likewise triumphed in mount Albane over the Ligurians and the Boians in Gaule. The honor of this triumph as it was lesse, in regard of the place, and of the name that went of his actes, as also because all men knew full well, that the charges went not out of the common chest or chamber of the citie: so for number of ensignes, of chariots and spoiles gained from the enemies, it  was in manner equall and comparable to the other. And of money hee brought well neere as much as Cornelius: for of brasse coine hee had in shew 254000 Asses, of silver coine in bigate pieces 53200. To common souldiours or footmen, to Centurians and horsemen, he gave as much as his colleague. After this triumph, there was a generall assembly held for the election of magistrates: wherein were created Consuls, L. Furius Purpurio, and M. Claudius Marcellus. The next day after, these Pretours were chosen, Q. Fabius Buteo, T. Sempronius Longus, Q. Minutius Thermus, M. Acilius Glabrio, L. Apustius Fallo, and C. Laelius.
In the end of that former yeere, letters came from T. Quintius with this intelligence, That he had fought in battaile raunged with king Philip within Thessalie, where the armie of the enemies was defeated and put to rout. These letters were first read in the Senate by Sergius the Pretour, and then by order from the LL. in the publicke assembly of the people. For this happie successe, it was ordained, That there should be solemne processions for five daies. Shortly after, there arrived embassadours both from T. Quintius and also from the king. The Macedonians embassadours were brought without the citie to the place or hamlet called Villa publica, where they were appointed their lodging, rich presents were given them, and allowed they were the charges for themselves and their traine. In the temple of Bellona the Senate was assembled, where there passed not many words by reason that the Macedonians promised, That the king should performe whatsoever the Senate would set downe. So (according to the auncient custome and manner) there were appointed ten Committees or Delegates, by whose advise and councell T. Quintius the Generall, was to present and tender unto Philip, articles and conditions of peace: provided, that in the said number of Delegates, P. Sulpitius and P. Valerius should be comprised by name; who when they were Consuls governed the province of Macedonie. The same day, the Cossanes demaunded and made suite, That the number of their coloners or inhabitants might be augmented: wher upon an order was graunted, That there should be a thousand new

 enrolled to the former: with this proviso, that in this number none of them should be matticulated, who after the Consulship of P. Sulpitius and P. Villius had beene enemies to the people of Rome. The Romane games and plaies were that yeer exhibited, as well in the Circus as upon the stage in the Theatre, by the Aediles Curule L. Cornelius Scipio, and Cn. Manlius Volso: which, as they were set out with more state and magnisicence than ever before, so they were beheld with more joy, contentment, and pleasure, in regard that all things fell out so fortunately in the warres: and they were renewed and represented all thrice over. As for the plaies called Plebeij, they were set forth no lesse than seven times one after another. Acilius Glabrio and C. Laelius exhibited those pastimes: who also of their silver that arose of fines and forfeitures, caused three cast images of brasse to be made, and erected them to the honour of Ceres, Liber, andVenus. Libera.
 Now when L. Furius and M. Claudius Marcellus were entred into their magistracie, and after question made concerning their provinces, the Senate passed a decree, That both of them jointly should governe Italie; they requested that they might cast lots for Macedonie and Italie together. Marcellus more desirous of the twaine of the province of Macedonie, alleadged, that the peace was not found, but counterfeit, pretended, and deceitfull; and that the king would take arms and war againe, in case the armie were withdrawne from thence: by which words he put the LL. of the Senate into a deepe studie and suspence, what to doe, or to thinke of it. And haply the Consuls had obtained their request, but that Q. Martius Rex, and C. Atinius Labeo, two Tribunes of the Commons, protested, that they would oppose themselves and crosse it by their negative voice, unlesse they might first propose unto the people to know, Whether  their will and pleasure was to entertaine peace with king Philip, or no? This bill being preferred and read in the Capitoll before the people, was graunted, and all the tribes or wards, even five and thirtie, every one gave their affirmative voice, Vti rogatis [i. So bee it as yee demaund.] And to the end, that all men might have more cause to rejoice that peace was confirmed with Macedonie, there came heavie newes out of Spaine, and letters were divulged abroad, containing thus much, That C. Sempronius Tuditanus the Viz-pretour in the hither province of Spaine, was vanquished in battell, that his armie was discomfited and put to flight, and divers men of name and marke slaine. That Tuditanus himselfe was carried forth of the medley greevously wounded, and soone after died. The province Italie was assigned for both the Consuls with those two legions which the former Consuls had in charge, and order graunted, that they should levie and enroll  foure new legions, where of two should bee sent whether it pleased the Senate to appoint. And T. Quintius Flamininus was commaunded to rule his province still with the same armie, and his commission of longer government was renued. After this, the Pretours cast lots for the parting of their provinces. L. Apustius Fullo obtained the jurisdiction of the citizens of Rome, and M. Acilius Glabres was lord cheefe justice betweene citizens and forrainers. Q. Fabius Buteo had the government of the base or farther Spaine, and Q. Minutius Thermus of the higher or hither Spaine. to C. Lalius fell Sicilie, and Sardinia to T. Sempronius Longus. And ordained it was, that unto Q. Fabius Buteo, and Q. Minutius, to whom the rule of the provinces in Spaine befell, the Consuls should out of those foure legions which they had enrolled, deliver one legion apeece, which they thought good, and of allies and of the Latin nation, foure thousand footmen  besides, and three hundred horsemen to either of them. And these Pretours were enjoined to go to their charges with all speed possible.
The warre in Spaine began afresh, in the fift after that the former together with the Punicke war was ended. But before that these Pretours went forth to this warre (which may be counted as it were new, in regard that the Spaniards now first, and never before, warred in their own proper name, without either leader or armie of Carthage) and before that the Consuls themselves departed out of the citie, order was given, that according to the old custome, they should provide for the prodigious tokens that were reported L. Iulius as he rode on horse backe into the Sabines countrie, was both himselfe and his horse under him strucken dead with lightening. The temple of Feronia in the territorie of Capena, was likewise smitten and blasted from heaven. At the  temple of Moneta, the yron heads of two speares were seene to burne on a light fire. A Wolfe happened to enter into the citie at the gate Esquilina, and ran through the most populous part thereof as farre as unto the market place, and so forward to the Tuscane street, and from thence through the Melium, and passed foorth againe at the gate Capena untouched, and in manner without taking any harme.

These prodigious signes were purged by the sacrifices of greater beasts. At the same time Cn. Cornelius Lentulus, who had governed the province of high Spaine before Tuditanus, entred the citie by order from the Senate in a kind of triumph, and carried before him in pompe 1515 pound weight of gold: of silver likewise in bullion 20000 pound weight: and in coine, 34550 deniers. L. Stertinius from the nether Spaine, brought into the treasurie 50000 pound weight of silver, and never pretended any hope that he had to obtaine a triumph. Moreover, of the prises and spoiles woon from the enemies, he caused two arches to bee erected in the beast market, even before the temple of Fortune, and the goddesse Matuta: and one besides in the grand Cirque or shew place. And upon these arches he set up guilded Statues. These were all the affairs, to speake of, that passed this winter season.
There wintered at that time in Athens, Quintius. And among many other suters that came  unto him with their petitions, the Boeotians exhibited a request, and obtained the same, to wit, that as many of their nation as had served in the warres under Philip, might bee restored and sent home againe unto them: which was easily graunted by Quintius, not so much, for that hee thought them worthie of that favour, but because hee was to win the love and affections of the States in Greece unto the Romane name, now especially that he had some doubt of king Antiochus. They were not delivered so soone, but seene it was, how little the Boeotians would bee beholden to him for it. For they sent presently unto Philip, and gave him thankes for the rendering of those men, as if they had beene delivered by him, and not by Quintius and the Romanes. And in their next assembly generall for their solemne election, they chose one Barcillas for their Boeotarches, or lord governour of Boeotia; for no other reason, but because hee had beene the  Colonell of those Boeotians that bare armes for the king: but they passed by Zeasippus, Pisistratus, and others, that had persuaded to make a league with the Romanes. This wrought discontentment in these persons for the present, and feare for the time to come. For thus they reasoned with themselves, If they would doe thus whiles the Romane armie lay encamped neere to their gates, what should become of them when the Romanes were departed into Italie, and whiles Philip was so neere at hand to assist those that sided with him, and to annoy those of the adverse part and faction? Therefore they complotted and concluded in the end to make away Barcillas, the head of the kings bend, whiles the Romane forces were at hand. And so chusing a convenient and fit opportunitie for their purpose, at what time as he returned homeward drunk from a publicke solemne feast, accompanied with certaine pleasant and effeminate persons, who to make  sport and mirth had been at that great feast; he was forlaied and beset with sixe armed men, wherof three were Italians, and three Aetolians, and so murdered. His traine that attended him ran away, and raised hui and crie, and called for helpe. Much trouble and hurliburly there was through out the citie, much running to and fro with torch-light. But they that did the deed, were escaped out at the next gate. In the morning betimes the people in great number assembled in the Theater, being called together by the voice of the common bedle, as if the murderers had beene detected. Openly it was in every mans mouth, that he was killed by his owne retinue, even those filthie want on persons that he had about him: but secretly in their minds they deemed Zeusippus the author of the murder. For the present it was thought good to apprehend them that were in his traine, and that they should be examined. Whiles search was made for them, Zeusippus came  forth into the assembly, with the like intent to avert all suspition of crime from himselfe, saying, that men were much deceived to thinke, that so horrible and straunge a murder was committed by such weaklings and persons as they were. This hee argued and discoursed by many likelyhoods and prohabilities to the same effect: by which meanes some were verily persuaded that if himselfe had beene guiltie of the fact, hee would never have offered and presented himselfe in the face of the assembly, or broched any words at all of the murder, especially when no man urged him thereto. Others there were againe, who made no doubt, but by this impudent face, his drift was to prevent an accusation, and to turne away all suspition from himselfe. The innocent and guiltlesse creatures within a while after being examined upon the racke and tortured, knowing what was the generall opinion and conceit of men, made their (...) of the  same for to bolt out and reveale the fact; and so they named Zeusippus and (...) for the principals; without any presumption or light given how they should seem to come to the knowledge of anything. Howbeit Zeusippus (accompanied with one Strattoni^a^) fled by night to Tanagra, fearing the remorse and pricke of his owne conscience more than the appeaching and

 information of those persons who neither were partie nor privie to any thing. But Pisistratus making no regard of these accusers, remained still at Thebes. Now had Zeusippus one bondslave, (whose hand was in all this action, and had beene a courriour betweene) whome Pisistratus feared that he would bewray him, and by that very feare caused him to open and declare the whole matter. He dispatched therefore his letters unto Zeusippus, advising him to rid that slave out of the way, who was privie to their dealing; advertising him, that in his conceit he was not so meet to conceale the thing now done, as he was a fit instrument at the time to execute the same. The bearer of these letters hee straightly charged to deliver them unto Zeusippus immediatly with all speed. But he because he could not spie a convenient time to meet with him himselfe; gave the letters to the verie same slave, whom he supposed to be most fast and trustie to his master:  adding moreover and saying, That they came from Pisistratus unto Zeusippus, and imported matter of great consequence. The bondslave promised to deliver them incontinently, but being touched in conscience, hee was so bold as to breake them open; and when hee had read them through, he fled backe in great feare to Thebes (where he bewrayed Pisistratus.) Zeusippus troubled in spirit for the flight of his bondman, retired himselfe to Athens, supposing it a place of more securitie to live in, as a banished man. As for Pisistratus, after he had beene divers times examined upon the racke, was put to death in the end. This murder wonderously estranged the Thebans and Baeotians, and set their hearts against the Romans; in so much as they hated and detested them to death, taking great indignation that Zeusippus (a principall and chiefe personage of their nation) had committed so foule and heinous a fact. To rebell in open tearmes, they  had neither force sufficient to maintaine them, nor a principall head to direct and lead them, Whereupon they fell to that which is next cousen to plaine warre, even to theeving and robbing by the high waies side, in such sort, as they surprised as well some souldiours who lodged neere unto them, and were their guests, as others that wandred and ranged abroad-from the garisons in winter time, and travailed about their affaires, who other whiles were caught up by the way, and came short home. Some passengers were killed in the port-rode-waies, by those that lay in wait for them in notorious theevish corners: others were trained and led deceitfully through by-lanes into desert places, there to take up their innes and lodging, and then were murdred. At length they played these prancks, not only of malice unto them, but also for greedie desire of bootie and spoile, by reason that commonly these waisaring men went about  their trade and merchandise, and therefore had some charge about them, and caried silver in their belts. Now when as at first there were some out of the way, and every day more than other many men missing, and no man knew what was become of them, allStramuzupa. Boeotia began to have an ill name, and the souldiers were more afraid to travaile there, than in the enemies countrey. Then Quintius sent certeine embassadors to all the cities for to make complaint of these robberies and enormities. Many footmen there were found dead about the meere or lakeLago slivo. Copais, where their cark asses were raked forth of the mud and mire, and drawne out of the standing water, tied and fastened as they were to heavie stones or some great vessels, that by their poise they might be plunged, and sinke to the bottome. Many such like outrages were found to have beene committed at Acraephea and Coronea. Quintius at the first demaunded to have the offenders  delivered unto him, and for five hundred souldiours (for so many were caught up by the way and murdered) he enjoined the Boeotians to make paiment of five hundred talents of silver. But the cities would doe neither the one nor the other onely they paied them with bare words, and excused themselves in that nothing had beene done by publicke warrant or counsell from the State. Where upon the embassadors were sent to Athens, and into Achaea, to make protestation unto their allies, that they would pursue the Boeotians with open warre, upon good ground and just cause offred. And so after hee had given commaundement unto P. Claudius to goe unto Acraephea with one part of his forces, himselfe with the other set him down about Coronea, and planted siege unto it. But first the territorie was laid wast all the way as the two armies marched from Elatia in divers quarters. The Boeotians plagued with these losses and calamities, seeing nothing but  feare and flight in every place, sent their embassadours unto him: but when they could not be admitted into the campe, the Achaeans and the Athenians were faine to come with them. The Achaeans were of greater credite, to entreat in their behalfe: for unlesse they might obtaine pardon and peace for the Baeotians, they determined also to enter into the quarrel, and to make war themselves. By whose mediation the Baeotians had accesse unto the Romane generall, and audience

once graunted. Who after they were enjoyned to deliver up the offendors and malefactors to  Instice, and to pay thirtie talents for amends and satisfaction, obteined peace; and so the siege was raised.
After some few dayes, the ten Delegates or Committees from Rome were arrived, by whose advise and counsell peace was articled and capitulated with king Philip, upon these conditions: Imprimis, That all the Greeke cities, as well in Europe as in Asia, should enjoy their libertie, and live under their owne lawes. Item, That Philip should withdraw his garisons out of as many of them as had bin in subjection under him. Item, That he do the like by those which were in Asia, to wit, Euromos, Pedasae, Bargyllae, Iassus, Myrina, Abydus, Thassus, and Perinthus: all which, the Romanes required to be free. As concerning the libertie and freedome of the Cyani, it was covenanted, That Iuintius should write his letters to Pratias the king of the Bithynians, giving  him to understand the advise and pleasure of the Senate, and the ten Delegates aforesaid. Item, That Philip render all the prisoners and fugitive traitours, to the Romanes, and yeeld up all the covered ships with hatches: and over and besides, one huge roiall Galiace or Argosey, which by reason of the exceeding bignesse was unweldie and of little use, and was directed with 16 banks of ores on a side. Item, That he should not have above five hundred men in armes, nor one Elephant at all. Item, That he should not warre (but by leave and permission of the Senate) without the marches of Macedonie. Item, That he pay unto the people of Rome a thousand talents, the one halfe in hand, and the other at ten payments, within the terme of ten yeeres. Valerius Antias writeth moreover, that there was imposed upon him a tribute of foure thousand pound weight of silver yeerely, for ten yeeres: and besides, twentie thousand pound weight presently. The same author saith, that expressely it was capitulated, that Philip should not warre at all with Eumenes the sonne of Attalus, who was newly come to the crowne. For the assurance of these covenants, there were received hostages, and amongst them. Demetrius king Philip his sonne. Valerius Antias hath written moreover, that the Iland Aegina, and certein Elephants were geven In pure gift to Attalus in his absence: and that upon the Rhodians was bestowed Stratonicea, a citie in Caria, with other cities also which Philip had possessed. To conclude, that the Atheniens received of free gift these Iiles following, to wit, Paros, Imbros, Delos, and Scyros.
When all the States of Greece approved and thought well of this peace, only the Aetolians secretly muttered and sound fault with this order set downe by the ten Delegates abovesaid: geving out, that they were but bare letters and vaine words, shadowed with a counterfer apparance  of libertie. For to what end, say they, should some cities be delivered, to the Romanes, and those not named? others againe be named, and yet order taken, that they without deliverie should be free? but only for this purpose, that those cities which are in Asia should beset free, because they be farre off and therefore in more safetie; but those that are in Greece, being not precisely named, should be seised upon by them, to wit, Corinth, Chalcis, and Oreum, with Eretrias and Demetrias. And to say a truth, this finding fault of theirs was not altogether srivolous, and without ocasion geven: for some doubt there was of Corinth, Chalcis, and Demetrias: because in the order and act of the Senate, by vertue whereof those ten Delegates aforesaid were sent from the citie, all other cities of Asia and of Greece were doubtlesse in plaine termes freed: but as touching the three before named, the Delegates had in commission to take order, as they should see it stand with the good of the Common-wealth, according to their owne judgement and discretion, and the trust that was committed unto them. For well they wist that king Antiochus would passe over into Europe, so soone as ever he could bring his affaires about to his mind, and unwilling they were on any hand, that these cities so commodious for his dessignes, should lye open and readie to his hand for to seise upon at his pleasure. So Iuintius together with the ten Delegates, sailed from Elatia to Anticyra, and from thence to Corinth, where they held their counsaile and consulted of their affaires. Iuintius would est soones say unto them, That all Greece might be delivered and set at libertie, if they could restreine the tongues of the Aetolians: if they were willing that their good affection should be deemed sincere, and the majestie of the Romane name mainteined among all: finally if they would pretend  and make it knowne abroad, that they were passed the seas to set Greece free, and not after they had shaken off the seignorie of Philip, to translate it unto themselves. The other againe, contradicted nothing as touching the libertie of those cities: howbeit, they made remonstrance, that it was the safer course for them, to remaine awhile under the protection and safegard of the

 Romanes, than that in steed of Philip they should receive Antiochus for their Lord. In conclusion decreed it was, That Corinth should be rendred to the Achaens, but yet so, that there should be a Romane garison in the highest quarter of the citie called Acrocorinthus. Item, That Chalcis and Demetrias should be reteined still, untill such time as they were no more in feare and doubt of Antiochus.
Now approched the ordinarie solemnitie of the Isthmian games, unto which at all times usually there was great recourse of people, as well in regard of the naturall disposition of that nation (desirous to see such sports and pastimes, wherin was represented the triall of maistries in all kind of arts, in all feates either of agilitie and nimblenes of the bodie) as also in respect of the commodious seate of the place: whereunto from all parts of Greece  they repaired thither by two divers and sundrie seas. But being amused in expectation to know what the estate of Greece, and what their owne particular condition would be hereafter, divers men not only devised secretly with themselves, but also gave out and whispered in their speech and talke.
Well, the Romanes were set to behold this solemnitie: and the publick Crier with a trumpetter went forth into the mids of the Cirque of shew place, from whence the manner was to proclaime the sports and games aforesaid in a solemne set forme of words: and after he had by sound of trumpet made silence, he pronounced with a loud voice in this maner, Be it knowne unto all men, that the Senate of Rome, and Q.Iuintius the Generall of their armie, having vanquished king Philip and the Macedonians, do ordeine, that the Corinthians, the Phocensians, and the Locrensians, be all free, and delivered from all taxes whatsoever, and to live according to  their owne lawes. Item, That the Isle Euboea, the Magnesians, Thessalians, Perrhaebians, Acheans, and Phthiotes do enjoy the like freedome and immunitie. And consequently he rehersed all the nations which had bene in subjection to Philip. Vpon this proclamation of the beadle, there was such joy, that men were not able to conceive and comprehend it. Every man could hardly beleeve that had heard the thing which he so wished and desired asore to heare: one looked upon another wondring at the matter as if it had ben a vain vision or illusion of some dreame: and well they trusted not their own cares in hearing that which particularly concerned every one, but enquired of them that stood next unto them. The crier was called back againe: such a desire had each one not only to heare the glad tidings, but also to behold the happie messenger of this their libertie: and no remedie there was, but once againe he must publish and pronounce  the same. Now when their joy was once confirmed, they set up such a shour, and followed it so with clapping of hands, redoubling the same so often, as evidently it appeared, how there is no earthly good in the world more pleasing and welcome unto a multitude, than is libertie. After this, the games were, perfourmed in such hast, that neither the mind of any man was bent to intend, nor the eye to behold the sight thereof, so wholly had that one joy possessed them and forestalled the sence of all other pleasures and delights. But when the pastime were once ended, they all in manner ran apace to the Romane Generall, in such sort, that his person was in some daunger of the multitude, crowding so hard upon him alone, for desire they had to come unto him, touch his right hand, and to cast garlands of flowers and labels of sundrie colours upon him: but beeing a man fast upon three and thirtie yeeres of age; both the vigour  of youth, and also the joy that he tooke for the accomplishment of so glorious an act, affourded him strength enough to abide the prease of the people. This gladnes of all men, shewed itselfe not onely for the present, but continued also for many daies space, entertained not onely in thankful minds, but expressed also in joyfull discourses: namely, That there was one nation yet in the world, which at their proper cost and charges, with their owne paine and perill, made warre for the freedome of others: who affourded this favour and pleasure not to neighbours and borderers onely, or to those that were joyned neere to them in the continent and firme land, but passed over the seas; to the end, that throughout the whole world, there should be no unjust and tyrannicall government, but in all places, right, reason, and law, might prevaile most and carry greatest sway. Loe, how by the onely voice of one Bedle all the cities of Greece and Asia are set  free. To conceive and enterprise so great a thing, proceedeth from a brave mind and noble heart: but to effect the same, is a singular vertue and rare felicitie.
This done, Iuintius and the ten Delegates gave audience to the embassages of divers kings and princes, nations and states. And first of all others were the embassadours of king Antiochus called in: who used the same speech in manner that they had at Rome, vaunting great words

without any ground and substance of credit. But answere was returned unto them, not covertly  by way of circumstance as aforetime (when Philip was on foot and things stood doubtfull) but openly in plaine tearmes. Inprimis, That Antiochus must quit and abandon all the cities of Asia, which belonged at any time either to king Philip or king Ptolomeus. Item, That he medle not with any free citie or state, and especially with those of Greece: but above all, warned he was and forbidden, either to passe over himselfe, or to send any forces into Europe. After the kings embassadours were licensed to depart, all the nations and states had a generall session and meeting together, which was the sooner dispatched, for that in the decrees of the ten Delegates all the cities and states were pronounced by name. Vnto the Orestians (a people in Macedonie) for that they revolted first from the king, their own lands and priviledges were restored. The Magnesians, the Perraebians and Dolopians were likewise declared free. Vnto the people of Thessalie  over and above the graunt of their libertie, the Phthiotian Achaeans were annexed, excepting the citie of Thebes in Phthia and Pharsalus. As for the Aetolians who required, that according to covenant Pharsalus and Leucas should be rendered unto them, they were put over unto the Senat. But they awarded them the Phocenses and Locrenses, with other appertinances adjoyned before by vertue of the decree. Corinth, Triphylia, and Herea (which also is a citie of Peloponnesus) were rendred unto the Achaeans. Moreover, these ten Delegates gave Oreum and Eretria unto Eumenes the sonne of Attalus, but by reason that Iuintius would not agree thereto, the matter was referred over to the Senat for to be decided: and the Senat graunted freedome unto these cities, togither with Caristus. Vnto Pleurasus were freely given Lingus and Parthenius,Selavonia. which were two nations in Illyricum, and had beene hoth subject to Philip. It was ordained  also, that Aminander should hold those castles stil, which during the warres he had won from Philip. When the assembly was dissolved, the ten Delegates having divided betweene themselves their severall charges, departed every man to set free the cities of their particular regions and quarters. P. Lentulus to Bargyllae. L. Stertinius to Hephaestra, Thassus, and other citties of Thracia; P. Villius and L. Terentius toward king Antiochus; and Cn. Cornelius toward Philip. Vnto whome, after Cornelius had declared his commission concerning some smaller matters, and withall demaunded of him, Whether he could with patience abide to heare councell not onely profitable unto himselfe, but also necessarie? The king made answere againe and said, That hee would not onely give him the hearing, but also yeeld him, thankes besides, in case he would deliver ought unto him for his good. Whereupon hee persuaded him earnestly, that for as much  as he had obtained peace alreadie, he should send his embassadors to Rome, to crave league also and amitie: to the end, that if Antiochus began to stirre, he might not be thought to have attended and waited for some occasions and opportunities to make warre. [This conference and communication with Philip was at Tempe in Thessalie.] And when he answered, That he would immediatly dispatch his embassadours; Cornelius came to Thermopylae, where a solemne Diet and assembly of all Greece is woont to be held upon certaine set daies, and thither resort great numbers of people. Which meeting is called Pylaicum: where hee advised the Aetolians especially to persevere constant and faithfull in the amitie of the people of Rome. Some of the principall Aetolians seemed to complaine betweene whiles, that the Romanes were not so well affected to their nation after victorie, as they were in time of the warre: but others, more sharply  blamed and reproched them, yea and upbraided them with this, That Philip could not have beene vanquished, no nor the Romanes ever able so much as to passe over into Greece, without the helpe of the Aetolians. Cornelius forbare to make answere against to those points, for feare of farther wrangling and altercation; and promised, that if they sent to Rome they should obtaine any thiug that was reason. Whereupon by his advise and approbation, there were deputed Embassadours. This was the issue and end of the warre with Philip.
Whiles these affaires thus passed in Greece, Macedonie, and Asia, all Tuscane in maner was gon out and risen up in arms, by occasion of a conspiracie of bondslaves. For to inquire into these troubles and to represse the same, there was sent M. Acilius a Pretour (who had the civill jurisdiction betweene citizens and aliens) with one of the two legions of Romaine citizens. Some of  them, who were alreadie assembled together and growen to an head, he overcame in fight: of whome, many were slaine, and many taken prisoners. Others he scourged and roundly trussed up, hanging them on gybbets, even as many as were the principall and chiefe of the conspiracie: and others there were whome he sent home againe to their masters.
 Now the Consuls were gone into their provinces. Marcellus so soone as he was entred into the marches of the Boij, and had over-wearied his souldiers with marching all day long, sate him downe upon a certaine rising of a hill, and there as he was in camping himselfe and his men, Corolamus a prince or great L. of the Boij, with a mightie power assailed and charged him, and slew upon three thousand of his men. In which sodaine and tumultuarie skirmish, certaine brave men of marke were slaine; among whome were T. Sempronius Gracchus, and M. Iunius Syllanus two Colonels of the allies: also A. Ogulnius and P. Claudius two knight marshals or Tribunes of the second legion. Howbeit the Romans strongly fortified their tents and defended them valiantly, which the enemies upon their fortunate victorie had long assailed to no effect. And in the same standing campe he continued certaine daies, whiles he cured his souldiours of their wounds, and  recovered their hearts after so great a fright. The Boij (as they are a nation that of all things can not endure any tedious delay of time) dispersed themselves into their townes and forts. Then Marcellus presently crossed ihe Po, and led his armie into the territorie of Comun, where the Insubrians lay incamped after they had sollicited and caused those of Comb. Comum to take armes. The legions made no more adoe, but gave them battaile in the verie way: and at the first encounter the enemies charged them so hotely, that they forced the forefront of the battaile to recule. Which when Marcellus perceived, fearing least beeing once disordered they should be repulsed and discomfited, he made out a cohort of Marsians to make head; and at once set forth all the troupes of the Latine Cavallerie against them. Their first and second charge both, mightily impeached and quailed the enemie, advauncing forward lustily and preassing upon them  in great furie: whereby the rest of the Romane armie taking heart againe and being encouraged, at the first received them manfully and made resistance only, but afterwards followed fiercely upon them: in so much as the Gaules were able no longer to abide their violence, but turned their backe, tooke them to their heeles, and ran away by heapes. Valerius Antius writeth, that in this battaile there were 40000 men slaine and above, 507 militarie ensignes taken, with 432 chariots: besides many chaines of gold, where of Claudius presented one (verie massie above the rest and of great weight) unto Iupiter, which was hung up within the temple in the Capitoll, as he writeth. The same day was the campe of the Gaules forced and ransackt, and the towne of Comum also within few daies taken by assault. Vpon this there were eight and twentie boroughs or forts, that fell away and revolted to the Consull. But the Historiographers agree not upon  this, Whether the Consull led his forces against the Insubrians first, or the Boians; and whether he rased out the dishonour of a former foile and defeature by a fortunate victorie in this battell: or contrariwise, after a prosperous fight atchieved before Comum, hee blotted and defaced the same with a shamefull overthrow received at the Boians hand.
During this variable and alternative fortune, L. Purpurio the other Consull, marched into the Boians countrie through the tribe Sappinia. And when hee was approched neere to a castle called Mutilina, Blondo. Modiana, Leandro. Mutilum, he feared least he should be enclosed and intercepted by the Boians and Ligurians: wherupon he retired with his forces the same way that he came, and fetching a great compasse about through the open countrie in safetie and securitie, he came at length to his colleague. Who having joined both their powers together, first raunged over the Boians territories, wasting  and spoiling untill they came as farre as Bologna. Felsina. This towne with other strong burroughes and forts, and in a manner all the Boians yeelded themselves, save onely their youth, who were up in armes to pill and spoile, and were at that time retired unto the forrest and glins out of the way. After this the armie marched toward the Ligurians. The Boians making full account to assaile the Romane armie at unwares, which marched without good regard of themselves, and not close together (for that their enemies seemed to beefarre oft) followed after through the blind and couvert forrests. But when they saw that they could not overtake them, they suddainely all at once passed over the Po in small bothomes and punts, and after they had spoiled and pilled the Levians and Libuans, as they returned from thence with a bootie raised out of the countrie, they chaunced in the utmost frontiers of Liguria, to light upon the armie of the Romanes in their  march. Sooner and with more eagernesse fell they to fight, than if they had appointed both time and place, and been prepared aforehand to strike a battell. There it well appeared, of what force anger is to pricke on and sharpen mens spirits to conflict. For the Romans more greedie of murder and bloudshead, than of victorie, fought so, as they scarce left the enemies one messenger to carie the newes of their unhappie overthrow. In regard of these exploits, upon the Consuls letters

brought to Rome, ordained it was, that there should be a solemne procession and thanksgiving  to the gods for three daies. Shortly after Marcellus came to Rome, unto whome was graunted a triumph with great consent of the LL. of the Senat; and whiles hee was in his magistracie he triumphed over the Insubrians and Comians, leaving for his Colleague good hope likewise of a triumph, because himselfe (to say a truth) in that nation fought but unfortunately, whereas his colleague sped well enough, and had a luckie hand. Much spoile of the enemies was caried in a pompe, upon the chariots that were taken and won from them. Many ensigns and banners were borne in a shew, besides in monie, to the value of 320000 asses of brasse coine; and 234000 bigate peeces of silver. The footmen had 800 asses given them apeece, every horseman and centurion had thrice as much.
The same yeare king Antiochus, whiles he kept his winter at Ephesus, assaied to reduce all the  cities and States of Asia unto the auncient forme of governement and subjection, assuring himselfe, that the rest would not be hard to be subdued and brought under, because the townes were either situate upon plaines, or nothing well fortified with walls, and not furnished with men and munition. As for (...) Smyrna and (...) Lampsacus, they stood upon their freedom, and challenged it. Doubted it was, and great daunger, that if he should let them goe cleere away so, some cities in Aeolis and Ionia would take after Smyrna, and others in Hellespontus follow the example of Lampsacus. Therefore both himselfe sent from (...). Ephesus to lay siege unto Smyrna, and gave commaundement, That the forces which were at Abydus (leaving only a small garison behind) should be led to the siege and assault of Lampsacus. And yet hee threatened and terrified them not so much with forces and violence, but assaied them rather by faire meanes, sending to them  his embassadours, so as, partly by flattering and gentle words wherewith he entertained them, and partly by mild reproofe for their rashnesse and obstinacie, hee endevoured to put them in some hope, that shortly they should have whatsoever they desired: and then, both they themselves, and all others should evidenly see, that they had obtained their libertie by the especiall grace and favour of the king, and not usurped and gained it by occasion of some advantage and opportunitie. To this they answered againe, That Antiochus ought neither to marvell, nor be offended and displeased at them, if they could not well endure the hope which they had of freedome, thus to be deferred from time to time. Then he departing from Ephesus in the beginning of the spring failed unto Hellespontus with his fleet.Maitos. His land forces he transported over to Madytos a city in Chersonnesus, and joined them to his strength by sea. And because the shut the gates upon him  he environned the towne with armed men, and when hee was at the point to give the assault, and to bend his engines of batterie against the walls, it was surrendered into his hands. Vpon the like feare the inhabitants also of other cities in Chersonesus yeelded themselves. After this hee came to (...) Lysimachia, with his whole power, as well of land-soldiours as sea-servitours. And finding it abandoned, ruinate, and lying (as it were) along, (for but few yeeres before the Thracians had forced, sacked, and burn it) he had a great desire to reare and set upright againe that noble and famous citie, seated in so good and commodious a place. And therefore he took great care, and emploied all his endevour to re-edifie the walls, to re-build the edifices, to redeem and ransome the Lysimachians that were in slaverie, to seeke out all those that were dispersed over Hellespontus lespontus and Chersonesus, and gather them together, yea, and to enroll new inhabitants upon  hope of gaine and profit, and by all meanes possible to store and people the citie againe. And withall, because he would ease them of the feare they had of the Thracians, hee went in person with the one halfe of his land forces to wast and spoile the confines of Thrace; the other part with all the sea-souldiours and marriners the left hard at worke about the repairing of the citie.
About this time as L. Cornelius (being sent by the Senate to compose the controuersies and variance betweene the two kings, Antiochus and Ptolomeus) abode at Selymbria; so of the ten Commissioners abovesaid, P. Lentulus departed from Bargyllae, P. Villius and L.T. Terentius from Thassus, and arrived all three at Lysimachia: where L. Cornelius likewise met them from Selymbria; and a few daies after king Antiochus, being newly returned out of Thracia. The first meeting and saturation betweene him and the Commissioners was friendly and courteous, yea, and  there passed to and fro afterwards divers amiable kindnesses and loving entertainements mutually. But when they entred once to parle of their commission that they had in charge, and of the present State of Asia, then there was frounsing, and their bloud up.
The Romane agents stucke not to tell him to his face, that all that he had done, since he tooke the sea, and departed with his

 fleet out of Syria, was displeasant unto the Senate, saying, That they thought it meet, that all the cities should bee restored unto king Ptolomeus, which had been under his dominion. For as touching those townes, which sometime Philip had been possessed of, and which Antiochus had surprised and seased upon, taking this time and vantage, when Philip was emploied another way in the Romane warres, it was no reason, nor a thing tollerable, that the Romanes should for so many yeares space, by land and sea endure so great toile, and hazard such perils, and suffer Antischus in the end to goe away with the fruit and reward of all the service. But set the case, that the Romans would take no knowledge of his comming into Asia, as a matter impertinent unto them; can they dissimule also, that now he is come over into Europe with all his forces both for land and sea, and little wanteth of making open warre upon the Romanes? Marie, as for him, he will not let to  denie, that he levieth any warre, although he were arrived and landed in Italie. To these challenges the king made answere and said, That he saw well ynough and knew before, that the Romans were inquisitive and curious ynough to search what king Antiochus ought to doe, but they never once thought of their own selves, how far forth they should by right proceed, as wel by lands as by sea. As for Asia, it pertained not at all to the people of Rome, neither had they more reason to enquire what Antiochus did in Asia, than Antiochus to search into the actions of the people of Rome in Italie. As concerning Ptolomeus, from whom they complaine, that he had taken certain cities; he did them to understand, that there was amitie betweene him and Ptolomeus, and they were now in tearmes of knitting themselves shortly in neerer bonds of alliance and affinitie. Neither sought hee the spoile of Philip, and to enrich himselfe by his adversitie and misfortune: or  passed over into Europe against the Romanes ***** But when he was vanquished once,Somewhat wanting in the (...). all that ever he had, by right and law of warre, became the possesions of Selencus, and so consequently (as he tooke it) appertained unto him. And during the time, that his progenitors and predecessors, were busied and troubled with other affaires, first Ptolomeus catched at some things, and Philip after at other, and so between them they usurped and seized upon on other mens possessions, and namely, of certaine places neere and hard by in Thracia, which without all controversie belonged unto Lysimachus. For to reduce which into their auncient State, hee was thiter come, and now was in hand to reedifie Lysimachia anew, lately destroied by the violence of the Thracians, to the end, that Seleucus his sonne might hold it as the roiall seat of his kingdome. Thus as they continued arguing an
d debating for certain daies, there ran a rumour, but without  any certaine author, that king Ptolomeus was dead: whereupon they could grow to no conclusion of all their parlies: yet they made semblance on both sides, that they heard nothing thereof. And as wel L. Cornelius, who was sent in embassage to both the kings, Antiochus and Ptolomeus, requested respite of some small time to conferre with Ptolomeus, to the end that himselfe might be arrived in Aegypt, before any alteration were made in the new possession of that kingdome: as also Antiochus made reckning, that Aegypt would be his, if this good occasion then were presented unto him. Therefore having dismissed the Romanes, and left his sonne Selencus behind him with all the land forces, for to finish the building againe of Lysimachia which he had begun, himselfe with all his fleete sailed to Ephesus: and having sent his embassadors to Iuintius, to treate soberly about a
league and amitie, he coasted along Asia, and so arrived in Briqui^, Giraum. Lycia. And  when he heard for certein at Patera. Patarae that Ptolomeus was yet living, he gave over his purpose of sailing into Aegipt: yet neverthelesse he shaped his course and set saile for Cyprus: and when he had doubled the point of Chelidonium, he stayed awhile in Secilia, whereof the No^h part is called Caraman, and the rest Scandilo^^m, Niger. Paymphylia about the river Zacuth, Theveto. Eurymedon, by occasion of a mutinie among the mariners and oremen. From thence he weighed ankar, and when he was sailed as farre as a place called [The heads of the river Sangis. Sarus] there arose agoust and fearefull tempest, wherein he had like to have bene cast away and drowned with all his fleet. Many of his ships were run aground, and many of them
swallowed up of the sea, so as there escaped not one of them by swimming to land. A number of men there perished, not of base mariners only, and unknowne common soldiers, but also his neere and especiall friends. Having rallied the dispersed reliques of this shipwrack, seeing he had no meanes and was not able to  reach and gaine Cyprus, he returned againe to Seleucia, with an armie nothing so puissant not so well furnished, as when he set out in his voyage. There he commaunded his ships to be haled aland, and laid up in their docks (for winter now approched) and himselfe tooke his journey to Anticchia, Nigro. Aleppo, Villenovano. Antiochea, there to lye all that winter time. And in these termes stood the affaires of the kings.

At Rome, there were first instituted in this yeere three Triumvirs called Epulones, to wit, C. Lecimius Lucullus, T. Romalesus (who was the man that put up the bill for their creation) and P. Percius Lecco. And by a law in that behalfe ordeined, these Triumvirs were allowed as well as a Bishop, the long embrodered robe of purple. But in this yeere great debate and variance there was betweene the Questors or Treasurers of the citie Q.Fabius Labeo, and L. Aurelius of the one side, and all the Priests on the other side. These Treasurers were at some fault for money, because they were minded and appointed to make the last paiment unto certeine privat persons, for the  loane silver which they had disbursed for the warres: these monies the Treasurers demaunded of the Augurs and Bishops, to furnish out the said paiment; for that during the warres, they only had not bene contributers in any levie. The Priests appealed to the Tribunes, and called for their lawfull favour: but all was in vaine, and so they were forced to satisfie all the arrereages for the yeres past, wherein they had paid nothing. This yeere there died two Bishops, and new were enstalled in their townes. M. Marcellus the Consull entred in place of T. Sempronius Tuditanns, who deceased Pretour in Spaine; and L. Valerius insteed of M. Cornelius Cethegus. I. Fabius Maximus also an Augur died a very yong man, before he had borne any office of State: but for that yeere there was not substituted a new Augur in his towne.
After this, M. Marcellus the Consull held the solemne assembly for the election of Consuls. And Consuls were created L. Valerius Flaccus, and M. Porcius Cato. Then were the Pretors chosen, namely, C. Fabricius Luscinus, Cn. Atinius Labeo, C. Manlius Volsse, Ap. Claudius Nero, P. Mantius, and P. Porcius Lecca. The Aediles of the chaire M. Fulvius Nobilior, and C. Flaminius divided among the people 1000000 Modij of wheare, at two asses a modius. This store of come  had the Sicilians brought to Rome, for the honor of C. Flaminius and his father. And Flaminius was content that his companion in office should reape a full part of the thanks for this gratuitie. The games called Romain were exhibited in most sumptuous manner, and thrice represented all over againe. The Aediles of the Commons Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus, and C. Sempronius, who also was the high parish-Priest, and Super-intendent, called Cario Max. called in question many of the citie bailites that gathered their rents for pastures, judicially to answere upon their accoumpts before the people. Three of them were condemned, and of their silver-raised upon two dayes, and a solemne publick feast was celebrated in regard of them.
The same day that L. Valerius Flaccus and M. Porcius entred their office, they proposed unto  the Senate concerning the government of the provinces. And order was given by the LL. of the Counsell, that for as much as the warre increased so in Spaine, as required not only a Consular armie, but a Consull also for the leader; the Consuls should either agree betweene themselves for the government of the two provinces, to wit, the hither Spaine, and Italie, or els to cast lots therefore: that he whose hap it was to rule Spaine, should have with him two legions, five thousand Latin allies, and five hundred horse; and likewise to have the conduct of a fleete of twentie gallies of warre: that the other Consull should levie and enroll two legions; which were thought sufficient to defend and keepe Fraunce in obedience, considering the courages of the Insubrians and Boij, were well cooled and abared the last yeere. Cato by lot had the charge of Spaine, and Valerius of Italie. Then the Pretours cast lots for their provinces. To C. Fabricius Luscinus sell the jurisdiction over the citizens of Rome: to C. Atinius Labeo over the strangers. C. Manlius Volso governed Sicilie, and Ap. Claudius Nero the farther Spaine. M. Porcius Lecca was assigned to rule (...) Pisae, to the end he might be upon the back of the Ligurians, and P. Manlius was appointed as an assistant and coadjutor to the Consull in the higher Spaine. As for T. Iuintius, his commission was renewed for one yeere longer, in regard that not only Antiochus and the Aetolians, but also Nabis the Lacedemonian Tyrant, were doubted and suspected not to stand found to the Romans: and for him were set out two legions: and if need were of any supply to make up the companies thereof, the Consuls were enjoyned to enroll new souldiers, and to send them over into Macedonie. Also Appius Claudius had a warrant to take up 2000 foote and two hundred horse, over and above that legion which Q.Fabius had. The like number  of fresh horse and foote was appointed for P. Mantius to be sent into the hither Spaine: and the same legion was graunted unto him, which was commaunded by Minutius the Pretor. Moreover P. Porcius Lecca was to have the leading of two hundred footmen, and fiftie horse, drawne out of the Gaules armie, for tolye in Hetruria about Pisae. Last of all in Sardinia P. Sempronius Longus

 continued still in place of commaund. Thus the provinces being distributed, the Consuls before they departed out of the citie, by advise and counsell of the Bishops, performed the solemnitie of the sacred Spring which was vowed before by the Pretour C. Cornelius Mammula, according to the mind of the Senat and the good liking of the people, in the yeere when Cn. Servilius and C. Flaminius were Consuls: and so it was celebrated one and twentie yeeres after it was first vowed. Much about this time was C. Claudius Pulcher the sonne of Appius, elected Augur, and invested in that Sacerdotall dignitie, in the place of Q.Fabius Maximus, who died the yeere before.
When as men began now to mervaile that there was so little accoumpt made of the warre begun alreadie in Spaine, there were letters brought from Q.Minutius with newes, That he had fought a fortunate field before the towne of Turba, with Budares and Besasides, two Spanish Generals  and great commanders: that he had slaine twelve thousand enemies, taken Budares the generall himselfe prisoner, and that the rest were discomfited and put to flight. Vpon the reading of these letters, lesse feare there was of Spaine, from whence they looked for great warres.
After the returne of the ten Delegates of Commisioners abovesaid, all the care was, and no talke els but about Antiochus and his affaires.
These men, after they had declared first how their proceedings went with king Philip, and upon what conditions they had graunted peace, enformed and gave them to understand, That there was as great a warre behind from Antiochus: that he had passed over the seas into Europe with a mightie Armada, and as puissant an armie for land service; and had he not bene averted another way by a vaine hope to invade and seize upon Aegipt, which he conceived of a vainer bruit and rumor of Ptolome his death, all Greece  would have bene anon on a light fire, and up in armes. For the very Aetolians themselves, a nation naturally of an unquiet spirit, and incensed besides against the Romanes, would not have sit still and bene in rest. Moreover, there was another maladie and mischiefe as dangerous, setled as it were within the ribs and in the very heart of Greece: to wit Nabis, the Tyrant at this present of the Lacedemonians only, but shortly, if he may be let alone, of all Greece; who for avarice and crueltie is equall to all the famous and noted tyrants that ever were: and if he be suffred to possesse himselfe of Argos, and to hold it as a fortresse to commaund all Peloponnesus, when the Romane armies shall be once transported home againe into Italie, in faith, Greece may make small boast of being delivered from Philip: for this they shall bee sure of at least, if of nothing els, to have a neere neighbour tyrant, in steed of a king far off, for to be their lord and imperiously to  commaund them. The auncient Senators, hearing these intelligence from grave persons of good qualitie, and who made report of all things, no by hearesay, but upon their owne knowledge, were of advise and resolved to have a good eye and regard with all speed unto Antiochus, considering the king was passed alreadie into Syria, whatsoever the occasion was. But as touching the Tyrant, after they had disputed and debated the matter long time, Whether they had sufficient cause alreadie to determine upon some small conclusion, or should referre unto the wisedome and judgement of T. Iuintius the managing of those affaires, therein to proceed and do according as he should deeme it good and expedient for the Common-wealth; in fine, they permited him to use his owne discretion concerning the Lacedemonian Tyrant: supposing that the matter was not of such weight and consequence as to concerne the maine state of the weale  publick so materially, whether it were hastened or protracted; but rather it behoved them to be advised and consider well, what Anniball and the Carthaginians would do, if happily the war with Antiochus were begun and once a foot. They [at Carthage] that sided with the adverse faction of Annibal, had sent divers and sundry letters unto the principal LL. at Rome, every one privatly to his friends to this effect, That there passed messengers and letters from Anniball to Antiochus, and that there were embassadors againe that secretly came from the king to him. And like as there be some beasts so wild and savage as never can be named: so the courage and spirit of that man was such, as might not possibly be dulced or appeased. For he daily complained that the citie languished and grew feeble with idlenes, and by sitting stil and doing nothing, was overgrowne as it were with mosse, and unpossible it was to raise and stir it up but with sound of armor and weapons. These advertisements  caried likelihood of truth and good credit with them, in regard of the late warre so fresh in memorie, which he alone began first, and managed to the last. Over and besides, he had provoked by a late act of his, many great and mightie personages, who set their hearts against him. The order and degree of Iudges at the time bare chiefe sway and soveraigne authoritie in Carthage: in this respect principally, for that the same Iudges were perpetuall. The goods,

the honour and reputation, yea and the life of every man lay in their hands. Hee that displeased  one of that bench, was sure to have all the rest his enemies and to be upon him: and there never wanted one promoter or other to carrie tales and give information to these judges against a man, if they saw them ill affected once and bent against one. During the time of this emperious and tyrannicall rule of theirs, (for as their power was exceeding all measure, so they bare themselves there in as outragiously beyond the limits of civilitie) it was Anniball his hap to be Pretour; and by vertue of his place he sent for one of the treasurers to come before him: but he made no reckning of his authoritie, and refused to obey: for the said treasurer was one of the contrarie side; and because from the degree of those treasurers they mounted presently into the highest order of the judges, therefore he carried with him an hautie mind alreadie, in regard of the high roume that he was shortly to stepinto. Anniball you may be sure, tooke this as a great  disgrace and indignitie to his person, and therefore hee sent a pursevant or sargeant to attach the bodie of the Treasurer aforesaid: and presently calling the people to a general assembly, he commaunded him there to be presented: where he accused and blamed the partie himselfe, no more than the whole order and degree of the judges: through whose insolent pride and excessive power, both lawes and magistrates were nothing regarded but troden under foot. And perceiving that these words of his tickled the itching eares of the people, considering also that their proud demeanor prejudiced the libertie of the meanest persons: immediatly he published a law, and gate it enacted. That those judges should be chosen every yeare, and that from thence forth one and the same man might not be a judge two yeares togither. But looke how much thanke he had at the commons hands for this act, so much he offended many of the great men and principals  of the citie. Another thing besides he did, whereby hee purchased to himselfe the ill will of some privat persons, in tendring the common good of the weale publick. The financies and revenues of the State, partly through negligence went to decay, and partly were shared out in dividends, betweene some certaine of the head citizens and magistrates: and more than that, the mony which by way of tribute was to be paid yeerely unto the Romans, was too short and not to be found: and it appeared, that a sore levie would be imposed upon privat persons shortly, to make those paiments out of their owne purses. Anniball, after he had cast up the bookes, and made an estimate and just abstract how much the rents and revenues of the citie amounted unto, as well from customers by sea as land, and to what uses they were emploied; and perceiving thereby, what was desrayed in the ordinarie charges of the State, and what went a wrong way, and  was averted by these theeves to their owne selves, he pronounced aloud in open audience of the whole assembly, That the arrerages should be gathered up and brought into the common chest: and so privat persons might be discharged and eased of their impositions of tribute, and the common-wealth would be rich enough and able to perfourme and furnish out the monies due to the people of Rome. And as he thus said, so he was as good as his word, and executed it accordingly. Then these caterpillers, who for certaine yeeres lived by robberie of the common treasure, and fed upon the fruits of the citie, fared spightfully against Anniball, as if he had done them great wrong in taking their owne goods from them, and not proceeded in justice to wrest out of their hands their stollen substance: and in great malice and bitternesse ceased not to provoke against Anniball the Romanes, who were ready enough of themselves to picke some quarrell  to him, to seeke occasion of hatred, and to find an hole in his coat. Scipio Africanus for a long time gave the dease eare unto them, and misliked the course: for he supposed it was not for the honour and majestie of the people of Rome to subscribe unto those imputations charged upon Anniball, to entertaine the spight and hatred of men, and to interesse and insert publicke authoritie within the privat factions of the Carthaginians; and not to be content to have vanquished Anniball in war, unlesse they also took upon them the persons of accusers, and preferred as landerous libel and bill of inditement, and sware therto Billa vera. But at length they wrought and brought about, that embassadours should be sent to Carthage, who in the Senate there might charge Anniball categorically, with plotting and practising with Antiochus for to wage warre against them. And these three were addressed to this embassie, C. Servilius, M. Cladius Marcellus, and Q.Terentius Culleo; who being arrived there, caused it to be given out to as many as should demaund the cause of their comming, (and all by instruction from the adversaries of Anniball) that their errand was to composed and end the debates betweene Masanissa king of the Numidians, and the Carthaginians. This was commonly divulged and belleved for truth.

 But Anniball found them streight and smelt this jugling, and was not ignorant that he was the onely man that the Romanes shot at, and howsoever peace was graunted to the Carthaginians, yet they continued an endlesse and inexpiable warre with him alone still. Whereupon hee resolved to frame himselfe to give place to the time and yeeld unto fortune. And beeing furnished aforehand with all things requisite to take his flight, when hee had of purpose all the day long shewed himselfe in the publicke place of assembly verie formally, to turne by all suspition of his intended resolution, so soone as it began to be darke night, in his citizens gowne as he went all day, and attended in the hall, he gate him soorth straight to the citie gate, accompanied onely with two persons, and those not privie at all to his purpose and designment. And having found his horses readie in the place appointed, hee mounted and rode apace that night untill hee was  come to a certaine quarter of the territorie of Voca: and by the next morning, hee passed betweene Acylla and Thapsus, and recovered a towne or fort of his owne; where he was imbarked in a ship readie rigged and appointed with saile and ore to take sea and away. Thus departed Anniball out of Africke, lamenting more often the hard hap and calamitie of his countrey, than of his owne friend and kinsfolke. And the same day he fell with the yland Cercina: where the Carthaginians found in the rode certaine hulks charged with marchandise: and when at his comming a shore out of his ship, there came many running toward him for to salute and welcom him thither, hee charged his owne companie, that if any asked concerning him, they should make answere, That he went upon an embassage to Tyrus: but fearing least any of their barkes should disanker that night, and make report at Thapsus or Acylla, that he was seene in Cercina:  he caused a beast to be killed for sacrifice, and invited the masters of the ships and all the marchants to supper; and there with commaunded all the sailes and crosse saile-yards to be had out of the vessels, to make thereof a large pavillon, that they might sit in the shade at their supper: for that, as it fell out, it was then midsommer. And as the time and such provision as they had, would give leave, he set out a feast and banket; he spared for no wine, and continued the mertiment farre within night. Then Anniball, so soone as he could espie his time for to deceive those that were in the harborough, weighed ancre. The rest were fast asleepe; and when the next day they awoke and roused themselues, with their drunken and drousie nols (and far forth day it was and late ere they arose) they were faine to spend some houres in sitting their ores againe in their right-places, and the tackling of the ships in good order.
 In this while, at Carthage the ordinarie multitude that used to frequent the house of Anniball, repaired as their manner was to his gate-house: and when it was voiced abroad, that he was not to be found, all the companie gathered togither in the market place, seeking and enquiring for the principal and chiefe personage of their citie. Some gave out (as the truth was) that he was fled: other said plainly, that he was murdered and made away through the falshood and villanie of the Romanes; and this they sticked not to avouch. There might a man have seene sundrie and divers countenances (as it fareth commonly in cities where there is siding and parts taking) as each one is affected to his owne bend and faction. At last, newes came that he was seene at Cercina. The Romane Embassadours having upon audience given, declared in the Senat of Carthage, that the LL. of their Senate had certaine intelligence, that both aforetime, king Philip  was by Anniball especially sollicited and set on to make warre with the people of Rome; and also now there had bene letters and messengers with credence sent from him to king Antiochus; and that he would never rest untill he had set all the world togither in arms and therfore if the Carthaginians were desirous to content and satisfie the Romanes, they should not suffer these parts of his to escape unpunished: then the Carthaginians made answere and said, That nothing of all this passed by publicke councell or consent and allowance of the State, howbeit they would be willing to doe whatsoever the Romanes thought to be reason.
Anniball this while had a boone voiage, and with a merrie gale of wind arrived at Tyrus, where he was received of the Tyrians, the first founders of Carthage, as if he had been in another countrie of his owne: received he was, I say, and entertained with all kind of honor, be seeming a man  so famous and renoumed. After he had so journied there some few daies, he sailed to Antioche: where understanding that the king himselfe was alreadie departed from thence, hee repaired to his sonne, and conferred with him, as he was setting out an yeerely solemnitie of games and plaies neere Daphne, and being courteously also by him intreated, he made no stay, but to ship-board and sea againe. And at Ephesus overtooke the king, whome hee found floating and wavering

still in his mind, and unresolved what to doe as touching the Romane warre. But this comming  of Anniball, was no small poise to turne the ballance, and to move him to enter into the enterprise thereof. The Aetolians likewise at the same time were estraunged and alienated in affection from the Romane league and societie, whose embassadors demaunding to have Pharsalum and Leucas againe, with other cities, according to the tenure and form of the first league, the Senate turned over and referred to Quintius.


THE XXXIIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the foure and thirtith Booke.
THe law Oppia, propounded and enacted by C. Oppius a Tribune of the Commons, in the time of the Punicke warre, for the abridging and restraint of the excesse in womens apparrell, was after much variance and debate repealed, notwithstanding that Porcius Cato laboured to the contrarie, that it might not be abolished. This Cato made a voiage into Spaine, and by force of armes (beginning first to warre at Emporiae) brought the hither province of Spaine on this side Iberus to quietnesse. T. Quintius Flamininus levied warre against the Lacedaemonians and  Nabis their tyrant, in which be sped fortunately, and so prevailed, that be made an end thereof, graunted them peace to his own good liking and pleasure, delivered Argos, and set it free, which was before in subiection to the tyrant. The Senate then, and never before, beheld the publick games and pastimes by themselves, apart from the rest of the people: Which to bring about, Sex. Aelius Paetus, and L. Cornelius Cetbegus the Censours, set in foot and intermedled themselves, to the great indignation and discontentment of the Commons. More colonies were planted with Romane citizens. M. Porcius Cato triumphed over Spaine. The warres also which fortunately were atchieved against the Boij and the French Insubres are here recorded. T. Quintius Flamininus, who had vanquished Philip king of the Macedonians, and Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, yea, and freed all Greece from their oppression, for these many and noble exploits, rode in triumph three daies together. The Carthaginian embassadors brought word, that Anniball who was fled unto Antiochus, banded with him and combined to wake warre. Anniball had besides assaied by meanes of one Aristo a Tyrian (sent as a courier with oedence onely and no letters, to Carthage) for to moove and sollicite  the Carthaginians to rebellion.

BEtweene the troublesome cares of great warres, which either were not fully ended, or at hand readie to begin, there happened an occurrence, which in it selfe being but a small matter to speake of, and of little regard; considering the sides and part-taking about it, grew to a mightie head and contention in the end. M. Fundanius and L. Valerius Tribunes of the Commons, preferred a bill unto the people touching the abrogation of the law Oppia. For C. Oppius aforetime, even when the Punicke warre was at the hottest, and whiles Q. Fabius and T. Sempronius were Consuls, had promulged a Statute, by vertue whereof, No woman of what degree  soever, might either have in ornaments and jewels above halfe an ounce weight of gold, nor weare any habiliments wrought of sundrie colours, ne yet ride in coach within the cittie of Rome, or any other towne, nor neerer than a mile from thence, unlesse it were upon occasion of some solemne feast or publicke sacrifice. Now M. Iunius Brutus, and P. Iunius Brutus, both Tribunes

 likewise of the Commons, stood in defence and maintenance of the said law Oppia, and affirmed plainely they would not suffer it to bee anulled. Many a nobleman was seene in this quarrell: some spake for the law, and others gaine said it. The Capitoll was full of people, either taking part and favouring the cause, or els opposing themselves, and urging the contrarie. The very dames of the citie themselves, could neither by persuasion and advise, nor by any reverent and womanly regard, ne yet by the expresse and absolute commaundement of their husbands be kept within dores; but doe what they could, they bespread all the streets of the cittie, beset and kept all the waies into the common place, beseeching and entreating their husbands as they passed by and went downe thither, to permit and give their consent, That seeing the good estate of the Commonweale now flourished, and the private wealth of every man encreased daily,  their wives also and matrones might bee allowed to have their auncient ornaments and gay attire againe. The number of these women grew every day more than other, for now they flocked also out of the townes, villages, and other places of resort in the countrie, and shewed themselves at Rome. In so much, as they tooke heart at length, and were so bold as to encounter the Consuls, the Pretours, and other magistrates, requesting and beseeching their favour, to stand with them, and forward the cause. But as for one of the Consuls, Marcus Porcius Cato by name, they could not with all their praiers entreat him to encline unto their suite: who in the maintenance of the said law, and that it might not bee revoked, spake in the frequent assemblie of the people to this effect.The Oration of M. Perci^ Cato, in maintenance of the law Oppia. My maisters and citizens of Rome, If every one of us had fully resolved and purposed with himselfe to hold his owne, and keepe the rightfull authoritie  and preheminence that hee hath over his owne wife, lesse adoe and trouble were should have had with them all together at this day.
Now having given them the head at home so much, that the curstnesse and shrewdnesse of women hath conquered our libertie and freehold there; behold, here also in publicke place it is troden downe and trampled underfoot: and because wee were not able everie man to rule his owne in severall, now wee stand in feare and dread them all in generall. Certes, I my selfe thought ever untill now, that it was but a seined fable and devised tale that went of a certaine Lemnos. Island, wherein by a conspiracie of women, all the men were murdered every one, and that sexe utterly made away and rooted out. But well I see now, bee they creatures never so weake, so silie and feeble, let them once have their meetings, their conventicles and secret conferences, they will worke mischeefe in the highest degree, and be as dangerous  as any other. And surely for mine owne part, I cannot resolve in mine owne conscience and determine, whether of the twaine be worse; the thing I meane in itselfe, or the precedent example and consequence thereof, considering the manner how it is handled. Of which two, the one toucheth us that are Consuls and the rest of the magistrats, the other concerneth you rather my maisters and citizens of Rome. As for the matter in question, and proposed unto you, whether it be good and expedient for the weale publick or no, that resteth in you to determine and judge, who are to give your voices and suffrages. But this seditious insurrection here, of women, be it of themselves, or procured by your motion and instigation, M. Fundanius and L. Valerius, no doubt it argueth and emplieth a great default in the magistrates, and I wot not whether it will bee a souler blot and dishonour to you that are Tribunes, than to us Consuls. Yours will the blame bee, if yee  have brought women now to raise and stirre up tribunitious seditions; and ours the shame, if we needs must admit and accept of laws, whether we will or no, for fear of a commotion and seperation of our women, as sometimes we were forced to do by the departure and insurrection of our Commons. I assure you for mine owne selfe, when I passed erewhile into this common-place through the prease and throng of these women, I was abashed and could not chuse but blush. And had I not beene more respective of the reputation, the honour and reverence of some in particular, than of them all togither, because it should not be thought and said, that they had been checked and taken up by the Consull; I would have said unto them, What new fashion is this, good wives, to run gadding abroad into the open streets, to beset the passages, and to affront, yea and hang upon other womens husbands as ye do? What? could ye not every one at home have dealt  with your owne good-men in the cause, and craved their helpe? or can ye speake faire and flatter better, can yee bee more pleasant and affable abroad in the towne, than within your houses? or make love to other men, rather than to your owne husbands? And yet to speake uprightly, if wives were of that modestie and womanly carriage, as to keepe themselves within the compasse and bounds of their owne libertie, and passe no farther; it were not besitting you ywis, so much as

at home to trouble yourselves about our lawes heere, not to busie your braines, to know either  what new Statutes passed, or what old were cassed. Our auncestours in old time would not, that women in any wife should dispose so much as of their own privat matters without the advise and direction of a governor and overseer: and therefore in great wisedome they ordeined, that they should be ordred and ruled, by their parents, by their brethren, by their husbands. But wee (and God will) can abide them to intermeddle in state-matters, to governe the weale publick, to converse with us in the common place, in publick assemblies and courts of parliament. For what els do they now in the streets, in the crosse waies and Quarrefours, but, some of them geve their voyces that the bils of the Tribunes may passe, and others advise and be of opinion, that the law Oppia may be repealed? Let this outrageous and unreasonable nature of theirs have the head; let these unruly creatures and untamed animalshave their will, and bridle them not; see then how  of themselves they will keepe a meane and measure in their licentiousnes, unlesse you curb them and hold them in. Tush, this is the least matter of all that displeaseth these women: there are a thousand things besides that they thinke hardly of, and are discontented to be held unto by old customes and positive lawes. Libertie in all things; nay to speake more truly, a loose and dissolute licentiousnes, is the very thing they long after and desire. For, go they away cleere with this once, what is it that they will not attempt and give the venture for? Do but runne through and count the lawes provided in this behalfe for women, whereby our forefathers and predecessours have kept downe and restreined their disorderly appetites, and with which they have sought to subject them to their husbands: yet, hardly can ye with the help of them all, keepe them in awe and tied fast, but breake out they will, and have their own waies. What then? how and if ye suffer  them to catch this and that, and to ther thing to it: if I say, ye let them wrest from you one thing after another, untill at length they be check-mates with their husbands, thinke ye that ever you shall be able to support and endure them? Begin they once to be equals, they will soone be superiours: make them your fellowes, and streightwaies they will be your maisters. But, alas, wee lay to hardly to their charge. The thing that they stand upon is no more but this, That no new Act and statute passe against them: for no equall and reasonable thing do they refuse: their desire and prayer is only that they might not be wronged. No, no, it is cleane contrary: That law which ye have received and admitted, that which by your suffrages you first granted, that which by the practise and experience of so many yeeres you have allowed and approved, they would have you to revoke and abolish: which is as much to say, as by anulling that one, to infringe, impaire, and diminish the authoritie and vertue of the rest. No law is there so well devised, that is good, commodious and agreeable unto all. This only is intended principally to be considered, that it may be profitable to the most part, and serve in generall. For if as each person shall find an act prejudiciall, hurtfull, and offensive to himselfe, he may be allowed by and by to undo and demolish the same: to what end should all the people assemble together to the making of those statutes, which they anon against whom they were enacted, may abolish and overthrow? But gladly would I know the great occasion and cause, for which our dames in such trouble and uprore run out into the streets, and have much ado to forbeare the common place, and to mount up into the Rostra to make an oration to this audience? Is it for this, to redeeme out of the hands of Anniball, their fathers, their husbands, their children and brethren, whom he keepth  prisoners? Nay, that calamitie is farre enough off at this day, and farre may it ever be I pray God from our citie and Common-weale. And yet when the time was of that hard fortune and calamitie, you would not hearken to their piteous and kind prayers in that behalfe. But it may well be, that it is neither naturall love and kind affection, nor carefull regard of their deere friends, but meere touch of conscience and sense of religion that hath brought them thus together in a congregation. And readie they are, it may be, to receive and interteine dame Cybill or Idas, comming from Pescinus out of Phrygia. What honest colour and shew, so much as in word only can be pretended to beare out and cover this mutinous sedition of women? Mary this (say they) that we may glitter in our golden jewels, and shine in purple robes to be seene a farre off: that as well on work daies as holidayes, we may be set up and ride in our coches and chariots through  the citie, as it were in triumph, for the conquest and victorie of a law by us repealed and disanulled: for winning from you, and wringing out of your hands, maugre your beards, the libertie of your voyces and suffrages: to the end that we might not be stinted and gaged in our excessive expenses, in our dissolute profusion, in costly vanities and superfluities. Many a time yee have

 heard me complaine of the wastfull and sumpteous bravery of women: and as often have you knowne me to invey against the lavish spending of men, not privat persons only, but magistrates also in higher place: and how this citie of ours is sick as it were at one time of two contrary diseases and maladies, to wit, pinching avarice, and superfluous prodigalitie, two plagues I say, that have bene the bane and overthrow of all great monarchies and flouring empires. These pestilent mischiefes I dread so much the more, as our state and common-weale encreaseth to the better; groweth welthy every day more than other; and as our dominion extendeth still farther and farther. And now that we are gotten over into Greece and Asia, provinces full of all entising pleasures and alluring delights of the world, now that we are come to finger and handle the rich treasures of mightie Monarches, I feare me that even these things have rather captivated us, than wee  them. The goodly images, statues and pictures that came from Syracusae, are (trust me truly) dangerous to this citie, and threaten no lesse than so many ensignes of the field displayed against it. And I heare say alreadie, that there are many, and too too many, that praise and have in admiration the beautiful ornaments of Corinth and Athens, and begin to make a skorne and game of the images of the Roman gods made of potters earth only, laughing a good at them, where they see them standing forth of the walls. Well, for my part I had rather have these gods so propice and favourable to us as they be, than such as those: and so I hope they will ever be, if we can suffer them to abide stil in their usual shrines and places acustomed. No longer ago than in our fathers daies, king Pyrrahus sent his embassador Cyneas of purpose and assaied by rich and goodly gifts, to tempt the minds not only of our men, but also of our women. There was no law Oppia as then  in force, to bridle and keepe downe the costly pomp and bravery of women: and yet not one of them all received ought at his hands. And what thinke ye was the cause? even the same and no other, for which our auncestors in times past, never so much as thought upon the providing of any such law. There was no pride then, nor riotous superfluitie to restraine. And like as the skill and knowledge of diseases, must praecede and go afore their cures and remedies: even so evill desires and enormious losts had neede to bud forth and spring before the lawes, which should represse and cut them downe. What caused the law Licinia to be made, Concerning five hundred acres of ground, for bidding that no man should possesse above; but the exceeding covetousnes of men, encroching still and laying land to land? What brought in the law Cincia as touching gifts and presents, but this, that the Commons began alreadie to be vassailes as it  were and tributaries to the Senat. No mervaile therfore it is, nor strange may it seeme, that neither the law Oppia, nor any other providing for the cutting off the unmeasurable expences of women, was required and thought needfull in those dayes; when gold, when purple freely tendred and offred unto them was refused. If now at this day Cyneas were come, and went with such gifts round about in the citie, he should find receivers enough of women, standing in every streete readie for him. And verily, with all the wit I have, I can not devise what the cause and reason should be of many lustfull desires and appetites that reigne in this age. For say, that if one of you were kept short and debarred of that, which another might lawfully have: per adventure there might rise in your harts (through infirmitie) some shame and abashment in nature, or els displeasure and discontentment in reason: so being all as ye are brought within one compasse of furniture  and apparell, and no ods at all between you, what need any one of you to feare, least she should be looked into, marked or observed, more than another. I must needs say, the shame that followeth and attendeth either upon nigardise or povertie, is worst of all others: but the law quitteth and freeth you of both, when you want but that only which by law ye may not have, and no man will reproch you therfore. Yes mary, quoth some rich and welthy dame, this same equalitie and no distinction at all among us, of al things I can not abide: Why may not I according to my calling, be seene araied in purple, and adorned with gold? And why is not the poore estate of others known, but lieth hidden under this pretext and cloke of a law: so as they may be thought yet (were it not for the law) that such and such things they would have; where as indeed they are not able to mainteine and beare it out? Would ye (in faith) my maisters and citizens of Rome, have your wives to  strive thus, that the richer sort might deserve to have that, which no other can reach unto: and the poore againe because by that meanes they would not be despised, over-streine themselves to go above their calling and abilitie? Certifie I dare avow, if they begin once to shame at that which is not shame-worthy, they will not bash at any thing, be it never so shamefull. Have it she will out of her owne, so long as it lasteth: and when all is gone, to her husbands purse she will go. Alas

poore man and wo begun is that husband, as well he that is intreated by his wife, to stretch his  purse strings, as he that is not, when he shal see another man to give her that, which he would not allow himself. And even now ye see how openly in the street (unshame faced as they be) they are in hand with other womens husbands, yea and that which more is, they keepe an intreating for to casse the law, and for the favour of their voices only. For of some they have got the good wills no doubt alreadie, whiles themselves wil not be intreated, but draw miserie upon thee, upon thy state, and upon thy children. Wel, let the law once cease to set down a gage and proportion of thy wives expences, and never thinke to have remedie, and to staie the same of thyselfe with all thou canst do. Be not deceived sirs, to think that the world will be ever againe at the same passe, as it was before this law took place. And as it is a safer course and lesse dangerous to let a naughtie and obstinat person alone, that he be not called into question at all; than after he is once accused to suffer  him to be quit and goe away unpunished: even so this excessive superfluitie, would have beene more tollerable, if it had not beene medled and tempered with all, than it will be now upon the very binding and curbing there of: much like a wild and savage beast let loose after it hath bene tyed up a time, and so made more fell and angrie. To conclude therefore, of this opinion am I, that of no hand the law Oppia be repealed: and so I pray all the gods to vouchsafe for to blesse and turne to good, whatsoever you doe or go about. When he had thus said, those Tribunes also of the Commons,The Oration of (...) the law (...) who openly promised and protested to oppose themselves, and to crosse the repealing of the law, made some briefe speeches to the same effect. Then L. Valerius rose up to maintaine the bill by him proposed for the revoking of that law, and spake as followeth. If privat men had stepped forth and advaunced forward either to approove and persuade, or to  reject and dissuade, that which by us is proposed, I my selfe also without opening my mouth would have attended your will and expected the deliverie of your suffrages, as thinking it had bene sufficiently debated and discoursed alreadie, whatsoever might be said for both parties. But now fith that the Consull M. Porcius Cato, a man of so great reputation and gravitie, not only by his countenance and authoritie, (which alone without any word at all spoken had been important) enough and effectuall) but also in a long premeditate Oration framed with much studie and forethinking, hath impugned and inveighed against our proposed ordinance, I must of necessitie answere him againe as briefly as I can. Who neverthelesse hath spent more words in reproving and chastising the matrons and dames of the citie, than he hath bestowed reason to the purpose in dissuading our new law: and all verify for this intent, that he might leave it doubtful, whether the women had done that which he blamed them for, as induced by their own motives, or seduced by us and our suggestions. As for me, the protection directly of the cause I will take in hand, and not busie and trouble my head in defence of our persons, against whome the Consull hath rather glaunced and girded at, by way of big words, than charged indeed by found reasons. It hath pleased him to call this, An assembly and mutinous meeting: yea and other whiles he tearmeth it, An insurrection and secession of women; because the wives in open place intreated you to repeale that law, now in time of peace, in the flourishing and blessed state of the Commonweale, which during those troublesome daies of war, had bene enacted against them. I wote full well, that both these words and other besides are verie significant, sought out, and picked for the nones, to enforce and aggravate the matter. And we all know, that M. Cato is an Oratour not  onely grave and earnest, but otherwhiles also fell, sharpe, and bitter, however otherwise by naturall disposition he be of a mild spirit and courteous enough. But to the point. What new and strange thing is this that our wives have done, in comming abroad and assembling themselves in companies, about a matter that so much concerneth and importeth themselves? What? were they never seene before now, abroad in open street? I will take the paines, o Cato, to turne over your own book of Originals against yourselfe. Listen and marke how often they have done the semblable, and alwaies truly for the common good and benefit of the State. And first and foremost, in the verie beginning and infancie of this citie, even in the reigne of king Romulus, when the Capitoll-Keepe was taken and held by the Sabines; when in the middest of the Common place, they were raunged in battell array and readie to fight a bloudie field, was not the  quarrell ended and the conflict stayed by the dames and wives that ran in, and put themselves betweene the two armies? After the KK. were driven out and expelled, What happened tho? When as the legions of the Volsciens under the conduct of Coriolanus Martius incamped within five miles of Rome, were they not the matrones of the citie that turned backe this armie,

 which doubtlesse would have forced our citie and put it to ransacke? And is not this likewise as true, that when the Gaules were possessed of Rome and masters thereof, the dames of the citie and none but they, even by the consent of all men, came foorth into the open streets, made a contribution, and laid downe that gold which paid for the ransome and redemption of the citie? No longer since than in the last Punicke warre (because I will not stand so much upon antiquities) was it not thus, that not onely when the citie was at a fault for money, the widowes stockes supplyed the want of the common treasure? but also at what time as we were driven to seeke for new gods, and to send for them afarre off to succor us in our extremities; all the wives and matrons of the citie went to the sea side for to receive the goddesse Mother Idaea? The occasions (quoth he) are different, and the case is not alike. Neither is it my purpose or any part  of my meaning to compare causes, and toproove they are all one. This onely I stand upon, and take it sufficient to excuse and cleere the women, for bringing up no straunge noveltie, in that they shewed themselves in open place. To proceed therefore: seeing that no man made any woonder then, of that which women did in under taking the affaires that concerned all alike as well men as women: marvaile we now that they doe the semblable, in a cause that properly and peculiarly pertaineth to themselves? And what great thing was it they did? Now in good faith wee are too coy and squeamish of our hearing, and our eares over nice and delicate, if when masters disdaine not to heare the praiers of their servants and slaves, we scorne to give eare to the requests of ladies and dames of honor. But now I come to the matter in question, in regard where of the Consull his Oration consisted in two points. For first, hee tooke it verie ill, that any  law at all once enacted should be revoked: and secondly he stood upon this, that above all others the law devised and made for repressing the superfluous ornaments and attire of women, should remaine in force for ever. So it should seeme, that the first part (a common defence as it were, of all the lawes) was a speech befitting the place and person of a Consull: but the other against the exceeding pompe of women, more properly became a man (as himselfe) of most severe life and precise carriage. And therefore it is great doubt and to be feared, least wee should seduce you into some errour, if we lay not downe and shew plainly the vanitie and defect both in the one and in the other. For as I confesse, that of those lawes which are devised and established not for a time and by occasion of some particular occurrence, but for ever and to the perpetuall good of a citie, none ought to be abolished; unlesse it be so that by use and experience  the same be checked and found hurtfull, or by some change of the State become needlesse and superfluous: so I see evidently, that those statutes and ordinances which are brought in to sit and serve some seasons, are mortall (if I may so say) and mutable with the times. And oftentimes wee see, that warre disclaimeth those lawes which peace proclaimeth; and peace pulleth downe that which warre set up: like as in the government and rule of a ship, one thing is requisite in faire weather and calme sea, another in soule and troublesome tempests. These things thus being in nature divers and distinct, let us consider I pray you, of whether sort is this law that now we are in hand to revoke. What? is it one of the auncient and royall lawes made by the kings, and equall in time with the foundation of our citie? or (that which is the next in time and authoritie) was it set downe and written in the twelve tables by the Decemvirs, created of  purpose to devise and make lawes? Is it of that nature without the which as our ancestors were of opinion, that the honestie and honour of matrons could not be preserved: so we are to feare likewise, least by the repealing thereof, wee overthrow the modestie, chastitie, and integritie of maried women? Why? who knoweth not that this is a new law of twentie yeeres standing and continuance and no more, made whiles Q. Fabius and Titas Sempronius were Consuls? And seeing that without it, wives lived so many yeeres before in good name and same and in passing good order: tell me what danger can ensue, and why wee need to feare least if it bee annulled, they should breake out to all loosenes and disorder. Mary, if this law had beene made at first, to gage the wantonesse of women, beleeve me then it were greatly to be doubted, that the putting downe thereof, would stirre them up againe to their former outrage. But to what end it was devised,  the time it selfe is able to shew and testifie. Anniball beeing in Italie, had woon a victorie at Cannae: he was now master of Tarentum, lord of Arpi, and possessed of Capua: every houre men looked when hee would march forward and advance his ensignes against Rome: our allies were revolted and gone: souldiours wee had no more of our owne to supply and make up the decaied bands: no mariners and sea servitours could we find for the maintenance of our Armada:

all our treasure in the citie chamber was spent and consumed. Driven we were to this exigent, as to take up bondilaves for to serve in warres, and to buy them of their maisters for day, yea, and to make paiment of their price after the warre was ended. For want of money also the Publicanes and Farmours of our domaine and publicke profites, undertooke to serve the armie with corne, and to furnish us with all things needfull for warre at a certaine price, and gave us the like day and time of paiment. The gally slaves that served at the oare we found and maintained with our own proper and privat charges; and a rate and proportion was set down according to our revenues and worth in the subsidie booke, what number every one should bee charged with. All the gold and silver that wee had in private we brought forth in commune, and the Senators themselves led the way first, and gave good ensample. The widdowes and orphane children brought in their stockes of money to the cittie chamber. Streight order was given, that  wee should not have in our houses either of gold or silver, wrought in plate or otherwise above so much, nor of silver and brasse in coine and currant money beyond a certaine proportion limitted. At such a time, our dames (be like) were set all upon their braveries, prunning, trimming, and tricking themselves, in such sort, as the law Oppia must needs be devised, there was no other remedie to keepe downe their excessive pride and superfluous expence in their attire and ornaments: even then, I say, when by occasion that the solemne feast and sacrifice of Ceres was discontinued, by reason of the generall mourning and heavie cheare of all the wives of the cittie, the Senate was faine to take order, that they should finish and end their sorrowfull mourning within thirtie daies. Who is so blind that seeth not, how in regard onely of the povertie and extreame calamitie of the citie, and because all the monies of private persons should bee converted  into a common stocke, and for a publicke use, this law was first framed, drawne, and set down, so long onely to stand in strength and vertue, as the cause of penning and writing it should endure and continue? For otherwise, if those acts and decrees of the Senat, if those orders and ordinances of the Commons, respective unto that present time, should bee in force, and observed forever; Why make we paiment of the loane money unto private men? Why doe wee set and to ferm let our commodities, our customes and revenues of the citie, unto farmers for readie rent? Why put we forth our publick works for present money paid downe upon the naile? Wherefore buy we not slaves to serve in our warres? Lastly why are we not put to find marriners and oarmen, at our owne proper charges, as then we did? All other estates and degrees, all men els, of what calling soever, feele a great change in the state of the citie, from woe to weale, from adversitie to  prosperitie; and shall our wives onely misse the good thereof, and not once tast nor enjoy the fruits of peace, and publick repose and tranquilitie? Shall we that are men, be in purple and scarlet? Shall we wear our embrodered gowns and robes when we are magistrats? shall we put on our rich amyces and copes, when we exercise the function and ministerie of the high priests? shall our children goe in their side garments, pursuled afore with purple? shall wee permit and priviledge the head officers and magistrates in our Colonies and Burrough townes? nay, shall we suffer here at Rome the maisters and constables of every parish, the meanest and basest officers of all other to weare embrodered gowns, and studded with purple? and not only so, for to grace and credit themselves, with these goodly ornaments and badges of worship and honour during their life, but also after their death, the same to bee burned and buried with them? And shall wee debarre  and forbid our women onely to use purple and skarlet in their apparell? And when you the husband may have purple and skarlet, carpets, counterpointes, and footclothes, what reason is there to denie your wife, the mistresse of the house, a gowne or mantle of the same? And shall your horse bee attrapped and barbed more richly, and better set out with his capparison, than your wife arraied in her apparrell? But in truth, for purple and scarlet, which are the worse for the wearing, and waxeth bare, me thinkes I see some reason, such as it is (although it be very hard) of sparing and restraint: marie for gold, wherein little or nothing is lost but the fashion and workemanship, what niggardise, what miserie is this, to make spare of it, and to denie it them: Nay, I dare avow and abide by it, there is great benefit and use there of in time of extremitie? and it may helpe at a pinch both in publick affairs, and in private occasions, as ye have found  by good experience. But Cato said moreover, There would bee no emulation and envie betweene this good wife and that, if neither one nor other were allowed that libertie of apparell and ornaments. True it is, but in steed thereof they all are mightily discontented and greeved at the heart in the meane while, disdaining to see the wives of our allies of the Latine name and

 nation, permitted to weare those ornaments which they are forbidden to have, to see them, I say, all gorgeously set out with spangles and jewels of gold, clad in their purple and skarlet clothes, riding in their coaches all over their cities, whiles they at Rome take pains to go afoot on their ten toes, as if the State of the Empire were seated in their townes, and not in this their owne citie of Rome. This indignitie were ynough to wound the hearts of men, and make them bleed; what hurt doth it then, thinke you, to silie women, whom small matters, God wot, are wont to trouble? Alas poore soules: no magistracie and place of government in State, no sacerdotal dignities in the church, no triumphes, no ornaments and titles of honour, are they capable of, no gifts, no spoiles and prises gotten in warres, can fall to their shares. Neatnesse and finenesse, gay garments, trim attire, and gorgeous habiliments, are the honour and ornaments of women: in it  they take delight, on it they set their hearts, of it they make their joy. And therfore well have our ancestors called all furniture for the decking of women [Mundus Muliebris]. What lay they off in time of sorrow and mourning, but their gold and purple? what put they on and resume again, when their mourning is past, but their gold and purple? what hang they on them besides in time of publick joy and solemn processions, but their better apparell, their richest attire and most costly ornaments? But per adventure, after ye have once repealed the law Oppia, it will not be in your power to overrule them, if happily you should forbid them to wear any thing, that now the law restraineth them of. And perhaps some shal have more ado with their daughters, their wives, and sisters, and find them lesse tractable and pliable unto their minds, than now they are. Never fear that: women cannot shake off their obedience, so long as their governours (be they fathers, husbands, or  brethren) are alive; nay, of all other things they abhor and cannot brook to be at their own libertie, when it commeth by the death either of husbands or parents: Widdows state and Orphans life, they may not abide. Be sure therfore, they had leifer have their ornaments and attire to be at the disposition of yourselves, than of the law. And therfore, to speake a truth, you must in equity and reason protect and defend them in kindnesse, and not oppresse them with hardnesse and bondage: delight ye must to be called their fathers and husbands, rather than their lords and masters. It pleased the Consull erewhile to give them hard words and odious tearmes, calling this their meeting. A mutinie of women, and a very insurrection and departure of theirs: and daunger there is, no doubt, least being up once, they will seize upon the mount Sacer, as sometimes the Commons did in their furious anger, or els possesse themselves of the Aventine, and  there encampe and keepe an hold. Well, this weake and feeble sexe, borne to beare, must suffer and endure whatsoever ye shall ordain and set down against them. But take this with all at the loose for a final conclusion, that the greater power and authoritie ye have over them, the more discretion and moderation ye ought to use in that soveraintie of yours. After debate of words passed in this wise, in favor and disfavor of the law, the day following the women flocked in greater multitudes into the open streets, and banding themselves together, as it were, in one troupe, they be set the dores and houses of the Brutt, who by interposing themselves, had hindered and crossed the bill preferred by their fellow Tribunes: and never gave they over to keepe this stur,The low Oppia repealed. untill those Tribunes slaked in their opposition, for to inhibit the same. Which done, there was no doubt then, but all the tribes with one voice would abrogate and abolish that law. Thus twentie yeeres after  the enacting thereof, it was repealed and anulled.
M. Percius Cato after the abrogation of the law Oppia, presently departed with a fleet of five and twentie gallies, whereof five were set out by Allies, and arrived in the port of Porto Vene^a. Luna, to which place hee commaunded his forces to assemble: and after by vertue of an edict sent out along the sea coast, he had gathered together vessels of all sorts as he losed from Luna; and proclaimed that they should all follow after him to the port of Pyreneus, from whence hee purposed to set forth against the enemie, with an Armada of many saile, and well appointed. Who having passed beyond the mountaines of Liguria and the gulfe of Gaule, arrived and met all together, at the day and place appointed. From thence they came against Roses. Rhoda, where they expelled the Spanish garrison that held the fortresse. From Rhoda with a good gale of wind,  they sailed to Emporiae. Where, all the whole armie, excepting the marriners, were set a land. At the same time Emporiae were two townes, seperate one from the other by a wall. The one of them was inhabited by Greekes, who came from Phocaea, from whence the Maffilians also are descended: the other was possessed by Spaniards. But the Greeks towne lieth out into the sea, so as the whole compasse of the wall is not halfe a mile about: but the Spanish

towne seated farther into the land, and devided from the sea, is defended with a wall three miles  in circuit. A third sort of Romane inhabitants were joyned unto them by (...) Caesar the Emperour of famous memorie, after he had vanquished Pompeys children. And at this day, they are confused and medled one with another, and become one entier bodie, by reason that first the Spanyards, and afterward the Greekes, were made free denizens of the citie of Rome. A man might well mervaile, seeing how open they lye of the one side to the maine sea, how exposed they are on the other side to the danger of the Spaniards, a nation so fierce and war like, what thing it was that garded and protected them? Discipline it was and good government, and nothing els, which mainteined and preserved them in that weakenes of theirs; discipline I say, which is ever best enterteined of them, who live in feare of the mightier that are round about them. One quarter of the wall looking to the fields, is passing strong and exceeding well fortified, having but  one gate in all that side; which ordinarily is alwayes warded by one of the Magistrates. In the mainteined not for custome and fashion, nor by vertue of any law: but they performed it with as great care, yea and went the round and saw to the setinels with as much diligence, as if the enemies were hard at gates. A Spaniard came not within the citie; neither went they forth themselves, unlesse it were upon just occasion. But on the sea side the issue was open for any man at his pleasure. By that gate which turneth toward the Spanish towne, they never used to go forth but in great number, even a third part welneere of the townesmen, and those who the night before had watched upon the walls. And this cause induced them to go abroad, for that the Spaniards being no men at sea, gladly would traffike and trade with them: willingly buying of  them their strange merchandise from forein parts brought in by ships: and venting unto them againe their land commodities and fruits arising of the maine. The desire of this mutuall commerce and necessarie intercourse was the cause, that the Spanish towne was open to the Greeks. And in greater safetie and securitie they were also, by reason that they were shadowed under the wing of the Romane amitie, which they interteined with as great loyaltie as the Maffilians, although they were nothing so mightie and puissant. And even at this time they received the Consull and his armie with great courtesie and liberalitie. Cato sojourned there some few daies, whiles he was advertised by his espials where his enemies abode, and what their forces were: and because he would not be idle whiles he stayed there, he bestowed all that time in training and exercising his souldiours. It hapned to be that season of the yeere, when the Spaniards had  their corne within their granges readie for the thrashing floore, where upon he for bad the comepurveiours to provide graine, and sent them home to Rome. Warre, saith he, shall feede and mainteine it selfe. Being departed from (...). Emporiae, he wasted and burnt the territorie of the enemies, forced them to run away in every place where he came, and put them in exceeding fright.
At the same time, as M. Helvius departed out of the farther province of Spaine with 6000 garison souldiours delivered unto him by the Pretour, he was encountered by a great armie of the Celtiberians, before the towne Illiturgum. Valerius writeth, that they were twentie thousand strong: that twelve thousand of them were slaine, the towne Illiturgum woon againe, and all above fourteene yeeres of age put to the sword. From thence Helvius marched to the camp of Cato: and because the countrey was cleere from enemies, he sent back the garison into the  nether Spaine, and tooke his journey to Rome, where he entred the citie Ovant in pety triumph, for the happie successe atchieved in his affaires. He brought into the treasurie, of silver in bullion or Ingots, 14732 pound weight: of silver coine 17023 bigate peeces: and of Oscane silver 120338 pound weight. The cause why the Senate denied him full triumph, was this, for that he warred under the conduct and name of another, and not in his owne province. But it was two yeeres before he returned, by reason that the yeere betweene he was stayed there, lying sick of a long and grievous disease, and put over his government to Qn. Minutius his successor. Whereupon Helvius likewise entred the citie of Rome in that manner of triumph, two moneths only before his successor Qu. Minutius triumphed. He likewise brought into the chamber of the citie 34800 pound weight of silver in masse: of bigates in coine 78000: of Oscane silver  278000 pound.
All this while the Consull lay encamped in Spaine not farre from Emporiae. Thither repaired unto him from Bilistages a prince of the Ilergetes, three embassadors, where of his sonne was one: complaining that their forts were assailed by force of armes, and they had no other

 hope to make resistance, unlesse they might have a gard of Romane souldiours to defend them, and 5000 say they will be sufficient: for never would the enemies abide by it if such a power came against them. The Consull answered them and said, that he had a feeling and compassion of the perill of feare (whether it was) wherein they stood: howbeit, he was not at that time furnished with such forces, that he might safely spare so many out of his maine armie, thereby to dismember the same and to empaire his strength, considering a mightie hoast of his enemies was not far off, with whom he looked every day, and he knew not how soone, to joyne battaile in open field with banner displaied. The embassadors hearing this, sell downe prostrate at the Consuls feete, and shed teares, humbly beseeching him not to forsake them in this piteous plight.
For whither (say they) shal we go, if we be repulsed from the Romanes? No allies we have besides, nor  other hope in all the world. This danger we might have avoided well enough, if we would have bene false and disloyall; if we would have banded and rebelled with other Spaniards: but no menaces, no terrours presented unto us, could drive us to renounce our fealtie, hoping alwaies that we should have help and succour enough from the Romanes: but now if no meede, if no reliefe come from thence; if we be denied at the Consuls hand; heaven and earth we call to witnes, that we must be forced, full against our wills and upon meere necessitie, to revolt from the Romanes, for feare we drinke of the same cup that the Saguntines have done afore us: and choose we wil to dye with the rest of the Spaniards for companie, rather than perish alone by ourselves. So for that day they were dismissed without other answer. But all at the night following, the Consul was much distracted in mind, and carefull in both respects. Vnwilling he was to cast off his allies  and see them destitute; and as unwilling again to breake his armie: considering that in so doing, he might either delay the opportunitie of geving battaile, or endanger himselfe in the very innstant of conflict. But at length he resolved, in no wise to diminish his owne forces; doubting least in the meane while he should receive some dishonor at the enemies hand. As for his associates, he thought it best to interteine them with good hopes, for want of better helps; considering that often times and especially in war, outward semblances and vaine shewes, are held and taken for truth and substance, and serve the turne well enough: and when a man is throughly persuaded that he hath aid and succour, the very trust and confidence there of hath ministred hart to give the venture of some exploit, and preserved him as well as the thing it selfe. The next morrow he delivered this answere unto the embassadors, That albeit he feared to abate his own strength, in serving  other mens turne with any part of his forces, yet he had at this present more regard of their occasions and dangerous estate than of his own. Where upon he gave commandement, that a third part of all his bands and companies should have warning to bake and dresse viands with all speed, for to bestow and lay in the ships; and streightly he charged, that they should be rigged and ready appointed against the third day: and willed with all, two of the embassadors to report so much to Bilistages and the Ilergetes. As for the yong prince his sonne, he deteined stil with him, used him graciously, and bestowed savours and rich gifts upon him bounteously. The embassadors tooke not their leave nor departed, before they saw the souldiers embarked: and thus by making relation hereof, as a thing assured and past all per adventure, they filled the heads not of their own friends only, but also of the enemies, with the bruit of Romane aids comming neere at hand.  The Consull now, when hee had set this countenance of the matter, and made sufficient semblance to serve his purpose, gave order that the souldiers should be disbarked again and set a land: and himselfe seeing now that the time of the yeere approched commodious for action and execution of martiall affaires, dislodged and remooved his standing winter campe within a mile of Emporiae. From whence (as any occasions and opportunities were presented) he led fourth his souldiers a for aging and boothaling into the enemies land, sometime one way and sometime another, leaving alwaies a competent guard to defend the campe. Ordinarily their manner was to steale out by night, to the intent, that both they might go on still farther from their leagre, and also surprise the enemies at unawares and unprovided: by which meanes not onely his new and raw soldiers were exercised, but also many of his enemies were caught up and came short home:  where upon they durst no more peepe out of their forts and holds of delence. Now after he had made sufficient proofe of the hearts as well of his owne men as of his enemies, he commanded all the marshals,The oration of ^ate to his cap^^^^ and (...). colonels, horsemen, and centurions, to assemble before him: and unto them he made this speech. The time (quoth he) is now come, that you so often have wished for; in which you may shew at full your vertue and valour.
Your service hither to hath beene more like

the manner of forraiers than warriours: but now shall ye come to a maine battaile, and as enemies, fight hand to hand with professed enemies. From henceforth you may if you will, not wast their fields onely and spoile their territorie, but ransacke the pillage of rich and wealthie cities. Our fathers before us and auncestours in times past, when as in Spaine there were both Generals and armies of Carthaginians, having themselves no leaders and commaunders, no souldiers and forces there, yet would they needs have this article among others capitulated in the accord and composition with the Spaniards, That the river of Iberus should limit their seignorie and dominion. Now at this day, when two Pretours and a Consull, when three entire Romane armies have the government and charge of Spaine; now, I say, after ten yeeres space almost, wherein no Carthaginians have set foot and been seene in all these quarters of both provinces, we have lost our seignorie on this side Iberus. This must yee recover and win againe by  force of armes, by manhood and valiancie: yee must I say, compell this nation, more rash and inconsiderate in rebelling, than constant and resolute in maintaining warre, for to receive once more the yoke of subjection, which they have shaken from off their neckes. Having exhorted and encouraged them in this manner, he gave them to understand, that he would set forward in the night and lead against the enemies campe. And so he let them depart to refresh their bodies. At midnight, after he had devoutly taken with him the signes and approbations of the birds for his better speed, he put himselfe in his journey: and because he might be seazed of some place to his liking before the enemies should descrie him, hee set a compasse in his march, and led his souldiors cleane beyond their campe. And having by day light set his companies in battell array, he sent out three cohorts, even close to the rampier and trench of the enemie.
The  barbarous people wondering to see the Romans shew themselves behind at their backe, ran too and fro to take armes. Meane while, the Consull held his men with these and such like speeches: My souldiours (quoth he) there is no other hope now left, but in cleane strength and valour, and I of verie purpose have wrought it so. Betweene us and our campe the enemies are encamped all: behind at our backe we have our enemies land. The bravest courses are ever safest, namely, to build and ground our hope surely upon vertue. And here with all hee gave order, that the cohorts aforesaid should retire of purpose to traine foorth the barbarous people, by making semblance of retreat and flight. And so fell it out in verie deed as he thought and supposed: for they imagining that the Romanes for verie feare were retired, issued forth by heapes out of the gate, and bespred with armed men all the ground, that lay betweene their owne campe and the  enemies battel. And whiles they made great hast to embattell themselves, the Consull who was alreadie arranged in battell ray, and in all respects well appointed, charged upon them before they were marshalled and set in order. First he put forth the cornets and wings of horsemen from both points and flankes of the battaile: but they of the right side were straightwaies repulsed, and by their hastie and fearefull reculing, caused the footmen also to be mightily affraid. Which the Consull perceiving, he commaunded two elect cohorts of footmen to wheele about the right flanke of the enemies, and to shew themselves at their backes before the other companies of foot encountred and charged one another. This sodaine terror affrighted the enemies, but set all upright again and recovered the battaile of the Romans, which through the feare of the Cavallerie began to shrinke and goe downe. Howbeit the horsemen and footmen both of the right  point, were so troubled and so farre out of order, that the Consull was forced to plucke some of them backe with his owne hand, and turne them with their faces affront the enemie. Thus all the while that the shot lasted, the skirmish was doubtfull: so as now the Romanes in the medley, had much adoe to make head and stand to it in the right side, whereas the fright and flight first began. But on the left and all affront, the barbarous had the worst, and with great horror they looked behind and saw their enemies how they played upon their backs and rested not. After they had done with flinging their iron darts and launcing their fierie javelins, they drew their swords; and herewith began the conflict afresh. They were not wounded now from a farre off by blind chaunce and hap-hazard, they knew not from whence; but foot to foot they stood, and hand to hand they coped and let drive one at another: no hope at all was now but to trust in pure  strength and maine force. The Consull seeing his men wearied, encouraged and refreshed them by sending for to relieve and maintaine the fight, certain cohorts out of the rereward. This new battaillon well in heart, and with fresh weapons, charged the enemies toiled and tired: and being raunged in pointed wise like a quoine or wedge, at the first hot onset brake their arraies: and

 being once disordered, they put them to flight, and in scattering wise they ranne as fast as their legges would carrie them, to their campe. Cato seeing them flie on all hands, mounted on horsbacke and rode himselfe to the second legion which was in the arrereward for supply, and commaunded to advance the standards and ensignes before him, to march apace, and to approch the camp of the enemies for to give an assault. If he espied any one to step out of his rank, he would ride before and rap him with his light javelin that he had in his hand; commaunding the marshals and captaines to chastice him for it. Now was the enemies campe at the point to be assaulted, and the Romanes were with stones, pikes, perches, and all kind of weapons set back and driven from the trench. But when this fresh legion approched neere, then both the assailants were more encouraged, and also the enemies fought more lustily in defence of their rampier.  The Consull cast his eye all about him, to spiehow to breake in at some place or other where least resistance might be made: and seeing the guard thin about the left gate, thither he conducted the Principals and the Haslati of the second legion: but the corps de guard which warded that gate, was not able to endure their violent charge. The rest on the other side, seeing the enemies within the rampier, abandoned the campe, and flang away their ensignes and weapons. The souldiours of the second legion followed the chase and killed them as they ran away, whiles the other ransacked and rifled their tents. Valerius Antias writeth, that there were 60000 fell that day upon the edge of the sword. Cato himselfe (that never loved to make the least of his owne praise-worthie acts) saith, there were many slaine; but setteth not downe what number. He is thought to have perfourmed that day three peeces of service worthy of great praise and  commendation: first, in that he set a compasse with his armie far from his ships, farre from his campe, and gave battaile in the middest of the enemies, where his men could repose no hope at all but in their owne vertue and valour: secondly, for sending those cohorts behind the enemies to charge upon their backes: and thirdly, for that he caused the second legion to march a great pace under their colours displaid, raunged as they were and ordered in battaile array, for to approch and assaile the gates of the enemies campe, whiles all the rest were disbanded and spred all abroad to pursue the enemie in chase.
After this victorie archieved, he sat not still in rest and repose, but having sounded the retreat and brought his owne souldiours loden with pillage into the campc, he allowed them some few houres for their night sleepe, and led them forth into the territorie of the enemie to forrage and  spoile: which was as effectuall to enforce the Spanish Emporitanes and all their neighbour borderers to yeeld subjection, as the unhappie battell fought the day before. Many also of other cities, which were retired to Emporiae for refuge, rendered themselves to his devotion: whom he entertained all with gracious words, and when he had made them good cheere, bestowing wine and cates plentifully upon them, he sent them home to their owne houses. Then immediatly he dislodged and removed his campe. And all the way as he marched with his armie, there resorted embassadours from divers States that yeelded themselves unto him. By that time that hee was come as far as Taracon, all Spaine on this side Iberus, was wholly subdued: and the barbarous people brought in as presents unto the Consull, all the captives and prisoners, as well Romanes as Allies, and namely Latines, who by many and sundrie chaunces had been taken in Spain. The  bruit went commonly abroad, that the Consull would lead his power into Turdetania. There was a false alarme likewise given, and spoken it was, That he would visit the mountainers that lay out of the way. Vpon this vaine and headlesse rumour, there were seven forts belonging to the State of the Bergistanes that revolted from him: but the Consul led his armie against them, and without any memorable battell reduced them under obedience. And the Consull his back was no sooner turned, and he gone to Taracon, but they rebelled againe, even before hee was departed from thence in any other expedition. Subdued they were the second time, but they found not the like favour as before, to have pardon: for they were all sold like slaves in ouvert market, under the garland, because they should not thus every while trouble the peace.
In this meane time P. Manlius the Pretour, after he had received the old armie at the hands of Q: Mutius whom he succeeded, and joined thereto the other armie of old souldiours belonging to Appius Claudius, and which were come out of the farther Spaine, he made an expedition into Turdetania. Now these Turdetanes of all other Spaniards are counted to be the worst souldiours, howbeit, in confidence of their great numbers and multitudes, they came forward and encountred the Romane forces. But the men of armes had no sooner charged them, but presently

they were disarraied. As for the footmen, they fought in manner not at all. The old approved soldiours, who knew the enemies very well, and were experienced in feats of armes, made a quicke dispatch of this skirmish, and soone put all past peradventure. Howbeit, the warre was not so ended, nor determined in one battell. The Turdetanes levied and waged ten thousand Celtiberians, and so mainteined war afresh with forraine mercenarie forces.
The Consull being stung alreadie with the rebellion of the Turdetanes, and supposing that other cities would doe the like, upon any good occasion and opportunitie, disfurnished all the Spaniards on this side Iberus of their armor and munition. Which they took for such an indignitie, that many of them for very melancholie killed themselves: a martial and warlike nation, that thought they were as good be out of the world, as turned out of their arms; and reckoned no life, without their weapons.
The Consull having intelligence hereof, commaunded the Senatours of  all those cities to repaire unto him: and when they were assembled together, he used this speech unto them. It concerneth you (quoth he) no lesse than us, to give over this rebelling and warring. For never yet to this day have ye entred into the action, but with more losse and damage of Spaniards, than toil^ and travell of the Romane armie. To prevent this mischeefe that it should not happen, I suppose one good way it is, to contrive and worke so, that yee might not possibly bee able to rebell. Effect this I would raine, by the easiest meane and course of all other. Assist me I pray you herein with your good counsell: I assure you I will not bee directed by any advise more willingly, than by that which you yourselves shall give mee. When they held their tongues, and would not speake a word, he said unto them againe, that he was content they should pause upon the matter, and consult thereof a few daies. When they were called againe, and kept silence in  this second meeting and conference as well as in the former; he made no more adoe, but in one day rased the walls of all their cities: which done, hee went forward against those that hitherto were not come in, nor yeelded obedience: and into what quarters soever he came, he received al the States one after another, there bordering and adjoining, into his protection; save onely Segestica, a wealthie citie and of importance, the which he forced with mantelets and rolling pavoi^es, and such like fabrickes. More difficultie in subduing these enemies hee found, than others afore him who first came into Spaine; in this regard, for that in times past the Spaniards at the beginning revolted unto them, as being wearie of the tedious yoke of subjection under the lordly government and tyrannie of the Carthaginians. But Cato had more ado with them now, in that out of libertie and freedome, which they had usurped and beene used to, hee was to vouch them  (as it were) bond, and to bring them againe to servitude. Besides, hee found all out of frame and order, whiles some of them were up in armes, others were forced by siege to revolt, as not able to have held out long, unlesse they had beene rescued and succoured in time. But of this nature and courageous mind was the Consull, that he would himselfe in person be present and manage all affaires, as well those of smallest moment, as also those of greatest weight and consequence: and not onely devise and give direction what was best to bee done, but would himselfe set to his hand, and execute most of the exploits and effect them fully. There was not one amongst them all, that he commaunded with more severitie and rigour, than his owne selfe. In living neerely, in spare feeding, in much watching, in painefull travell, he strived to surpasse and outgoe the meanest common souldiors. And no priviledge challenged he, no advauntage sought he to himselfe  in his whole armie above others, but onely honour and soveraigne commaund.
The Pretor P. Manlius had the more trouble in his war-service, by reason of the Celtiberians, whom (as it hath ben said before) the enemies had levied and hired with their monie. And therfore the Consull being sent unto by the Pretor his letters, led his legions also thither. Being there arrived, (now the Celtiberians and Turdetanes were severally encamped apart one from the other) the Romanes fell presently to maintaine light skirmishes with the Turditanes, and eftsoones charged their corps de guard: and how rashly and inconsiderately soever they began the game, yet they ever went away winners. As for the Celtiberians, the Consull sent certaine Tribunes or knight marshals unto them to emparle, giving them in charge to make them an offer and tender unto them the choice of three conditions. First, if they could be content to arraunge themselves  to serve under the Romanes, and to receive at their hands double wages to that they bargained for with the Turditanes. Secondly, whether they would be willing to go their waics home under safe conduct and publicke securitie, besides that their siding with the Romane enemies should not be laid to their charge, nor bring them within the compasse of any daunger. Thirdly,

 if they had more mind to warre, then, that they should set downe some time and place, when and where they might come to an issue, and trie it out in a set battaile. The Celtiberians required to take a day for to consider better upon these points. So they assembled togither in counsell, with great trouble and confusion, by reason that some Turdetanes were thrust in among them; upon which occasion, they might worse grow to any conclusion. Now albeit uncertein it was, whether there would be any warre or peace with the Celtiberians, yet the Romanes gathered their provision out of the territorie and borroughes of their enemies, like as in time of peace: yea and more than that, they entred oftentimes within their fortifications and defences as if there had bene some common traffike and commerce agreed betweene them, by way of private truce. The Consull seeing he could not draw the enemie to a battaile, first led certeine  companies lightly appointed with banners displaied, to raise booties in one quarter of the countrie, which as yet was free, and had not tasted of the wars: but afterwards hearing that all the bag and baggage and other cariage of the Celtiberians was left at Gigoncae in Andalusia, Motali. Saguntia, he set forward thither to give an assault to the towne. But seeing that nothing would move and stir them, he paied not onely his owne souldiours their wages, but also the Pretours armie their due, and leaving the maine hoast in the Pretour his campe, himselfe returned to the river Ebre, accompanied only with seven cohorts. With these forces, as small as they were, he woon certain towns, and there revolted unto him the Sedetanes, Ausetanes, and Suessetanes. The Lacetanes (a nation living out of the way after a savage manner within the wilds and woods) kept still in armes, not only upon a naturall and inbred wildnesse, but also upon a guiltie conscience, in that whiles the Consull  and his armie was emploied in the Turdulois warre, they had made suddaine rodes and incursions into the lands of their Allies, and pitifully wasted the same. And therefore the Consull advaunced forward to assault their towne, and led against it not onely his owne cohorts and bands, but also the youth of his Allies, who had good cause to bee angrie, and to oppose themselves unto them. The towne which they inhabited, lay out in length, but was nothing so wide and large in breadth: and within one halfe mile or lesse, hee pitched downe his ensignes, and planted himselfe. There hee left behind a guard of choise companies, and streightly charged them not to stirre out of that place, before hee came unto them himselfe. The rest of his forces hee led about unto the farther side beyond the towne. Of all the aid-souldiours that he had about him, the greatest number were the youth of the Suessetanes, and those he commaunded to approch the  wall for to give the assault. The Lacetanes, when they took knowledge of their armor and colours, calling to mind how often they had overrun them at their pleasure, and wasted their lands without checke or empeachment, how many and sundrie times they had in raunged battell discomfited and put them to flight, all at once set open the gate, and fallied out upon them. The Suessetanes were so little able to sustaine the forcible charge of their onset; that they hardly could abide their very shout and first crie.
The Cos. seeing now, that come to passe indeed which he suspected would be so, rode a gallop upon the spurre to those said cohorts of his owne that were left on the other side under the towne, and taking them with him in great hast, whiles all the townesmen were spread abroad in following the chase after the Suessetanes, he led them into the towne at a place where there was no noise, no stirring, and not a man to be seene; and made himselfe maister of all,  before the Lacetanes were returned backe: but within a while hee received them to mercie upon their submission: who, poore men, had nothing to yeeld and loose but their bare armor and weapons. Immediately he followed the traine of this victorie, and led his forces against the hold or strong towne of Vergium. This was a receptacle and place of sure receit for certaine rovers and theeves, who from thence used to make many rodes into the peaceable parts of that province. The principal and cheefe person of Vergium quit the place, and be took himselfe unto the Consull, and began to excuse as well himselfe as the townesmen, saying, that the governement of the towne and the state thereof lay not in their hands. For why? these robbers after they were once received in among them, seized themselves wholly of that strength, and had all at their commaund. The Consull willed him to goe home againe, and to devise and forge some likely and probable  cause why he had been absent and out of the way; with this charge and direction that when he saw him approch under the walls, and the robbers aforesaid wholly amused and occupied in defence thereof, then hee should remember to joine with the rest of his part and faction, and be possessed of the fortresse and keepe of the towne. This put he in practice and execution accordingly. So whiles the Romanes of one side skaled the walls, and they on the other side had taken

the fortresse, these barbarians were sodainly at once surprised with a two-fold feare before and  behind. The Consull when he had gotten the place into his owne hands, gave order, that all those who were gotten into the castle and held it, should remaine free, themselves and all their kinred, and likewise enjoy their goods. The rest of the Vergetanes he commaunded the Treasurer to sell and make money of them. As for the Rovers, they suffred according to their deserts. After he had set the province in quiet, he laid great tributes and imposts upon the mines of yron and silver: which being once ordeined and established, the whole province grew in welth and riches, every day more than other. For these his exploits atchieved in Spaine, the LL. of the Senat decreed, that there should be a solemne procession at Rome, to endure for three dayes.
The same winter, L. Valerius Flaccus the other Consull, fought in Fraunce a set field with the power of the Boians, neere the forest of Litania, and wan the victorie. And by report, there  were eight thousand Gaules there slaine: the rest abandoned the warre, and slipt every one into their owne wickes and villages. The rest of the winter the Cos. kept his armie at Placentia and Cremona about the Po, and repaired in these cities whatsoever had bene decaied and demolished during the warres.
The affaires in Italie and Spaine standing in these termes: when T. Quintius had so passed the winter in Greece, that setting aside the Aetolians (who neither had bene recompenced according to the hope that they conceived of the victorie, nor yet could long time like of repose) all Greece throughout in generall enjoying the blessing of peace and libertie, flourished and mainteined their state exceeding well, admiring no lesse the temperance, justice, and moderation of the Romane Generall after victorie, than his valour and prowesse in warre: there was  an Act of the Senat of Rome brought and presented unto him, importing thus much, That warre was determined against Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedemonians. Which when Quintius had red, he published and proclaimed a generall Diet or Counsell at Corinth against a certein day, when and where all the States associats should assemble by their delegates and embassadors.
Now when there was met together from all parts a frequent number of princes and great personages, in such fort, that the very Aetolians also were not absent, Quintius used unto them this or the like speech. The Romanes and Greekes have warred against king Philip as yee well know; and as with one mind and common counsell they have so done, so either of them had severall quarels unto him, and private causes and occasions by themselves to take armes. For Philip had broken the league and amitie with us Romanes, one while by sending aid and maintenance  to the Carthaginians our enemies: otherwhiles by assailing our allies in these parts: and to you-wards he hath so demeaned himselfe, that albeit we could forget and put up all the wrongs that he hath done unto us, the very injuries that yee have received at his hands, minister sufficient cause unto us to warre against him for your sake. As for this dayes consultation, it resteth wholly in your selves. For, this I propound unto you, Whether your wil is to suffer Argos (which as yee know your selves Nabis the tyrant holdeth) to remaine still under him in obedience: or whether you thinke it meete and reason, that a most noble and auncient citie as it is, seated in the very hart of Greece, should be reduced unto libertie, to enjoy the same condition and state wherein other cities of Peloponnesus and Greece do stand. This consultation I say, as you well see, entierly toucheth you and your good, and concerneth us Romanes no farther than thus, that  by the servitude of that one onely citie, wee can not have the full and entier glorie of setting Greece wholly in libertie. But if you regard not the state of that citie, and are not moved with the example thereof and the danger, for feare the contagion of this mischiefe spred farther: we for our parts are content, and take all in good worth, and will not set you downe and teach you what to do. Only I require your advise in this point, minding to resolve upon that, which the major part of you shall cary by voyces. After the Romane Generall had ended his speech, all the rest began to deliver their opinions. And when the deputed delegate or agent for the Atheniens had magnified and extolled as highly as possibly he could, the good demerits of the Romans toward Greece, yeelding them great thanks, that upon their request they had graunted their aid against Philip, and without any petition at all, offred their help and succour against  Nabis the tyrant; and seemed therewith to be offended and displeased at some, who neverthelesse in their talke and speeches found fault and carped at these so great favours and deserts; yea and spake badly of future events, whereas it behoved them rather to acknowledge and confesse how much they were bound and beholden alreadie to the Romanes for good turnes past: it well

 appeared that he pointed out directly the Aetolians, and girded at them.
Wherupon Alexander, a principall and chiefe man of their nation, inveighed first against the Atheniens, who having bene in times past the head captaines and mainteiners of freedome, betrayed now the common cause, for love of their owne private flatteries. Moreover he complained that the Achaeans, who first served Philip in his warres, and at the last (when they saw him downe the wind and fortune to frowne upon him) fell away like disloyall traitours, and possessed themselves of Corinth to their owne behoofe, practising also to compasse and gaine unto them the citie of Argos. As for the Aetolians, the first and principall enemies of Philip, and alwayes allies and friends to the Romanes, howsoever they had expressely and precisely covenanted in the league, to enjoy their townes and tetritories, after Philip was vanquished, were notwithstanding put besides Echinum  and Pharfalus. He charged the Romanes with fraud and faiterie, who pretending an outward shew, a vaine title and colour of libertie, held the cities of Chalcis and Demetrias with strong garisons: and yet when Philip made some stay and hasting to withdraw and void from thence his armed guards, they were ever wont to object and say, that Greece would never be in freedome, so long as Chalcis, Demetrias and Corinth were in his hand: and finally he alleadged against them, that under pretense of Argos and Nabis, they sought occasion to remaine still in Greece and keepe their armies there. Let them (quoth he) transport their legions once into Italie, the Aetolians would then undertake and promise, that Nabis should remove his garison out of Argos, upon composition and with good will, or else they would compell him by force and armes, to be over-ruled by the puissance of all Greece united together in one generall consent.  By this vaine bable of his, he roused Aristenus first, the Pretor of the Achaeans, who spake in this wife. Never will Iupiter Opt. Max. quoth he, and Queene Iuno the patronesse of Argos, suffer that citie to be the recompence or prize betweene the Lacedemonian Tyrant, and these pilling and theeving Aetolians: to be brought to this hard point and these termes of extremitie, as to susteine more miserie and calamitie when it is recovered by us, than when it was woon and taken by him. O Quintius, it is not the sea lying between us and them that can defend us from these robbers. What will then become of us, in case they should make themselves a fort and castle of strength in the mids of Peloponnesus? Nought have they of the Greekes but their language, like as they carie nothing of men but their shape and visage. For looke into their manners, their fashions and behaviour, they are more rude and cruell than any barbarians,  nay they are more savage than the most wild and ravenous beasts that be. We beseech you therefore o Romanes, both to recover Argos out of the hands of Nabis, and also to establish the State of Greece in such sort, that ye leave these parts also safe and secure enough from the robberies and theeving hostility of these Aetolians. The Romane Generall Quintius, seeing them of all sides to blame and rebuke the Aetolians, said that he would have answered them himselfe, but that he perceived them all so hatefully bent against them, that more needfull it was that they were to be appeased, than farther provoked. And therefore holding himselfe satisfied and contented with that opinion which was conceived of the Romanes and Aetolians, he said, that he would demaund what their pleasure was to advise, concerning the warre against Nabis, unlesse he rendred Argos to the Achaeans? And when they all were of one mind to make warre, he  exhorted them to send aids proportionably to the power and strength of each state and citie. To the Aetolians he sent an embassadour, more to discover and lay open their intention (as it fell out accordingly) than upon any hope he had to obteine ought at their hands. Vnto the Provost Marshals of the camp, he gave commandement to send for the armie from Elatia.
About this time, when the Embassadours of king Antiochus came unto him to treat about alliance and a league, he answered, That hee could say nothing to them nor determine of that point in the absence of those Delegates abovesaid; and therefore they were to repaire unto the Senat of Rome. Then, himselfe in person prepared to make an expedition and voyage against Argos, with those forces which were brought from Elatia. And when hee was about Cleonae, Aristaenus the Pretour, with 10000 foot of Achieans and 1000 horse met him in the way: and not farre from thence, they joyned both their forces and encamped togither. The next day after,  they came downe into the plaine of Argos, and chose a place to fortifie and lie in leaguer about foure miles from Argos. Now was Pythagoras the captaine of the Lacedemonian garrison, who had both married the tyrant his daughter, and was his wives brother besides. This Pythagoras against the comming of the Romanes, had fortified with strong guards both the

castles (for two there are within Argos) and other places, which either had easie accesse or were  suspected. But as he was imployed in these provisions and preparatious, he could not dissimule and hide the feare which this arrivall and approach of the Romanes strake into him: and beside this forraine terrour from without, there happened also an intestine mutinie within. There was one Damocles and Argive, (a young gentleman of more spirit and courage than wisdome and discretion) who at the first by interposing a mutuall and reciprocall oth, had conferred with certaine persons of good sufficiencie, about expelling the garrison: but whiles he studied to strengthen the conspiracie and his owne side, hee was not well assured of their fidelitie, and could not judge which of them were true and which not. As he talked upon a time with his complices, the captaine of the garrison sent for him by one of his guard; whereupon hee perceived, that his complot was revealed: hee exhorted therefore the conspiratours that were in the way, to take  armes with him, rather than to die by torture upon the racke: and so with some few about him he marched forward into the market place, crying estsoones aloud, That as many as loved the safetie of the common-weale should follow him as their head and maintainer of their libertie: but no man mooved he with his speech to go after him and take his part; for no hope saw they of any succour at all neere at hand: so farre off were they from making good account of a sure guard of defence. And as hee spake those words, the Lacedemonians were come round about him, and killed both him and his fellowes. After this, were others also apprehended; the more part of them were slaine, and some few cast into prison. A great number the night following, slid downe the wall by ropes, and fled to the Romanes. These assured the Romanes, that if their armie had bene neare the gates, the commotion and conspiracie aforesaid would have taken effect: and in case their campe approched nearer, the Argives would not be in quiet, but make some insurrection: whereupon Quintius sent out the footmen lightly appointed, togither with the horsemen; who skirmished with the Lacedemonians about Cylarabis (a publicke schoole and place of exercise about a quarter of a mile out of the citie) who were sallied out at the gate, and without any great difficultie chased them within the towne: and in that verie place where the conflict was, the Romane Generall encamped. One day he spent in escouting an espiall, whether any new trouble and uprores arose among them within the citie. But when hee perceived once that they were all amort for feare, he assembled a counsel to take advise, Whether he were best to give the assault upon Argos, or no? All the heads of Greece (except Aristaenus) agreed with one accord, that since there was no other cause of war elswhere, it should begin there especially. Quintius in no case would like of that course, but willingly he gave eare with evident approbation unto Aristaenus, as he discoursed and reasoned against the general opinion and consent of them all: and over and besides added this of himselfe, That considering the warre was enterprised and taken in hand in the behalfe of the Argives against the tyrant, there was nothing lesse beseeming and more without sence, than to leave the enemie himselfe, and to affaile and batter the poore citie of Argos. For his part hee would fight at the head, even against the Lacedemonians and their tyrant, the principall cause of this warre. Then having dissolved the councell, he sent certaine cohorts lightly appointed to purvey store of graine. As much as could be found ripe in those parts was cut, mowed, and reaped down immediatly and laid up: al that was green they trampled under foot and spoiled, that the enemies soon after might have no good thereof. So he  dislodged and remooved from thences and having passed over the mountaine Parthenius, at three daies end he encamped in the territorie of Caryae neare to Tegea. In which place he expected the aids of his allies before hee would invade the territorie of the enemies. From Philip there came a thousand and five hundred Macedonians, and of Thessalians, fortie horse. The Romane Generall staied not now for succours of men (where of hee had sufficient and plentie) but for his provision of victuals, which he had commaunded the townes bordering neare hand to furnish him withall. Besides, there came great forces by sea, and met him there: for by this time was Lucius Quintius arrived with fortie faile from Leucas: also eighteene covered ships of Rhodes. And now also was Eumenes the king, about they lands Cyclades, with ten close hatched and decked ships, thirtie gallions, with other smaller vessels among of sundrie forts. Likewise  of Lacedemonians that were exiled and banished persons, there were verie many; who, chased and driven out by the oppression and wrongfull dealing of their tyrants, repaired now into the Romane campe, in hope to recover their native countrey againe. Now a great many had beene expulsed in divers and sundrie ages, since time that the tyrans first usurped rule, and were possessed

 of Lacedaemon. The chiefe of these exiled persons was one Agosipolis, a man to whome by right of descent and linage, the inheritance of the kingdome of Lacedaemon appertained. Hee whiles how as but an infant, happened to be expelled by Lycurgus after the death of Cleomenes, who was the first tyrant at Lacedaemon.
The tyrant beset thus round about with warres threatning both from sea and land, and destitute in manner of all hope, (considering the proportion of his forces to the power of his enemies:) yet neverthelesse neglected not to wage war, but levied out of Creta one thousand more (even the chosen flower of all their youth) to the other thousand that he had from thence alreadie. He had besides of mercenarie souldiours three thousand in armes: also ten thousand of his owne subjects and citizens of Lacedaemon, togither with those that hee had taken out of the  boroughs and villages in the countrey. Moreover, he fortified the citie with trench and mure. And that there might arise no trouble and sturre within the towne, he held the spirits of men in awe with feare of sharp and rigorous punishments. And for as much as he could not hope nor imagine that they desired and wished his good and safetie, for that he held some citizens in suspicion and jealousie: after he had brought forth all his forces into the plaine, which they call l. a running race. Dromos, he commaunded the Lacedemonians to assemble togither without any armour and weapons, to an audience; and when they were assembled, hee environed them with his armed guard. And after some few remonstrances by way of a short preamble, Why they ought to hold him excused at such a time, if he feared every thing, and made all sure as well as he could: considering withall, it was expedient even for them also (as many as the present state of the world  might bring in suspition) to be kept short for being able to execute any attempt, rather than be surprised in the mids of their practises and complots, and so be punished accordingly: even for this cause (quoth hee) I will have certaine persons in safe custodie and durance, untill such time as the tempest be overblowen which now is comming. And when the enemies be once repulsed, (from whome lesse daunger there will be, in case domesticall treasons may be prevented) then incontinently will I enlarge them and set them at liberty. This said, he commanded the names to be called of fourescore or therabout of the principall of the youth; and as every one of them answered to his name, he clapt him up fast in prison: and the next night following, murdered them every one. After this, certaine Ilotes (these were they who ever of old time were the Burghers and Villagiers, a kind of peasants and country kerns) were accused to have intended  to flie unto the enemie and to band with him who likewise were whipped and scourged throughout all the streets, and then put to death. By the fearefull example of this crueltie, the courages of the common sort were well cooled and abated, yea and so astonied, that they durst not once quetch nor give attempt of any new designments tending to change and alteration. His forces he kept within his strength and places of defence, for neither thought hee himselfe strong enough to enter the field and fight a set battaile, nor durst abandon the citie, seeing the minds of men so wavering, and their affections so unconstant.
Quintius having made his provision and set all things in good order, departed from his standing camp, and the second day came to Sellasia upon the river Oenus: in which very place Antigonus sometime king of the Macedonians, strucke a battell (men say) with Cleomenes the tyrant  of the Lacedaemonians. And there, having intelligence, that from thence he was to mount up an hard ascent and narrow passage, he set a short compasse through the mountains, having sent before certaine men to levell the ground and make the way even, and so gat into a large and broad port-gate, untill he came to the river Eurotas, which runneth in manner hard under the walls of the citie of Sparta: where, as the Romanes were pitching their tents; even as Quintius himselfe with the horsemen and light vaunt-courriers gone before, the aid-souldiours of the tyrant charged upon them: who looking for nothing lesse, because no man had encountred them al the way as they marched, but passed on in their journey as in a peaceable countrey, were much troubled and affrighted herewith. This feare of theirs continued a good time, while the horsemen called unto the footmen, and they againe unto the horsemen; and both the one sort and the other trusted  in themselves but little or nothing at all. At length the standards of the legions with their ensignes came forward; and were within sight, and so soon as the companies of the vauntguard advaunced soorth to fight, they who erewhile teirified others, were driven in fearefull hast themselves into the citie. The Romanes being retired so far from the wall, as that they were without dartshot, stood a while raunged in battell array. But after that they saw none of the enemies

come abroad against them, returned to their leaguer. The next day after Quintius tooke his way  and marched with his armie in order of battell along the towne side, neere unto the river, hard at the foot of the hill Maenalus. The companies of the legionarie footmen led the march in the ^^untguard, the light footmen and the horsemen followed in the rereward, and flanked the rest. Nabis kept within the walls his mercenarie souldiours (in whom he reposed greatest confidence) arraunged under their ensignes, and in readinesse to fight, purposing to charge the backe of his enemies. And the arrierguard of the Romanes was not so soone passed by, but they fallied out of the towne at sundrie places at once, with as tumultuous a noise as they made the day before. Appius Claudius had the leading of the rereward, who having prepared beforehand the hearts of his souldiours, and advertised them to be prest and readie for what occurrent soever might happen, presently turned the ensignes, and set a compasse with the whole armie to make head against  the enemies. Whereupon there ensued a hote sight which endured a good time, as if two armies had directly encountred one another. In the end, the souldiours of Nabis began to recule and flie: in which flight of theirs they had made lesse hast, and better saved themselves, but that the Achaeans who were acquainted well with the ground, and knew the coasts of the countrey, hotely followed the chase: these made a soule carnage and butcherie among them; and the most part, such as were dispersed here and there in their flight, they disarmed. Then Quintius encamped neete unto Amycla, and having harried and wasted all the territorie round about the citie (which places were well peopled and very pleasant:) when he saw no enemies issue out at the citie gates, heremoved his campe hard to the river Eurotas. From whence he made excursions, wasted all the vale lying under the hill Taigetus, and the lands butting and adjoining close  to the sea.
Much about the same time L. Quintius made himselfe maister of the townes, situate on the sea side: some yeelded willingly, others for feare or perforce. And being afterwards advertised, that the towne Gyttheum served for a place of safe retreat and refuge unto the Lacedaemonians in all their exploits and service at sea, and that the Romanes lay encamped not far from the sea side; hee resolved to assaile it with all forcible meanes. This towne at that time was very strong, well peopled with citizens and other inhabitants, and sufficiently furnished with all warlike provision and munition. And in very good time it fell out, that as Quintius was entred unto this difficult enterprise, king Eumenes and the Rhodian fleet arrived. A mightie number of marriners and sea-servitours, gathered out of three Armadaes, within few daies made and finished all engines  and fabrickes, which were to assault a citie so well fortified both by sea and land. Now was the towne wall broken downe with the undermining of the tortues, now was the wall shaken by the push of the ram, and with all there was one tower that by continuall batterie was overthrown, and with the fall thereof, all the wall that stood of each side, came tumbling downe and lay along. And the Romanes endevoured at one time to enter the towne, both from the haven (where the passage was more plaine and easie) to the end, that the enemies might abandon the defence of the more open place; and also at the breach made in the wall: and they missed but very little of entrance there where they entended, but the hope they conceived of yeelding the cittie, which anone was crossed againe, and turned to nothing, staied their violence and heat of assault. Dexagoridas and Gorgopas governed the towne then, in equall authoritie. Dexagoridas had dispatched  a courrier to the Romane lieutenant, to signifie that hee would betray the towne: and when the time and place of execution of this designement was agreed upon between them, the traitour was killed by Gorgopas: by occasion whereof, the citie was the better defended with more carefull heed by him alone; yea, and the assault thereof had been more difficult, but that Titus Quintius came to succour and helpe with foure thousand chosen souldiours. Hee was no sooner discovered with an armie arraunged in battell array from the brow and top of the hill that is not farre distant from the towne; whiles L. Quintius withall from another side followed the assault with his ordinance and artilleric both by sea and land, but Gorgopas then began himselfe to despaire in very deed, and was driven perforce to take that very course, which in another he had punished by death: and upon composition that he might depart and have away with him those soldiors  which he had in garison, he delivered up the citie to Quintius.
Before that Gyttheum was rendered, Pythagoras left as captaine at Argos, leaving the guard and defence of the citie unto the charge of Timocrates of Pellenae, came with a thousand waged souldiours, and two thousand Argives unto Nabis at Lacedaemon. And Nabis like as at the first

 arrivall of the Romane fleet, and the surrender withall of the townes standing by the sea side, was much affrighted, so hee had recovered againe some little hope and was well quieted in mind, so long as Gyttheum held out still, and his garison within the towne kept their owne. But after he heard once, that it also was yeelded unto the Romanes, and lost; seeing no hope left by land side, which was wholly possessed by the enemies, and that he was altogether shut up from the sea, hee thought it best to yeeld unto fortune. And first hee sent an herault into the campe, to know whether the enemies would permit and suffer him to send his embassadors unto them. Which being graunted, Pythagoras repaired unto the Generall with no other charge and commission, but only to request, that the tyrant might parle with the Romane Generall. Hereupon the Councell was assembled: and generally opined it was, that there should be graunted unto him a conference; insomuch,  as both time and place was agreed upon and appointed. Now when they were come to the hils standing in the middest of that quarter, with some small companies of souldiours attending on either side upon them; they left their cohorts behind them, standing in guard, within the open view and fight of both parts: and then Nabis came downe with a certain chosen guard for his bodie; and Quintius accompanied with his brother, Eumenes the king, Sobilaus the Rhodian, and Aristhenus the Pretor of the Athaeans, with some few knight Marshals and Colonels. And then the tyrant being put to his choise, whether he would speake first, or heare another, began his speech in this wise.
If I could have be thought my selfe (o Quintius,The Oration of Nabis. and you all that are here present) and imagined what the cause should be, that you either proclaimed or made warre first against me, I would  have attended the issue of my fortune with silence.
But now I could not have that mastery and commaund of my selfe to forbeare, but that before I perish, I would needs know the reason and cause of my ruine and overthrow. Certes, if ye were such men as the Carthaginians are reported to be (with whome there is no regard of truth, no trust and securitie in covenants of societie and alliance) I would not then marvell at all, if you made small reckoning, and cared but little what measure yee offered unto me. But now, when I behold and advise you well, I see you are Romanes, whose manner is to entertaine most duly and precisely the observation of holy rites and divine religion, and the faithfull keeping of humane league and alliance. When I consider and looke into my selfe, I hope and think verify that I am one, with whom in generall, as well as with the rest of the Lacedaemonians ye are linked by vertue of a most auncient league: and in particular  regard of my selfe, a private amitie and societie hath been lately renued by the warre with Philip. But peradventure some man will say, That I have broken and overthrowne the same first, in that I hold the citie of the Argives. And how shall I be able to answere this, and excuse my selfe? Shall I plead to the substance of the matter, or to the circumstance of the time? The thing itself presenteth unto me a two-fold plea for my defence. For being called by the inhabitants themselves of the citie, who offered the towne unto me, I received it at their hands, and in no wise seized upon it by force: I received it, I say, when it sided and took part with Philip, before it was comprised within your league. As for the time, it justifieth and cleareth me also and my doings. For even then when as I was possessed of Argos, I was allied and associate with you in good accord: and in our covenants, we articled and capitulated to send aids unto you for your warres, and  not to withdraw the garison from Argos. And verily, in this difference and question about Argos, I have the vantage, as well in regard of the equitie of the fact (in that I received a citie not of yours but of your enemies, received it I say, not surprised by force, but offred and delivered willingly) as also by your owne confession, for that in the conditions of the association agreed betweene us, ye left Argos free unto me. But it may be that the name of Tyrant hurteth me: and some of mine actions condemne me much, and namely, that I set slaves free, and devide lands to the poore commons. As for the name, thus much I am able to answere: that, such as I am, better or worse, still I am the very same man, and no other than I was when you, even you o Quintius entred alliance with me: then, I remember well, I was called King among you: and now I see I am termed a Tyrant. And therefore if I my selfe had changed the title and stile of my dignitie  and government, I must have yeelded a reason and accoumpt of my levitie and inconstancie: but seeing you have altered it, ye ought to answere for your vanitie. Now as concerning the multitude, so augmented by the enfranchising of slaves; as touching the land also, parted and distributed among the poore and needie; I can mainteine and justifie my doings herein, and protect me under the defence and priviledge of the very time. For all these things, be they as they be

may, I had done alreadie, when ye made a league and covenant with me, and received aids at  my hand in the warre against Philip. But in case I had done so at this very present, I stand not upon this, whether I either had offended you or broken your amitie, but thus much I averre, that done I had according to the custome and fashion of our auncestours. And ye must not thinke to square and trie the practise of Lacedemon according to the rule and squire of your lawes and ordinances. For, to let passe many other things (and needlesse it is to compare particulars:) yee choose your gentlemen or men of armes according to their revenue: according to revenue yee choose likewise the footmen. Your will is that some few should excell in welth and power, and the commons be subject and vassals unto them. Our Law-giver thought not good that the Common-wealth should be ruled by a few, whom you call a Senate; nor that one or two States should excell and have preeminence in the citie; but he thought thatin the equalitie of welth  and worship, there would be many more to beare armes for their countrey. I have made a longer discourse I confesse, than the ordinarie and naturall (...) (...) and that (...) or ^ La(...) The (...) of (...) brevitie of our speech in these parts will beare. And I might have knit all up in one word and said, that I had done nothing after I was entred into amitie with you, wherewith you needed to have taken any offence and bene displeased. Then the Romane Generall made answere to these points in this manner. No friendship nor association at all have we made with you, but with Pelops the true and lawfull king of the Lacedemonians: whereof, I must needs say that the tyrants also who afterwards held the seigniorie and soveraigntie of Lacedemon, have usurped the right, and enjoyed the benefit during the time that we were otherwise employed, and wholy busied, one while in the Punick warres, another whiles in the Gaules, and evermore in one or other: like as you also have done in this last  Macedonian warre. For what was lesse unsitting and more absurd, than for us who waged warre against Philip for the libertie of Greece, to conclude amitie with a tyrant? and such a tyrant, as of all others that ever have bene is most cruell, most violent and outrageous with his owne subjects? And considering that we were entred into the course and traine of setting all Greece at libertie, albeit you had not possessed your selfe of Argos by covin, nor held the same by force, yee it behooved us to restore Lacedaemon also to her auncient libertie, and to settle her in her owne lawes, whereof erewhile you would seeme to make mention, as if you had followed the steps of Lycurgus. Shall we make care and take the paines to void the garisons of Philip out of lassus and Bargillae: and when we have so done, leave to be troden under your feete, Argos and Lacedemon, two most noble cities, the two lights as it were in times past of all Greece; which remaining  still in servitude and slaverie, might deface the rest of our glorie, and marre the title that we aime at, of Saviours and Deliverers of Greece? But you say, that the Argives friended Philip and tooke his part. We are content well enough, that you should not trouble your selfe, and be angrie for our sake. For we know for certein, that this was the fault of two or three persons at most, and not of the whole citie: and we know as well, that it was not agreed in any publick counsell, that you and your garison were sent for and received into the Castle. As for the Thessalians, the Phoceans and Locrians, they sided with Philip, we wot right well, by a generall consent of all: and yet when we enfranchised all Greece besides, we also set them at libertie. What think you then should we do in regard of the Argives, who are innocent for any publick counsell intended against us? You said that you were blamed and charged sore for setting bondslaves free. No small objections these are, I assure you, nor of little importance. But what are they in comparison of other bad parts and heinous facts, committed by you and your followers day by day, one in the head of another? Graunt but libertie of an Assembly Generall either at Argos or Lacedemon, wherein the people may speake their minds freely, and what they know by you without empeachment: if you would learne the truth indeede, and heare the particulars of a most proud and unsupportable dominion and tyrannie. And to let all old matters go by. What a bloudie massacre committed this sonne in law of yours Pythagoras, even almost within my very sight in Argos? nay, what a carnage and butchery made you your selfe, even when I was welneere within the marches of Lacedaemon? But come on: those persons whom in a generall assembly you caused to be attached, and promised in the presence of all the citizens to keepe them safe  and sure in ward: come on, I say, commaund them to be brought forth now bound as they be; that their poore fathers and mothers may understand they are alive, whom they have mourned for so much, without cause, as if they had bene dead. But you will say, Set case all this be true, what is that to you Romans? Dare you in deede speake out and say so much to those that deliver

 Greece and set it free? to those I say, that for the freedome thereof have passed the seas, have warred both by land and sea? And yet all this while (say you) I have not directly and truly wronged you, nor properly infringed and broken your friendship and amitie. No have you? How often would you have me to convince you of the contrary? But I will not use many words and much circumstance, but come to the very catch and point of the matter. What be the things I pray you, wherewith friendship is commonly broken? I take it they are these two especially, namely, if you take my friends for your foes; and joyne your selfe to my enemies. You have done both the one and the other: for you have taken by force and armes Messena, a cittie received into our societie and alliance by the very same conditions and covenants that Lacedemon was; you I say our allie, have forced a cittie allied unto us. Againe with Philip our enemie, you have  not only concluded amitie, but (God save all) contracted alliance and affinitie by meanes of Philocles a Colonell and commaunder of his: and making warre against us, you have kept the seas all about Malea with your men of warre and rovers: and I thinke I may safely say, you have taken prisoners, and killed more Romane citizens than Philip himselfe. And the whole sea coast of Macedonie hath lesse infested our ships that use to bring provision unto our armies, and bene more safe for passage than the promontorie and cape of Malea. Do you for beare therefore to make such vaunt of fidelitie: spare you, of all other, to speak of the rights of alliance; and laying off the maske of popular language and civile speech, talke as a tyrant and enemie as you are. Vpon this, An^lenus dealt with Nabis, one while admonishing and advertising him, another while requesting and intreating him, now that the opportunity was offred, to provide for himselfe and his whole  estate: he began to discourse unto him of the Tyrants of all the states confining thereabout one after another by name, who when they had resigned up and laid down their absolute soveraigntie of commaund, and restored libertie to their subjects, passed their old age among their citizens, not only in repose and securitie, but also in great honor and reputation. These words uttered and heard between them too and fro, the night drew on apace and parred the conference. The morrow after Nabis promised, seeing the Romanes would have it so, to quit the cittie Argos, to withdraw his garison from thence, and to deliver again all the captives and fugitive traitors that were under his hands: and if they demaunded any more of him, he requested that they would set it downe in writing, that he might consult thereof with his friends. So, both the Tyrant had respit and time graunted to take advise, and also Quintius sate in counsell with the principall heads of  his allies what to do. The most part were of opinion to mainteine the warre shall, and to kill the tyrant out of the way; for never would the libertie of Greece be otherwise firme and sure: and better farre had it bene, never to have entred into armes with him, than being once begun, to give it over. And he will, say they, bee greater and more strong hereafter, as if his tyrannicall government were approved, and no doubt he would vouch the people of Rome for author of his unjust rule and dominion, and will induce and incite by his example many in other free States and cities, to lye in wait to worke meanes to overthrow the libertie of citizens, and to bring them into thraldome and bondage. The Generall, of himselfe, was more affected and inclined to peace: for hee saw, that if the enemie were once driven within the walls, there was no  way but to lye in siege against the citie, and that would require long tract of time: for as much as it was not Gyttheum (and yet that was betrayed and rendred, and not forced by assault) but Lacedaemon, a most strong towne both for men and munition, that they were to lay siege unto and assault. And whereas the onely hope was, that when they approched with the armie, there might some dissention and sedition have risen among themselves within: now when as they saw the ensignes in manner advaunced hard to the citie gates, there was not one that mutined or stirred at all. Hee added moreover and said, That Villius the Embassadour newly returned from Antiochus, reported, how all was not found there, not the peace like to continue: and that hee had passed over into Europe with farre greater forces both for land and at sea, than at any time heretofore: and if (quoth hee) the armie should bee wholly employed in the siege of Lacedaemon, what other power have wee to maintaine warre withall against so  puissant and mightie a prince as is Antiochus? These were the remonstrances that openly he gave out; but secretly hee was troubled in mind for feare least a new Consull should come in his place, and have the government of the province of Greece: and so hee should leave unto his successour, the honour of the victorie of a warre commenced by him, and in good forwardnesse. But when hee perceived that his allies were nothing inclined to his waies, notwithstanding

all his contradiction and bending to the contrarie, by making semblant that hee  now drew with them and was of their mind, he woon them all to approve his designment and intention. Well, God speeed our hand (quoth hee:) let us besiege Lacedaemon since yee will needs have it so: but considering that the laying siege unto cities, is a thing as ye well know, that goeth so slowly forward, and oftentimes maketh the assailants sooner wearie than the defendants: you ought even now to cast this account presently with your selves, that wee must lye all winter long about the walls of Lacedaemon. And were there nothing but travell and perill, that during so long time we were to endure, I would exhort and encourage you to suffer and abide the same, with stout bodies and resolute minds. But besides all that, we must be at great cost and expences about fabricks, engins, and instruments of artillerie, requisite to the assault of so great a citie: we must I say be provided of victuals good store against winter, as well to serve us as you. Be well advised therfore (to the end that you should not sodainly in hast huddle up these matters, or after yee are once entred into the action, give over and abandon it with shame) that yee dispatch your letters aforehand every one to the State wherein hee liueth, and found them to the depth, how their hearts serve them, and what strength and forces they have. Of aids and succours I have enough and to spare: but the more in number we are, the more maintenance shall wee need. At this time the territorie of our enemies hath nothing but bare soile and naked ground: and withall, the winter is comming on apace, all which season, carriage (especially farre off) is combrous and hard. This Oration at the first caused them every one to regard and looke homeward to domesticall difficulties and inconveniences, namely, the idlenesse, the envie and backbiting of those which tarie at home, against them that are employed in warfare: the  common libertie (which causeth men of one societie and communaltie hardly to accord and sort togither) the publicke want of treasure, and the niggardise of privat persons, when they are to part with any thing out of their owne purses. And therefore suddainly changing their minds, they put to the discretion of the Romane Generall, to doe and determine what hee thought expedient for the good of the people of Rome and their allies. Whereupon Quintius taking the advise onely of his owne lieutenants and Provost-marshals, engrossed these articles and conditions following, according to which, peace should be concluded with the tyrant. Imprimis, That there be a truce made for the tearme of sixe moneths, betweene Nabis and the Romanes, king Eumenes and the Rhodians. Item, That both T. Quintius and Nabis should immedaitly send Embassadours to Rome, that the peace might be ratified and confirmed by the  authoritie of the Senate. Item, That from that day forward, wherein the conditions put downe in writing should be presented unto Nabis, the truce aforesaid should begin. Item, That within ten daies next after ensuing, all the garrisons quit Argos and the rest of the townes within the territorie of the Argives: and then those pieces to be delivered void and free unto the Romanes. Item, That no slave taken captive in warres, belonging either to the king or to any publicke state or privat person, be had away from those townes: and if any before time had beene carried forth, they should be restored againe duly to their right masters. Item, That Nabis should deliver againe those ships that hee had gotten from the maritime cities, and that himselfe have no vessell at all but onely two gallions, and those to have no more than sixe and twentie ores a peece to direct and rule them. Item, That he render all the rennegate traitors and  captives unto all the cities consederate with the people of Rome, as also make restitution to the Messenians of all their goods againe, that either could be found, or the owners know certainly to be theirs. Item, That he restore to all the banished Lacedemonians their wives and children; but of the wives, so many onely as would be content to follow their husbands: and that none of them should be compelled against their wills to goe with any exiled person. Item, That to as many mercenarie souldiours of Nabis, as were either gone from him into their owne cities or to the Romanes, all their owne goods should be justly and truly delivered againe. Item, That in the yland of Crete he should not be possessed of any one citie: and looke what cities hee then held, hee yeeld them to the Romanes. Item, That hee enter into alliance with no Candiote nor with any other whatsoever, ne yet make warre with them. Item, That he remoove  all the garrisons out of all the cities that himselfe had delivered up, and which had surrendred themselves and all they had, under the protection and obedience of the people of Rome, and not molest them neither by himselfe nor any of his. Item, That he build no towne nor castle, either in his owne land or in any other. Item, That for the more assurance of performing these covenants

 he give five hostages, such as it should please the Romane Generall to choose; and namely, his owne sonne for one of them. Last of all, That he make present paiment of one hundred talents of silver, and fiftie more yeerely untill the tearme of eight yeeres be run out. These articles engrossed, were sent to Lacedaemon, after the campe was remooved nearer to the citie. But nothing well pleased was the tyrant with any of them. Only hee was wnll apaied, that beyond his hope and expectation, there was no mention at all therein of reducing the exiled persons home into the citie. But that which offended and displeased him most was this, that both shipping was taken from him, and also the maritime port townes: for great commoditie he gat by the sea, in scouring the coast from the cape of Malea with his pyrats and men of warre: and besides, the youth and able men of those cities, served his turne verie well to furnish and man  his ships with the verie best souldiours and men of service that were. And albeit he skanned and considered upon these articles in great secrecie with his friends, yet were they all of them divulged abroad and current in every mans mouth: so vaine are these courteours commonly and hardly to be trusted, as in all things else, so especially in keeping of secret counsell. These conditions were controlled and found fault with, no so much by all men in generall, as by each one in particular, as they tooke exceptions against those points that touched and concerned themselves. They that had married the wives of the banished, or were possessed of any part of their substance, chafed and stormed thereat, as if they were to loose and forgoe their owne, and not to render and restore the goods of others. The slaves who had been freed by the tyrants, were now not only to loose the benefits of that freedom, but also to endure harder servitude and bondage  than aforetime; setting before their eyes how they should returne againe into the houses and hands of their old masters, angrie and incensed now against them. The hyred souldiours were malecontent, for that they saw they should loose their pay after peace concluded: and saw full well, that there was no beeing for them in those stares and citties, who hated the tyrants themselves no more than their followers and attendants. At first they muttered and murmured, whispering these things among themselves in their secret meetings and conventicles: afterwards they mutined, and on a suddaine ran and tooke armes. The tyrant seeing the multitude disquieted ynough of themselves with this tumult, assembled the people together. Where, after hee had declared the conditions imposed upon him by the Romanes,  and in every article had untruly put to somewhat of his owne devising, to aggravate all matters and make them seeme more greevous and intollerable, at the rehearsing of every particular the whole assemblie one while cried out, and another while the sundrie parts thereof, set up a note of unter dislike. Then hee asked their opinion what answere they would have him to returne unto those articles, and what to do? They all in manner with one voice accorded and said, that there was no answering of the matter, but that he should plainely goe to war, and make no more ado. And that every man for his owne part (as the usuall manner is of a multitude, when they are together) should take a good heart, and hope the best, saying, that Fortune favoureth Fortitude. The tyrant incited with these their words, seconded them himselfe, and assured them that Antiochus and the Aetolians would take their parts and assist them: and if they did not, yet were they  strong ynough of themselves, and had sufficient meanes to endure the siege. No more talking now nor thinking of peace, but every man was readie to run in hast to his severall quarter, and stand upon their own guard, without any rest or repose from thenceforth. The Romans so soon as they saw some few of them to sallie out of the citie, and to discharge their darts among them, were soone put out of all doubt, that no other remedie there was, but they must to warre againe. After this, there passed certaine light skirmishes foure daies together, at first without any assured issue of good speed, either of the one part or the other: but the first day, after one conflict fought in manner almost of a set battell, certaine Romane souldiors following the chase upon their enemies, and killing them in their flight, entred the cittie at certaine void places, where the wall was not united: for in that order were the wall built of that town in those daies. Quintius then verily, having well bridled and tamed by this terror his enemies for making any more excursions, and  supposing that ther remained no more, but lustily to go to an assault, sent out certain of purpose for to call the mariners and sea-servitours from Gyttheum, while himselfe in person, accompanied with the Provost marshals, rode about the walls to view the situation of the citie. This Sparta in times past stood without murage. And the tyrants of late daies had built walles against the open flattes and plaine fields. The higher ground and of harder accesse, they fortified with strong

corps de guards of armed souldiours, in steed of bulwarkes of defence. When Quintius had sufficiently  considered every corner, hee supposed there was no other way but to invest it round about, and thereupon with all his forces united (which being all together Romane cittizens and Latine allies, foot and horse, land souldiours and sea-servitours one with another, amounted to 50000 fighting men) he compassed and environment the cittie. Some brought skaling ladders, some fire, every man one thing or other, not onely to give an assault, but also to terrifie and amase them: with direction and expresse commaundement, with a loud crie and shout at once in all places to approch the walls, and give the venture upon them; to the end, that the Lacedaemonians affrighted at one instant on every side, might not know which way to turne them, and bee to seeke, where first to make head against the enemies, and in what place to come with succours. Having therefore devided the whole power of his armie into three parts, hee gave the one of them  in charge to assaile that quarter which was called Phoebeum; a second likewise to set upon that which is named Dictynneum, and the third to force the canton Heptagoniae; places all lying open and without a wall. The cittie being thus seized on all sides with so great feare, the tyrant moved and troubled to heare those suddaine outcries and fearefull newes brought unto him by hastie messengers: according as any place stood most in daunger, at the first, either presented himselfe in proper person, or else sent some to helpe but afterwards, seeing the feare so generall, and no one place void of danger, hee was so astonied, that unneath he was able either himselfe to give good direction to others, or to heare theirs. So void was he, and disfurnished of advise and counsell, yea, and be rest of his right wits and senses. The Lacedaemonians at first hand sustained the furious violence of the Romanes in the narrow streights and passages, and at one time in diverse  places, three armies fought on either side: but afterwards, as the heat of the medlie encreased, the service was nothing equall of both parties; for the Lacedaemonians discharged shot, from which the Romane souldiours easily saved themselves, by meanes of their large targuets, and withall much thereof either fell short and besides, or els so feebly flung from them, that little or no harm they could doe. For by reason of the streightnesse of the place, and the multitude so thronged and thrust together, they had not onely no space to take their run, when they should launce their darts (the best meanes of all other to enforce them) but not so much as sure footing, and at ease, to drive and levell them with all their strength. Insomuch, as of all the darts and javelines which were directly shot a front them, none at all pierced to their bodies, and very few so much as stuck in their bucklers. Marry some happened to be wounded from the higher places, by those that stood  neere unto them, and about their sides. And anone as they advaunced forward, they chaunced to bee hurt, not onely with arrowes and darts from off the houses, but also with tiles and slates are they were aware. But afterwards, they covered their heads with their targuets, which they set so close united together one under the other, seatherwise, that not onely there was no place of enterance for the darts throwne and cast at randon afar, no nor so much as any roome for a weapon to get betweene, levelled though it were, and aimed neere at hand; so as under this targuetfence they approched neerer and neerer in safetie. At the first the narrow and streight avenues filled with the throng both of themselves and also of the enemies so thrust and crouded together staied them for a while; but afterwards, when they had by little and little gathered upon the enemies, and put them back, and were come into a larger and more spatious street of the citie, then  their force and violence could not possibly bee endured any longer. Now when the Lacedaemonians turned their backes, and fled apace to gaine the higher places for their vantage, Nabis verily for his part trembling and quaking, as if the citie had ben quite lost, looked about him on every side, which way himselfe might escape and save his life. But Pythagoras as in all things else hee performed the devoire and part of a courageous captain, so he was the only cause that the town was not lost: for hee commaunded to set fire on the houses standing next to the wall, which in the minute of an houre burned out on a light flame, as being set forward by the helpe of those, who otherwise were wont to quench the like skarefires: whereupon the houses came ratling and tumbling downe upon the Romans heads, and not onely the tileshards, but also the timber pecces halfe burnt, fell upon the armed souldiours, the flame spread still farre and neere, and the smuddering  smoke put them in feare of more daunger than was. And therefore, as well those Romans who were without the citie in the hotest of their assault, reculed from the walls, as also those that were entered alreadie, for feare least by the fire behind them they should be separated from their fellowes, retired themselves. Quintius also seeing how the case stood, caused to found the retreat,

 and so being recalled, they returned out of the cittie which they had as good as woon, into the camp. And Quintius conceiving more hope by the feare of the enemies, than of the thing it selfe and the service done, never gave over for three daies to terrifie them, partly by skirmishing, and partly by intrenching and stopping up certeine quarters, that they might have no passage at all to flie and shift for themselves. They tyrant constrained at length with these dangers menaced, sent Pythagoras again as an Orator unto Quintius. But he at first rejected him, and commaunded him to avant out of the campe: yet in the end, after he had made most humble supplication, and cast himselfe prostrate at his feet, he gave him audience. The beginning of his speech was this, that he yeelded all to the discretion and former award of the Romanes. But seeing that he gained nothing thereby, and that his words took no effect, they grew at length to this point, That upon the  same capitulations which few daies before were exhibited up in writing, a truce should be made, and hereupon was both the money, and also the hostages received.
Whiles the tyrant was besieged and assailed, there came post upon post to Argos, that Lacedaemon was at the point of being lost: whereupon the Argives tooke such heart and courage unto them (by reason that Pythagoras with the best part of the garrison souldiers was departed before out of their towne) that contemning the small number which remained in their fortresse, under the leading of one Archippus, they expelled the rest of the garison. As for Timocrates of Pellene their captaine, because hee had behaved himselfe in his charge and government gently and mildly, they sent him away alive with safe conduct. At the very instant of this joyfull occurrent, T. Quintius arrived, after he had granted peace to the tyrant, and sent away from Lacedaemon, Eumenes and the Rhodians, together with L. Quintius his brother to the fleet. The citie of Argos in great joy proclaimed the celebration of their most solemne feast, and those so famous and renowmed games and pastimes called Nemea, against the comming of the Romane army and their Generall, which they had forelet upon the ordinarie time and day, by occasion of the troubles of warre. And for the honour of Quintius, they ordained him to bee the overseer of these solemnities. Many things there were to redouble and increase this their joy and solace to the full. The citizens were reduced from Lacedaemon, whome Pythagoras of late and Nabis aforetime, had carried away. They also were returned home againe who had fled and escaped, after the conspiracie of Pythagoras was detected, and the massacre begun. Now they saw their libertie againe, whereof they had lost the sight along time: now they beheld the Romans the authors  thereof, and who for their sakes were induced to take armes and enterprise ^he warre with the tyrant. Also, upon the very day of the Nemean games, the libertie of the Argives was published and proclaimed by the voice of the publicke beadle and crier of the cittie. But looke how much joy and hearts content the Achaeans conceived in their common and generall counsell of all Achaea, for the restoring of Argos into their auncient freedome, so much troubled they were againe, in regard that Lacedemon was left still in servitude, and the tyrant so neer unto them readie ever to pricke their sides, whereby their joy was not so found and entire. But the Aetolians in all their Diets inveighed mightily against this, saying, That the Romanes never gave over the war with Philip before hee had abandoned all the cities of Greece: as for Lacedemon, it was left still under a tyrant, and in the meane while the lawfull and naturall king who had been in the  Roman campe, and all the rest of the noblest citizens should live in exile. For now the people of Rome was become a pensioner to guard the bodie of tyrannising Nabis. Then Quintius brought backe his armie from Argos to Elatia, from whence he departed to the Sparrane warre. Some write, that the tyrant when he fought with the Romanes, came not immediately out of the citie; but that hee was lodged without by himselfe full opposite to the Romane campe: and that after he had made good a long time, expecting the aid of the Aetolians, he was driven in the end to a battaile, by occasion that the Romanes charged upon the forragers and purveyours of his campe: in which battaile he was vanquished and beaten out of the field, and craved peace, after that fifteene thousand of his men were staine and foure thousand taken prisoners, and above.
At one and the same time in a manner, were letters brought both from T. Quintius touching  the affaires atchieved at Lacedaemon, and also from M. Porcius the Consull, out of Spaine. And by order from the State, there was granted in the name of either of them, a solemne procession to continue three daies. L. Valerius the Consull, after hee had governed his province in quietnes upon the diffeiture of the Bolans about the forest of Litana, returned to Rome against the generall assembly for election of magistrates, and created Consuls, P. Cornelius Scipio

Africanus the second time, and T. Sempronius Longus: whose fathers had been Consuls in the  first yeere of the second Punick warre. Then the Assembly was holden for the election of Pretours, wherein were chosen P. Cornelius Scipio, and the two Cneij Cornelij, the one Merenda, and the other Blafio: Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus, Sextus Digitius, and T. Iuventius Talva. When these elections were finished, the Consull returned againe into his province. That yeere the Ferentinates assayed to obteine a new priviledge: to wit, That as many Latines as were enrolled in any Romane Colonie, should be citizens of Rome. But they of Puteoli, Salernum, and Buxentum, who were coloners and had their names entred there, and by that meanes carying themselves as Romane citizens, were adjudged by the Senat to be no citizens of Rome.
In the beginning of this yeere, wherein P. Scipio Africanus was Consull the second time, with T. Sempronius Longus, two embassadors of Nabis the tyrant, arrived at Rome. For to geve them  audience, the Senat assembled together without the citie in the temple of Apollo. Their petition was, That the peace agreed upon with Quintius, might be ratified: and their suite was graunted. When it was moved, as touching the government of the provinces; the Senate (assembled in great frequencie) were all of this opinion, That for as much as in Spaine and Macedonie the warre was ended, both Consuls should have the government of Italie. Scipio was of advise, That one Consull was sufficient for Italie, and that the other should be emploied in Macedonie. And why? there was cruell warre menaced from king Antiochus: himselfe alreadie was passed over into Europe: And what thinke ye, quoth he, will he then do, when the Aetolians (who doubtlesse are enemies) of one side shall sollicit and call upon him for to warre, and Anniball, a warriour and commaunder so renowned for the defeatures and overthrowes of the Romanes, shall prick him forward of the other? Whiles they debated thus about the provinces of the Consuls, the Pretours cast lots for their severall governments. The citie jurisdiction fell to Cn. Domitius, the foraine to T. Iuventius. To P. Cornelius the farther Spaine was allotted, and the hither to Sex. Digitius. Cn. Cornelius Blasio had Sicilie assigned unto him, and Merenda was charged with Sardinia. It was not thought good that a new armie should be transported over into Macedonie. But concluded it was, that the armie should be brought back by Quintius into Italie, and discharged. Item, That the armie likewise should be casled, which had served under M. Porcius Cato in Spaine. Item, That both Consuls should governe Italie, and levie two legions of citizens to go thither, that when those forces were dismissed and licensed to go home, which it pleased the Senat to set at libertie, there should be eight Romane legions in all, and no more in pay.
In the former yeere, when M. Porcius and L. Valerius were Consuls, there had bene held a solemnitie of a sacred Spring. But when P. Licinius the high Pontifees made report first to the college of the Priests, and by the advise and authoritie of that colledge, unto the LL, of the Counsell, That there was some error committed, and that it was not performed accordingly: the Senatours ordeined, that it should be done againe a new, according to the discretion and direction of the Pontifees aforesaid. Also that the great Romane Plaies, which together with that Spring were vowed, should be exhibited with the accustomed cost and expenses: And that al yong cattaile that fell betweene the kalends of March, and the last day of Aprill, in that yeere wherein P. Cornel. Scipio and T. Sempronius Longus were Consuls, should be accounted as consecrated  for that sacred Spring above named. After this, there was an assembly held for the choosing of Censors, wherein were created Sex. Aelius Patus, and C. Cornelius Cethegus: who elected P. Scipio the Consull, President of the Senate, like as the Censors before them had done. In the survey and review of the whole Senate, they left out and discarded three only, and none of them who had borne office of State, and sit in the yvorie chaire. Great love these Censors woon amongst them of that calling and qualitie, in geving commaundement to the Aediles curule, that at the Romane games and plaies they should set out places apart from the rest of the people for the Senatours to behold the said disports. For aforetime they beheld the sports and pastimes all together, without regard and destinction. Few also of the gentlemen or knights of Rome, had their horses of service taken from them: and rigorously dealt they with no estate and degree. The porch of Libertie, and the hamlet called Villa publica, were by them repaired and enlarged. The sacred Spring was celebrate; and the games vowed by Serv. Sulpitius the Consull, were by them exhibited. And whiles all men were amused, and their minds occupied thereupon, Q. Pleminius who had bene cast in prison for divers and sundrie outrages committed at Locres, to the

 great offence of God and man, had procured certeine persons, who in the night season at one instant should set on fire many places of the citie, to the end that whiles all the people were affrighted in this night-tumult, he might breake prison and escape. This complot was discovered and reported to the Senate by some of them that were privie and accessarie thereto. And Fleminius was let downe into a lower dungeon and there killed.
That yeere were certeine Colonies of Romane citizens conducted to Puteoli, Vulturnum, and Liternum, and three hundred men planted in each of them. Likewise Coloners of Romane citizens were brought to Salernum and Buxentum. The Triumvirs who had the placing of them, were T. Sempronius Longus, Consull for the time being; M. Servilius and Q. Minutius Thermus. The territorie of the Campanes was devided among them. Three other also deputed  for the like purpose, D. Iunius Brutus, M. Babius Tamphilus, and M. Helvius, placed a colonie of Romane citizens in Sipontum, to enjoy the lands of the Arpines. Likewise other colonies of Romane citizens were planted in Tempsa and Crotone. The lands belonging to Tempsa were woon from the Brutij, who had expelled the Greekes: and the Greekes remained in Crotone. The Triumvirs for Crotone were Cn. Octavius, L. Aemylius Paulus, and C. Pletorius: and for Tempsa L. Cornel. Merula, and C. Salonius. Also that yeere were seene at Rome divers wonders and prodigious sights: and some were reported from other parts. In the common place, in the publick Hall, Comitium, and Capitoll, were seene certeine drops of bloud. And oftentimes it rained earth. The head of Vulcane was on fire. Newes came that at Interamna there ran a streame of milke. Also that at Ariminum, there were two infants both of three condition, borne  without eies and nose, and another in the Picene countrey handlesse and footelesse. These strange tokens were by order given from the chiefe-Pontifees, looked unto and expiated, and a Novendiall sacrifice continued for nine daies, because the Adrians brought word, that in their territorie it rained stones.
In Gaule neere to Mediolanum, L. Valerius Flaccus the Proconsull, fought a set field with the french Insubrians and Boians. Which Boians under the conduct of Deruacus passed over the river Padus, for to sollicite and raise the Insubrians. In which conflict were slaine ten thousand enemies. About the same time his colleague in government M. Porcius Cato triumphed over Spaine. In this triumph he caried in pomp and shew 25000 pound weight of silver in bullion, and in come 123000 Bigate pieces: of Ofcan silver 540 pound weight, and of gold  400000 pound weight. Of the bootie woon from the enemies he dealt among his souldiours that were footmen 270 asses a peece, and triple so much to every man of armes.
T. Sempronius the Consull having put himselfe in his journey toward his province, led first his legions into the Boians countrey. Boiorix at that time their Prince with his two brethren, having raised the whole nation to rebellion, encamped in certeine commodious places: so as it appeared that if the enemie entred their confines, they were readie to give him battaile. The Consull perceiving how strong and confident the enemies were, dispatched a courrier to his Colleague, to make hast if he thought so good and come unto him: for untill his comming he would fall off, seeme to retire, and not fight. But the same cause that moved the Consull to stay, gave occasion to the Gaules to make more hast: for besides that the hasting and lingering  of the Consull, encouraged the enemies, they were desirous to have the triall of a battaile before the forces of both Consuls were joyned together. Howbeit, for two dayes space they did nothing but stand readie raunged for fight, if any should have come forth to brave and dare them. On the third day they approched the trench and rampier of the Consuls camp, and on every side at once gave the assault. The Consull immediatly commaunded the souldiours to arme. And when they were armed, he kept them in awhile, of intent to increase the foolish confidence in the enemies, and to dispose of his owne forces and give direction, what companies should ^ally out at every gate. The two legions he commaunded to issue forth under their coulors at the two side gates called Principales's but in the very passage without forth the Gaules stood thick and made head againe, so that the way was stopped up. A longtime they fought in those very  streights. And they bestirred themselves no more with their hands and swords, than they pr^^sed one upon another with their bodies and targets: whiles the Romanes strived to advance their ensignes out of the gates, and the Gaules endevoured no lesse, either to enter themselves within the camp, or else to impeach the Romance for going forth. But in this conflict there was nothing betweene them either woon or lost, no ground gained the one of the other, before

that Qu. Victorius a principall Centurion of the Pilani in the second legion, and C. Atinius, a Tribune or Marshall of the fourth, caught the banners from the ensigne-beareres (a thing often practised in time of extremitie) and flang them among the enemies. For whiles these laboured and strained themselves to recover each one a banner, they of the second legion first brake through and gat forth of the gate: so as now, they maintained skirmish without the trench, and the fourth legion stuck still in the gap. By which time, there arose another tumult and noise in the contrarie side of the campe: for the Gaules were broken in at the Questors gate (or the gate against the The quarter and lodging of the Treasurer. Questorium) and slaine those that valiantly made head and held them play; to wit, Lucius Posthumius a treasurer surnamed Tympanus, Marcus Atinius and Publius Sempronius two colonels of the allies, and well neere two hundred souldiours besides. Thus the campe on that part was woon, untill such time as one extraordinarie cohort  was sent from the Consull to defend the Questors gate aforesaid: which either flew those that were within the rampier, or else drave them foorth, and so withstood those that would have rushed in. And much about that very time, the fourth legion also with two extraordinarie squadrons, brake forth at the gate. Thus at once there were three severall battailes in sundrie places about the campe: and the dissonant cries and noises (according to the divers occasions of ech partie ministred by their fellowes) turned and withdrew the minds and spirits of those that were in fight, from the present skirmish before them. In this manner maintained they the medley untill noone; equally matched in strength and number, and little or no ods between them for hope of victorie: but tedious travaile and soultering heat compelled the Gaules (whose bodies are soft and open, and soon running to sweat, and who of all other things can least away with thirst) to abandon the battell: and those few that remained behind, the Romans ran upon, ruffled their colours, and chased them into their owne hold. Then the Consull founded the retreat: at which signall given, the more part retired themselves; but a sort of them, upon a hote desire of fight, and good hope to be masters of their campe, persisted still, close to their trench. The Gaules disdaining their small number, issued all forth out of their campe: and then the Romanes being discomfited, were glad now of themselves for feare and fright, to trudge unto the strength of their owne hold, which they would not retire unto at the commaundement of the Consull. Thus on both sides, there was one while victorie, and another while fearefull flight: howbeit, when all cards were told and the reckoning made, the Gaules had the woorst of the game: for of them were slaine eleven thousand, whereas of Romanes there died but five thousand. Then the Gaules retired themselves into the most inward parts of their countrey, and the Consull marched with his legions to Placentia. Some write, that Scipio and his colleague with their joynt forces, invaded and spoiled the countries of the Boians and Ligurians, so far forth as they could passe for woods and bogs: others againe record, that he, having done no memorable exploit at all, returned to Rome about the assembly for election of Consuls.
The same yeere T. Quintius spent the whole winter season at Elatia (whither he had retired his forces for winter harbour) in hearing mens causes and ministring justice to every one; also in reforming and redressing all such disorders as had passed in the States and cities, through the licentious government and jurisdiction either of Philip himselfe or his captaines, whiles hee advaunced those favorites of his owne faction, and put downe the right and libertie of others. In  the beginning of spring he came to Corinth, where he had given summons, that there should be holden a general Diet of the States. There in the assembly of all the embassadors and agents from the cities, gathered about him as it were to heare an Oration, hee made a speech unto them; beginning first with the amitie contracted betweene the Romanes and Greece: and proceeding to the acts atchieved in Spaine by the Generals afore him, and those also of his owne. All that he spake, was heard and received with great applause, untill he touched the point concerning Nabis: for it was generally thought unsitting, that he undertaking to set all Greece at libertie, had left a tyrant (not onely a grievous oppressour of his owne subjects, but also daungerous to all the cities about him) to remaine still as a fearefull maladie setled in the very bowels and heart of a most noble and renowmed State.
Quintius, not ignorant of their affections  and dispositions, confessed, that he should not indeed have given any care at all to the motion or mention of peace with the tyrant, in case that Lacedaemon could have stood in safetie without so doing: but now since that Nabis might not possibly be confounded and overthrown, without the present ruine and fearfull downfall of the citie, he thought it a better course in pollicie to

 leave the tyrant enfeebled and disfurnished of all meanes to offend and hurt any man, than to suffer so goodly a citie to die in the cure, and under the hand as it were of the Physician, amid those quicke and sharpe remedies which it were never able to endure: and so in seeking to recover libertie, to perish and die for ever. And after he had discoursed of things past, he inferred, that his purpose and intent was, to goe into Italie, and to have away with him his whole armie: also that within ten daies they should heare newes how all the garrisons had quit Demetrias and Chalcis: and that he would deliver out of hand unto the Archaeans in their very sight, the fortresse of Corinth: that all the world may know, whether it be the Romans guise, or the fashion of the Aetolians, to overreach and lie; who in their common talke have not let to discourse, to sow surmises, and to buz into mens heads, that it was daungerous for Greece to put  their libertie into the Romans hands: and that they had but made an exchange of their lordly rulers, admitting the Romanes in lieu of the Macedonians. But as for them (quoth he) their tongue is no slaunder, being such persons as never tooke heed and made regard what either they did or said. But the other cities he advertised to weigh their friends by deeds and not by words: to be wise and well advised whome they are to trust, and whome they are to beware of: to use their libertie in measure and moderation; which if it be well attempered and qualified, is good and holesome to particular persons and generall States: but excessive if it be, it would not only be grievous and unsupportable to others, but also untruly, daungerous, and pernicious to themselves that have it. He gave them counsell, that the princes and States in ech citie should maintaine concord not onely among themselves, but also with all other in one communitie:  for so long as they accord and agree togither, no king nor tyrant should be strong enough for them: whereas discord and sedition maketh overture and openeth easie way to enemies that lie in await for the vantage; considering, that the side which in civill contention is the weaker and goeth to the walls, will band rather with a forrainer, than give place and stoupe to a citizen. In conclusion, he advised them, to keepe and preserve by their carefull regard, this their libertie purchased for them by forraine forces, and delivered unto them with faithfull securitie of strangers and alliens; that the people of Rome might see, that they have given freedome to well deserving people; and this their great benefit hath beene well bestowed upon worthy persons. Whiles they hearkened to these sage admonitions, as uttered out of the mouth of a verie father,  the teares gushed plenteously out of their eyes for kind heart and joy; in so much as they troubled him in the deliverie of the rest of his speech. For a while there was a plausible noise heard among them as they approved his words, and advised one another to ponder these sage sawes, and to imprint them deeply in their hearts, proceeding as it were from divine oracle. After silence made, he requested them to seeke up all those Romane citizens (if haply there were any) who lived in servitude and slaverie among them, and within two moneths to send them unto him into Thessalie: for it were a great disworship and shame even for them, that in their countries there should remaine in bondage any of those, by whose meanes they themselves were set free and delivered out of bondage. With that, they all cried aloud with one voice, That for this above all the rest they rendred thankes unto him, in that they were admonished and warned by  him, to performe their devoir and duty, so honest, so religious, and so necessarie. Now a mighty number there was of captives in the Punick war; such as Anniball (when their friends redeemed them not by raunsome) had sold in open market. And how great the multitude of them was, this may proove and testifie which Polibius writeth; to wit, that this cost the Achaeans for their part By this accour.s of Livie, a talent in this place amounteth to 187 lib. 10 shil. s^es^. one hundred talents: and yet they ordained and set downe, that there should but 500 Denarij bee repaid unto their masters for the redemption of every poll: for by this account Achaea had 1200 of them. Adde now unto them as many as all Greece was like to have by that proportion [and see what number may arise.] The assembly was not broken up and dismissed, before they might see the garrison descending from the fortresse of Corinth, who marched directly to the gate and went their waies. The Generall presently followed after, and being accompanied with them all, who called him with a loud voice, Their saviour and redeemer; he tooke his leave  and bad them farewell: and so returned the same way he came to Elatia. From thence hee sent his lieutenant Ap. Claudius with all the forces, commaunding him to conduct him to conduct the armie to Oricum by the way of Thessalie and Epitus, and there to expect and wait his comming: for he purposed there to take sea and set over his armie into Italie. He wrote also to L. Quintius his brother and lieutenant, and Admirall likewise of the fleet, to gather all the ships of burden from along

the sea coast of Greece into that place. Himselfe went to Chalcis, and having withdrawen the  garrisons not onely from thence but also from Oreum and Eretria, he held a generall councell there of all the cities of Euboea: and after he had made remonstrance unto them in what case he found them, and in what estate he left them, he dismissed the assemblie. From thence hee departed to Demetrias, where also he removed the garison, and being attended with a traine of all the citizens, like at Corinth and Chalcis before, hee tooke his journey into Thessalie: where the citties were not onely to bee set free, but also to bee reformed, and from a generall mingle mangle and confusion wherein they stood, to be reduced and framed into some tollerable order and forme of government. For they were not onely tainted and infected with the corruption of the times, and the violent current of licentious outrage, which had taken head under the government of the king; but also of an inbred troublesome spirit and humor of their owne, wherby, since  their first beginning and uprising, even unto our daies they never held Parliaments, Elections, Diets, Counsels, or any other assemblies whatsoever, without much trouble and sedition. He chose the Senat and Iudges there in regard especially of their wealth, and in all cities he made that part more mightie, unto which it was more expedient and beneficiall to have all quiet and in peace. Thus having visited Thessalie, and taken a generall review thereof, hee came by the way of Epirus to Oricum, from whence he minded to crosse the seas. From Oricum all his forces were transported to Brundusium, and so they passed forward throughout Italie to the cittie of Rome, in manner of triumph, sending before them as great a traine of prises by them taken, as they made themselves in their march. After they were come to Rome, the Senate assembled without the cittie for Quintius, where hee had audience to declare and discourse of his worthie exploits: and  willing they were to graunt him triumph, according to his deserts. Three daies together he rode in triumph. The first day he made a shew of all the armour, as well defensive as offensive, also of brasen and marble images, of which he had taken more from king Philip, than hee found in the saccage of the citties. The second day there was carried in pompe, the gold and silver both unwrought and wrought into plate, yea, and cast into coine. Of silver unwrought there was eighteen thousand pound weight: of wrought, two hundred and seventie pound weight. Many vessels of plate of all sorts, and most engraven, some of right curious and exquisit workmanship. Likewise brasen vessels, cunningly and artificially made: and besides, tenne shields of silver, and in coine eightie foure thousand Atticke peeces of silver, which they call Tetradraclima, weighing almost foure Romane deniers apeece: of gold there was three thousand seven hundred and fourteene  pound weight, and one shield full and whole of b^aten gold: and of Philip golden peeces in coine, foureteene thousand five hundred and foureteene. The third day were borne in view for a pageant, a hundred and foureteene coronets of gold, which were the presents of cities given unto him. Moreover, there were led that day the beasts for sacrifice: and before his chariot went many noble prisoners and hostages, and among them, Demetrius, king Philip his sonne, and Armenes the sonne of Nabis the tyrant, a Lacedaemonian borne. Then rode Quintius himselfe in a chariot into the citie, and a great number of souldiours followed after, by reason that his whole armie was retired with him out of his province. To every footmen he gave two hundred and fiftie Asses, duple as much to a centurion, and triple to an horseman. Those who were redeemed out of captivitie, followed his chariot with their heads shaven, and much beautified the glorie  of the triumph.
In the end of this yeere, Q. Aelius Tubero a Tribune of the Commons, presented a request or bill unto the people, and they graunted and enacted it, to wit, that two Colonies of Latines should be conducted, the one into the Brutians countrey, and the other into the territorie of Thurium. For the conduct and planting whereof, there were ordained three Deputies called Triumvirs, whose commission was in force for three yeeres, namely, Q. Nevius, M. Minutius Rusus, and M. Furius Crassipes for the Brutians: and for Thurium, A. Manlius, P. Aelius, and L. Apust^us. For the chusing of these officers, Cn. Domitius the Pretour in the citie, called two severall assemblies in the Capitoll. In that yeere were certaine temples dedicated, one of Iuno Sospita in the hearbe-market, which had been vowed and set out to building foure yeeres before, by C. Cornelius the Consull, during the warre with the French: and hee in his Censorship dedicated it. Another temple of Faunus: the Aediles C. Scribonius and Cn. Domitrus, had likewise bargained for the building thereof two yeeres before, and laid by the money therefore; and this Cn. Domitius being now Pretour of the cittie dedicated it. Also Q. Minutius Ralla, dedicated a temple to

Fortuna Primigenia upon the hill Quirinalis, having ben created Duumvir himselfe for that purpose. P. Sempronius Sophus had vowed the same ten yeares before, in the time of the Punicke war, and agreed for a certaine price to have it built. Also C. Servilius the other Duumvir consecrated the temple of Iupiter within the island. Vowed it was sixe yeares before in the Gaules warre by L. Furius Purpurio Pretour, and by him afterwards (when he was Consull) order was given for the edifying thereof. And these were the affaires which passed that yeere.
P. Scipio returned out of his province and government of Gaule for the election of new Consuls, and to that purpose was the generall assembly summoned; wherein were chosen L. Cornelius Mernla, and Q. Minutius Thermus. The next morrow after were created Pretours, L. Cornelius Scipio, M. Fulvius Nobilior, C. Scribonius, M. Valerius Messala, L. Porcius Licintus, and C. Flaminius. C. Attilius Serranus, and L. Scribonius Libo, Aediles of the chaire, were the first that exhibited the Stage-plaies called Megalesia. And the Romane plaies or games represented and set out by these Aediles, the Senate now first and never before beheld a part from the rest of the people. And this (as all novelties and new fashions) ministred much talke: whiles some gave their opinion and said, That now at length that was given to this most noble and honorable State, which long agoe was due; others againe construed thus, and gave out, That whatsoever was added to the majestie of the Senators and nobles, was derogatorie from the dignitie of the people: and that all such kind of distinctions, whereby estates and degrees are severed one from another, are prejudiciall as well to common peace as publicke libertie. For these five hundred and eightie yeeres say they, these plaies and games have been beheld and looked upon pell mell, without any such  precise difference. What new accident is suddainely befallen, why the Nobles should not be willing to let the Commons be intermingled with them in the Theatre? and why a rich man should disdaine his poore neighbour to sit by him? This is a new appetite and straunge longing of theirs indeed, full of pride and arrogancie, a thing never desired nor taken up and practised by the Senate of any nation whatsoever. So as in the end even Africanus bethrewed himselfe (men say) and repented thereof, for that hee in his Consulship mooved and persuaded the bringing up of this nashion. So hard a matter it is to alter an old custome, and make a new order to be well liked of. And men are ever more willing to keepe them to auncient customes, unlesse they be such, as practise and experience doe evidently checke and condemne.
In the beginning of the yeare, wherein L. Cornelius and Q. Minutius were Consuls, newes came  so thicke of many earthquakes, that men were not onely wearie of the thing it selfe, but also of the holydaies and solemnities that were published and proclaimed in that regard. For the Consuls could not intend either to assemble the Senate and sit in counsell, or manage the affaires of the Commonweale, for being wholly emploied about sacrificing and appeasing the wrath of the gods. In conclusion, the Decemvirs were commaunded to peruse the bookes of Sibylla, and according to their answere and direction, a procession and supplication was for three daies solemnised. And before the altars and shrines of the gods and goddesses, they made their praiers with garlands and coronets on their heads: yea, and commaundement was given, that every houshold and familie by it selfe should fall to their praiers and devotions. Also the Consuls by order from the Senate made proclamation, That upon what day a feast or solemnitie was ordained by occasion  of one earthquake, no man the same day should bring newes of another. Then the Consuls cast lots for the government of their provinces, and after them the Pretours did the like. Vnto Cornelius besell Gaule, and to Minutius the Ligurians; C. Sempronius had the charge of the civile jurisdiction, and M. Valerius of the forraine; L. Cornelius governed Sicilie, L. Porcius Sardinia, C. Flaminius high Spaine, and L. Falvius the lower. The Consuls looked for no war that yeare: but even then at that instant were letters brought from M. Cincius lord president of Pisae, which gave notice, that twentie thousand Ligurians were up in armes, having conspired together in all market townes and places of resort throughout the whole nation, and that they had alreadie wasted the territorie of Luna, and having invaded and passed through the Pisane land, had overrun also sea coasts. Wherefore Minutius the Consull, unto whom the government of Liguria  was allotted, by the advise of the LL. of the Senate mounted up into the pulpit Rostra, and published an act, That those two legions of Romane citizens, which the former yeare had ben enrolled, should within ten daies present themselves at Arretium, in lieu whereof he would levie two other legions out of the citie. Also he commaunded the allies and magistrates of the Latine nation, and their embassadours leagers, who owed knight-service, and were bound to find souldiors

to come before him into the Capitoll. And from among them he enrolled fifteene thousand  foote and five hundred horse, according to the number of young and serviceable men that were to be found in each State: which done, he commaunded them forthwith, to go directly from the Capitoll to the gate of the citie, and presently to take musters that all might be done with greater expedition. Vnto Fulvius and Flamimus were appointed three thousand Romane footmen and two hundred horsemen apeece, for to supplie and strengthen their forces: also five thousand foote to either of them of allies of the Latine nation, with two hundred horse. Moreover the Pretours were charged to dismisse and casse the old souldiours, so soone as they were arrived into their provinces. Now, when as the souldiours who were enrolled in the citie-legions, resorted thick unto the Trib, of the Com. that they should take knowledge of as many of them as were exempted from warfare, for that they either had served out their full time by law  appointed, or were sickly and diseased: behold the letters of Sempronius dashed all this, and cleered every difficultie and scrupulositie: wherein it was written, that fifteene thousand Ligurians were entred the territorie of Placentia, and had made great wast and saccage therein, putting all to fire and sword as they went, even as farre as to the very walls of the Colonie it selfe, and the banks of (...) Padus. Also that the nation of the Boij made countenance and gave suspicion of rebellion. In which regards seeing there was a tumultuous and sodaine warre toward, the Senat passed a decree, wherein they signified that it was not their pleasure that the Tribunes should accept any excuses pretended by the souldiours, but that they should all meete and assemble together, according to the Edict. Over and besides they gave order, that the allies of the Latine nation, who had served in the armies of P. Cornelius and Titus Sempronius, and were discharged  from souldierie by them being Consuls, should now be readie to shew themselves, against that day which L Cornelius the Consull should appoint, and at what place soever of Hetruria he should commaund by way of proclamation: Also that the said L. Cornelius the Consull in his march and journey toward the province, might take up, enroll, and arme, what souldiours he thought good, out of all the burroughes and villages in his way, and have them with him whither soever he would, yea and have commission to dismisse whom of them he thought good, and when soever he listed at his good pleasure.
After that the Consuls had taken musters, and were gone into their provinces, then T. Quintius demaunded to have a day of audience in the Senat concerning those affaires that he had concluded with the assistance of the ten Delegates above said: and that it would please them to  confirme and establish the same by vertue of their assent and authoritie. Which they might do with more ease, in case they would heare the embassadors themselves speake, who were come out of all Greece, a great part of Asia, and from the kings. These embassies were admitted into the Senate by C. Scribonius the Pretour for the citie, and all dispatched with a gratious answere. But because the dispute about Antiochus required long time of debate, therefore it was referred and put over to the ten Delegates, of whom some had bene in Asia, or at Lysimachia with the king. And Quintius was commaunded, that together with those said Delegates he should heare what the king his embassadors could say, and so returne unto them such an answere, as might stand with the honor and welfare of the people of Rome.
The chiefe of this embassage from the king were Menippus and Hegesianax. Then Menippus began and said, That he knew no such perplexed  difficultie in their embassage, considering they were come simply to treat for peace, and to contract a league and alliance. For, saith he, there are three sorts of consederacies and associations, whereby States and KK. ordinarily conclude league and amitie one with another. The first, when they that are vanguished in warre, have conditions and articles imposed upon them: for when all is yeelded into the hands of him that is the mightier and more puissant, then it is in his power and at his discretion and will, to give unto the conquered partie what he list, or to take from him as he pleaseth. The second is, when they that are egall in warlike forces give over on even hand, and be content to make peace and amitie, upon indifferent and equall conditions, one with the other: in which case, demaund and claime is made, restitution and amends performed according to the accord and agreement: and if in time of the warres, any have bene  molested and troubled in their possession, they fall to composition either by the forme and tenor of auncient law, or respective to the good and profit of both parties. The third is, when they that never were enemies, meete and conferre together about concluding some friendship, by way of solemne alliance and societie, who neither geve nor take any conditions: for that belongeth

 properly to Conquerours, and those that are conquered. Seeing then that Antiochus is comprised in this last kind, I mervaile (quoth he) that the Romanes should thinke or say, It is reasonable to render articles unto him, or to prescribe and set downe, what cities of Asia they would have to be free and exempt, and which they would have to be tributarie: and into what cities they would expressely forbid the king his garisons, or the king himselfe to enter and set foote. For in this wise ought they to make peace with Philip their enemie in times past, and not to draw a contract of amitie and association with Antiochus, a friend at this present. To this oration Quintius shaped his answere in this sort. For as much as it pleaseth you to make your speech thus distinctly by way of division, and severally to reherse all kinds of consederacies and accords, I also will set down as methodically in order two conditions, without which, you may let the king your  maister to understand, that he must not looke to interteine any friendship with the people of Rome. The one is this, that if he would debarre us to intermedle with the cities of Asia: he likewise himselfe have nothing to do with all Europe. The other, that if he cannot conteine himselfe within the compasse of Asia, but will needs encroch upon it, the Romanes likewise may have libertie and power both to mainteine those amities which they have alreadie, and also to enterteine new with the States of Asia. Hereat Hegesianax inferred and said, That this was an indignitie intolerable, and which he could not abide to heare, namely, that Antiochus should be disferzed of those cities of Thrace and Chersonesus, which Seleucus his great grandfather had conquered with singulet honor from king Lysimachus, whom he vanguished in war and slew in field, and setled the same in him as his rightfull inheritance. As for the same cities possessed by the Thracians, Antiochus himselfe with as great praise and glorie hath partly by force of armes regained out of their hands, and partly repeopled with the old inhabitants called home againe, whereas they lay abandoned and desolate, and namely Lysimachia itself, as all the world seeth: and more than that, hath reedified to his exceeding charge and expense, those that lay along in their ruines, and were consumed with fire. What likenes then is there between these two demaunds: namely, that Antiochus should quit the possession of that which either he acquired or recovered in that sort: and that the Romanes should absteine and forbeare Asia, which never apperteined unto them? To conclude, Antiochus (saith he) is desirous of the Romans friendship, but in such termes as may stand with his honor, and not purchase himselfe shame and reproch. Then Quintius rejoyned  again in this manner: For as much as quoth he, we balance and weigh things according to honestie (as in truth it is besitting the chiefe and principall state of the world, and so great and mightie a king to peise that only or at leastwise principally above all other regards) I would gladly know of you, Whether ye thinke it more honest of the twaine, either to will and wish that all the cities of Greece whatsoever and wheresoever should enjoy libertie: or to make them homagers and tributarie? It Antiochus thinketh it be an honorable thing for him to reduce into servitude and bondage as his owne, those cities which his great grandfather held by right of armes, and whereof neither his father nor grandfather afore him were in possession: the people of Rome likewise esteemeth it a materiall point that toucheth their faithfulnesse and constancie, not to forsake the Greekes, whose protection and defence they have enterprised  and taken in hand. And like as they have freed Greece out of the hands of Philip, so they intend to deliver those cities of Asia which are of Greekish race and descent, from the subjection of Antiochus. For the Greeke Colonies were not sent into Aeolis and Ionia, to live in servitude under the king, but to increase and multiply, that a most auncient nation might spread over the face of the whole earth. Now when as Hegesianax knew not how to shift and turne himselfe, and could not denie but that the cause of libertie which the Romanes pretended in the title of their quarell, was of more honestie and credit, than that other of slavery: Let's lay away all these circumstances of words (quoth P. Sulpitius, the auncientest person of all the ten Delegates) and choose yee one of the two conditions which even now were expresly offred unto you by Quintius, or else make no more talke about amitie with the Romanes. Then quoth Menippus, As for us, wee may in no case, neither will wee capitulate and covenant any thing prejudiciall to the  kingdome and royall state of king Antiochus. The morrow after Quintius when hee had brought all the Embassies of Greece and Asia into the Senate, that they might know what affection the people of Rome caried, and what mind Antiochus bare to the cities of Greece, he declared before them all as well his owne demaunds, as those of the kings part: willing them to make report unto their own cities, and assure them, that the people of Rome would maintein them

against Antiochus (unlesse he departed out of Europe) with the same vertue, valour, and fidelitie  wherwith he had defended their liberty against Philip. Then Menippus was earnest with Quintius and the LL. of the Senate, beseeching them instantly not to proceed in hast to a decree whereby they should set all the world in trouble and uprore; but both take leisure themselves and give respite unto the king to deliberate farther of the matter: for no doubt, upon the relating of the conditions, he would consider upon them, and either obtaine somewhat at their hands, or for peace sake yeeld his consent to all. Thus was the matter wholly and entirely deferred: and agreed it was, that the same embassadours should be addressed unto the king, who had beene with him at Lysimachia, to wit, P. Sulpitius, P. Villius, and P. Aclius.
Scarcely were they gone from the citie and entred upon their journey, but embassadours arrived from Carthage, who reported, that without all doubt Antiochus made preparation for  warre, and therein used the hand and ministerie of Anniball: in so much, as it was feared also that a third Punicke warre would breake out withall. Anniball as wee said before, having sled his native countrey, repaired unto Antiochus, and was in great account and estimation with the king, for no other cause and pollicie in the world, but that the king who projected and plotted long time in his spirit to levie warre upon the Romanes, could find no man more sit than Anniball to break his mind unto, and with whom to discourse upon a matter of such consequence. Anniball his song and resolution was ever one and the same still, namely, To make war within Italie: and that Italie was able to furnish a forraine enemie, with men, munition, and victuals. For this he cast with himselfe and considered, that if all were quiet there and no troubles set a foot, but that the people of Rome might with the forces and riches of Italie, furnish themselves  to make war without Italie, there was no monarch nor nation under the sunne able to make head against the Romanes. He demanded therefore to have the commaund of 100 close ships with hatch and decke, 16000 foot, and 1000 horse: and with the said fleet he would first saile into Affrick, where he assured himselfe that he should be able to sollicit and induce the Carthaginians to rebellion: but if they held off and made it goodly and strange, yet would he settle in some part of Italie and levie war against the Romanes. His advise and counsell furthermore was, that the king should with all his other forces passe into Europe, and in some one part of Greece keep his power together, and not to take the sea, but to be readie ever to crosse over; which would be sufficient to make a shew and raise a bruit all abroad of warre. When he had persuaded the king to this designment  and resolution, supposing that he was likewise to found and prepare the hearts aforehand of his own countrimen to this purpose: he durst not dispatch any letters unto them, for fear they might chaunce to be intercepted by the way, and so discover the whole plot. He happened at Ephesus upon a Tyrian one Ariston, a man whose industrie and dexteritie he had tried in some small services wherein he had imployed him. Him he plyed with gifts in hand, but fed him more with large promises of great rewards, which king Antiochus also himselfe seemed to make good and give his word for; and so sent him to Carthage with credence and instructions. He redied him in the names of all those persons with whom he was to talke and conferre: hee furnisheth him with secret tokens, whereby they might assuredly know, that hee was no counterfeit, but came with a message from him. Now whiles this Ariston conversed in Carthage, the friends of Annibali knew no sooner about what errand he came, than his very enemies. At the first, much talke  and discourse there was in every corner of the citie where they met, and at their feasts and meriments, of this matter. Afterwards at their councell table some stucke not to say, that the exile of Anniball was to little or no purpose, if whiles he was absent hee could contrive and compasse new plots, and by solliciting and tempting mens minds, disquiet and trouble the state of the citie. There is a straunger, say they, one Ariston a Tyrian, hither come with instructions from Anniball and king Antiochus: certaine men there are, that daily have privie conference with him, and devise in secret of that, which anon will breake out to the utter ruine and overthrow of all.
Wherupon they all cried with one voice to convent Ariston peremptorily before them, and to examine him about what businesse he was thither arrived; and unlesse he would bewray and declare the matter, to send him with embassadors of purpose, to Rome: For why? we have (say they) felt the  smart enough, and paid sufficiently for the folly and rash head of one harebrained man already. Let privat persons beare their owne load hereafter, and at their owne perill commit acrespasle: provided alwaies, that the Commonweale be preserved cleare not onely from all fault, but also from all apparance and bruit of any such intent. Ariston being called before them, stood stiffely

 upon his integritie and excused himselfe, and evermore used this for his best and surest defence, That he had brought no letters at all to any person: howbeit he could not render a ready and found reason of his comming thither: but especially hee was shrewdly troubled and put to his triumps when they charged him, That he had talke and communication with those only of the Barchine faction. Hereupon arose some debate and altercation in the house; whiles some were of opinion, that he should be apprehended for a spie, and clapt up fast in ward: others againe were of mind, that there was no cause to make such a stirre and tumult; for it was an evill president to be given, that straungers comming to their citie, should be troubled and hardly intreated: and the like measure no doubt would be offered to the Carthaginians in Tyrus and in other townes of marchandise, whereunto they use to have resort for exchange and traffique. So for that day  the matter was put off. Ariston framing himselfe to play the craftie Carthaginians among these Carthaginians, wrote a certaine bill, and in the shutting in of the evening, hung it up in the most conspicuous and publicke place of all the citie, even over the seat where the head magistrate useth daily to sit; and himselfe about the third watch gat to shipbord and escaped. The morrow after, when the Suffetes were set on the bench to minister law, the bill aforesaid was seen, taken down, and read: wherin to this effect was written, That Ariston was not come with a message to any person in particular, but to all the Seniours or Elders in generall (for so they call the Senat.) After that the thing was by this meanes made a publicke matter, and the whole state of the Senators reputed culpable, they were not so earnest to search into privat persons. Howbeit thought good it was, that Embassadours should be sent to Rome to give information hereof to the Consuls  and the Senat, and withall, to make complaint of certaine wrongs done by Masanissa.
Masanissa understanding that the Carthaginians were suspected and in some ill name among the Romanes, and also at jarre and variance within themselves; and namely, that the great and principall men were had in jelousie by the Senat for their conferences with Ariston; and their Senate likewise suspected by the people, by reason of that writing above-named of the said Ariston: taking this for a good advantage and opportunitie to do them some injurie, not only invaded their maritime parts and made spoile, but also forced certain tributarie cities to the Carthaginians for to pay himselfe tribute. That quarter of the countrey they call Emporia. It is the sea coast of the lesser Syrtis, and the country is exceeding fertile: there is in it one only citie named Leptis, which paid to the Carthaginians for tribute, a talent every day. All this region Mosanissa  then had plagued sore, yea and for one part thereof he made some claime, as beeing litigious whether it pertained to his kingdome, or the seignorie of the Carthaginians: and because hee knew for truth, that the Carthaginian embassadors were about to goe to Rome, as well to purge themselves of some crimes wherwith they were charged, as to complaine of him; therfore himselfe also addressed his embassadors to Rome, who should lay open more matter against them of deeper suspition, and debate withall as touching the right of those tributes. The Carthaginians were no sooner heardspeake concerning that Tyrian straunger, but the LL. of the Senate grew into some doubt least they should wage warre with Antiochus and the Carthaginians both togither. And this presumption of all the rest made the suspicion most pregnant, because when they had the partie among them and were purposed to send him to Rome, they neither  made the man himselfe sure, nor the barke wherein hee arrived. After this, they fell to debate and argue with the kings Embassadours, about the territorie and land in controversie.
The Carthaginians pleaded for themselves, and stood much upon their bounds and limits, for that the land in suite lay within that precinct, by which P. Scipio the conquerour limited out that territory which pertained to the stegniorie of the Carthaginians. Also they alledged the confession of the king himselfe, who at what time as he pursued Apheres, that fled out of his own realm, and with a companie of Numidians raunged abroad about Cyrenae, made request unto them to give him leave to passe through this very ground, as if (without all question) it belonged to the Carthaginians. The Numidians answered againe to these points and said plainely to their faces, that they lied in their throtes, as touching that supposed limitation and bounding by Scipio: and  moreover, if we would go (say they) and search the very original indeed of the law, what land at all ought the Carthaginians have of their own proper inheritance? For being but meere strangers, they had after much praier and entreatie, as much ground allowed them and no more, to build them a citie in, as they could compasse with thongs cut out of one bull hide. And looke whatsoever they had encroched upon; without that neast and seat of theirs in Byrsa, they gat and held it

by force and violence. And as for the land now in strife, they are not able to prove, that they alwaies  held the same in possession, no not that they kept it any long time together. But as occasion and opportunities served of advauntage, one while they, and another while the Numidian kings made reentrie and enjoied it, and evermore he went away with the possession thereof that was the stronger, and had the keener sword. In these considerations they requested the Romanes to leave the thing in that state and condition, wherein it stood before that the Carthaginians were enemies, or king Masanissa friend and allie to the Romanes; and not to intermeddle betweene, not take a part, but let the winner weare it, and him have it that can hold it. In conclusion, it was thought good, that to the embassadours of both parties this answere should be returned, namely, That they would send certaine Commissioners into Affrick, to decide this controversie about the land in question, betweene the people of Carthage and the king. So there were sent of purpose, P. Scipio Africanus, C. Cornelius Cethegus, and M. Minutius Rufus. Who having heard what could bee said, and seene the thing, left all hanging still in suspence and undecided, without adjudging it by their definitive sentence to the one or the other. But whether they so did, on their owne head and selfe-accord, or by direction from the Senat, is not so certaine, as it seemeth agreeable unto that present time in pollicie, to leave them as they found them, and the controversie still depending. For unlesse it were so, Scipio himselfe alone, in regard of the knowledge that hee had of the thing, and of his authoritie with the persons (so much bound they were unto him on both sides) might with a word of his mouth, or a nod of his head, have ended all this matter.


THE XXXV. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS  of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the five and thirtith Booke.
PYblius Scipio Africanus being sent embassador unto Antiochus, talked at Ephesus with Anniball (who had sided with Antiochus) to this end, that he might rid him of that feare which he  had conceived of the people of Rome, as touching the taking away of his life. Among other matters passed betweene them, when he demaunded of Anniball, whom he iudged to have been the noblest and greatest warriour that ever was, hee answered, that it was Alexander king of the Macedonians: set that he with a small power had discomfited and defeated an infinite number of armies, and withall, passed through those farre dissite and remote parts of the world, unto which a man would not beleeve, that it were possible for any person to go and see them. When he asked again of him whom he deemed for the second: Who but Pyrrhus (quoth he?) because he taught the maner how to pitch a campe, and besides, no man had the cast to gaine places and holds for advauntage, nor could set his corps de guard, or plant garisons better than he. And when he proceeded still to know whom he tooke to be the third, Anniball named his owne goodselfe. At which answere Scipio fell a laughing: And what would you have said then (quoth he) if your hap had been to have vanquished me? Marrie then (saith he) I would have set my selfe before Alexander, before Pyrrhus, and before all  other. Among other prodigious sights, whereof there were reported very many, it is said, that in the yeare wherein Cn. Demitius was Consull, an exe spake, and said these words, ROME, LOOKE TO THY SELFE. The Romanes prepare to warre with Antiochus. Nabis the tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, provoked by the Aetolians, who sollicited both Philip and also Antiochus to wage warre against the people of Rome, revolted from the Romanes, and after hee had levied warre against Philopamen, Pretour of the Achaans, was by the Aetolians slaine. The Aetolians likewise abandoned

 the friendship of the people of Rome, with whom Antiochus king of Syria banded: who warred upon Greece, and surprised many cities, and namely Chalcis and Euboea among the rest. Besides, this booke contameth the martiall affaires in Liguria, and the preparation of Antiochus for the warres.

IN the beginning of that yeere wherein these affaires thus passed, Sext. Digitius Pretor in high Spain, fought battels (rather ordinarie, and for number many, than otherwise memorable and worth the speaking) against those States, whereof after the departure of Cato a great sort had rebelled. And those battels for the most part were so unfortunat, that hardly he could deliver up to his successour the one halfe of those souldiours which he had received.  And doubtlesse all Spaine would have taken heart againe, if the other Pretour P. Cornelius Scipio, the sonne of Cneus, had not sped better in many of his conflicts beyond Iberus. Vpon which terrour, no fewer than fiftie good townes revolted unto him. And these exploits performed Scipio, as Pretour. Who also in qualitie of Propretour, encountred the Lusitanes upon the way, as they returned homeward charged with a mightie great bootie raised out of the base Spaine, which they had utterly pilled and spoiled: where hee fought from the third houre of the after sunrising. day unto the eight, with doubtfull event. For number of soldiours he was inferiour to his enemies, but for all things else he had the vauntage, and went beyond them. For his battaillons were wel appointed and close compacted of armed men, and so he charged upon the enemies marching in a long traine, and the same encombred with a deale of cattell: besides, his souldiours  were fresh and in heart, whereas the other were wearied with long travell. For the enemies set forth at the third watch, and besides their night journey, they had marched three houres also of the day, and without any repose or rest at all, they came to a conflict presently upon their travell on the way. And therefore at the beginning of the battell, so long as they were in any heart, and their strength served, they troubled and disordered the Romanes with the first charge they gave; but afterwards for a while they came to be equall in fight. In which hazard of doubtfull issue the Propretour vowed to set forth certaine solemne games to the honour of Iupiter, in case he might discomfit the enemies, and kill them in chase. At the length the Romanes advaunced forward more hotely, and the Lusitanes reculed, yea, and anone turned their backes quite. And when as in this traine of victorie the Romanes pursued them hard in the tout, there were of the  enemies slaine upon twelve thousand, five hundred and fortie taken prisoners, all in manner horsemen; and of militarie ensignes they caried away one hundred thirtie and foure. Of the Romane armie seventie and three onely were lost. This battell was fought not far from the citie Ilipa. And thither brought P. Cornelius his victorious armie, enriched with prey and pillage. Which was laid all abroad before the towne, and everyman had leave giuen to challenge and claim his owne. All the rest was given to the Treasurer for to be sold, and the monie raised therof, was parted among the souldiours.
Now had not C. Flaminius the Pretour as yet taken his leave of Rome, when these things fell out in Spaine, and therefore both he and his friends talked and discoursed much upon these occurrents both good and bad: and forasmuch as a great warre in his province was broken out to  a light fire, and himselfe was to receive from Sext. Digitius but a small remnant of an armie, and the same timorous still and full of fright, as not wel recovered of their former flight, he had assaied to bring about, that the Senate would assigne unto him one of the citie-legions; to the end that when he had joined thereto those souldiors which himselfe had enrolled according to an order set downe by the Senate, he might out of all that number chuse forth sixe thousand and five hundred footmen, and three hundred horsemen. With which legion (for in the armie of Sext. Digitius he reposed small confidence) he minded to make warre. The auncient Senatours denied and said, That acts of the Senate were not to bee made upon every flying tale and report set abroad and blased by some particular persons in favor of magistrates. Neither would they hold anything for certaine, but that which either the Pretours themselves wrote out of the provinces, or embassadours  sent of purpose, related. And if there were any such commotion and trouble in Spain, they were of advise, that the Pretour should levie in hast without Italie, such tumultuarie souldiors, as in that case were usually taken up. The intent and mind of the Senat was, that soldiers should in that sort be prest out in Spaine. Valerius Antias writeth, that C. Flaminius both sailed into Sicilie to levie and muster men, and also as he made saile from Sicilie toward Spain, was

by wind and tempest put with the shore of Africk: where he found certeine souldiers dispersed  over the countrey, remaining of the armie of P. Africanus: of whom he tooke a militarie oth to serve him in his warres: and that to these levies raised in two provinces, he joyned also a third in Spaine.
The warre of the Ligurians likewise grew as fast: for they had alreadie besieged and invested Pisae with fortie thousand men: and thither resorted and flocked dayly unto them great multitudes as well for hope of pillage, as upon the bruit and rumor that went of the warre. Minutius the Consull came at the day appointed to Arretium, which was the Rendezvous where he had commaunded all his souldiours to meete him: from whence he marched with a fouresquare Battailon toward Pisae. And when the enemies had removed their camp a mile from the citie on the other side of the river, the Consull entred the towne, which no doubt by his comming he  preserved. The next day himselfe also encamped on the other side of the river, almost halfe a mile from the enemies, from which place he made light skirmishes with them and saved the territorie of his allies from the excursions and robberies of the enemies. Hee durst not as yet try a battaile in pitched field, as having but raw and new souldiours, and those gathered out of many kinds of men, and not so well knowne among themselves, that one might surely trust another. The Ligurians bearing themselves bold of their numbers, not only came forth into the field readie to bid battaile, and hazard all upon a throw: but having multitudes at commaundement and to spare, sent out into all parts sundrie companies to spoile and raise booties as farre as to the marches and frontiers of the countrey. And when they had gathered together much cattaile and great store of pillage, they had a strong place of defence readie at hand, well  manned and garded, by meanes whereof all was convoyed into their burroughs and townes.
Thus while the Ligurians warre was settled about Pisae, the other Consull L. Cornelius Merula entred with his armie by the utmost consines of the Ligurians into the territorie of the Boians: where the warre was managed farre otherwise than with the Ligurians. For the Consull entred the field in battaile array, but the enemies fell off, and would not fight. In so much as the Romanes seeing none to come forth and present themselves, ran abroad into all parts to speed their hands with pillage. And the Boians chose rather to suffer their goods to be ransaked, making no resistance, than to save the same with the hazard of a battaile. The Consull when he had wrought his pleasure, and consumed all with fire and sword, departed out of the territorie of  the enemies, and marched toward Modenna. Mutina securely without any regard of himselfe, as through a peaceable country of his friends. The Boij perceiving once that they were gone out of their limits, followed after with a still and silent march, seeking some convenient place for to lay an ambush. And having in the night season passe beyond the Romane camp, they seised themselves of a streight passage within a fastnesse, through which of necessitie the Romanes must passe, and there they forlayed them. This was not so closely caried, but the Consull had an yokling thereof: and therefore whereas his manner was to set out in his march early in the morning, long before day light, now for feare least the darkenes of the night should increase the terror of a tumultuarie skirmish, he waited for the day. And albeit the sunne was up before he removed and set forward, yet he sent out a troup of horsemen to scoure and discover the quarters. And after he was advertised by these espials what number there was of enemies, and in  what place they were, he commaunded that all the baggage and cariage of the whole armie should be bestowed in the mids, and that the Triarij should stake and pale it all
about, whiles he with the rest of his forces marched in order of battaile, and approched the enemie. The like also did the French, after they once saw that their ambush and traines were detected, and that they must of necessitie fight a set pitched battaile, where downe-right blowes, cleane strength, and pure valour, was to carry away the victorie. Thus about the second houre of the day they affronted one another. The left wing of the horsemen of the allies and the extraordinaries fought in the vantgard, under the conduct of two Lieutenants that had bene Consuls, to wit, M. Marcellus, and T. Sempronius, Consull the yeere before. The new Consull one while was in the front of the battaile, another while at the taile to keepe in the legions, least for egre desire of fight  they should advance forward to the conflict before that the signall was geven. As for the men of armes belonging to the legions, he commaunded Quintius and P. Minutius, Marshals on Colonels, to bring them forth, and conduct them without the battaile into a large plaine, from whence out of the open ground they should on a sodaine charge the enemies, when he gave

 them a signall by sound of Trumpet. Thus as he was marshalling and directing his men, there came a messenger from T. Sempronius Longus with a report, that the loose Extraordinarie souldiers aforesaid were not able to abide the violence of the Gaules: that very many of them were slaine, and those that remained, partly for weerinesse of travade, and partly for fearefull cowardise began to quaile their heate of fight: and therefore if he thought so good, he should send one of the two legions to succour, before they had received farther dishonor. Whereupon the second legion was sent, and the Extraordinaries retired themselves out of the battaile. Then began the conflict anew, by reason that the souldiours came in fresh and in heart, and the legion besides was complet and fully furnished with all her companies: the left wing of horsemen aforesaid was retired out of the battaile, and in lieu thereof, the right wing advanced into the forefront.  By this time the sunne with extreme skorching heate, rosted and fried the bodies of the Frenchmen, which of all things can least abide heat: howbeit, standing with their ranks thicke and close together, one while they leaned one upon another: other whiles they rested and bare themselves upon their targets, and susteined the violence of the Romanes. Which when the Consull perceived, he commaunded C. Livius Salinator who had the conduct of the light horse in the wings, to send in the quickest horse in all his companie, with full carriere to breake their ranks: and gave charge that the legionarie horsemen should abide behind in the reregard. This tempest and storme of Cavallerie first shuffled and put in dissaray the battaile of the Gaules, and afterwards brake their ranks and files cleane, yet not so, that they turned their backs: for why, their captaines and leaders would not suffer them, laying about with their truncheons  upon the backs of them that so trembled for feare, and forced them againe into their ranks: but the light horsemen aforesaid riding among them would not permit them to stand to it, and keepe their place. The Consull for his part encouraged and exhorted his souldiers to stick to it a while, for the victorie was in their hands; and to charge still upon them, so long as they saw them disordred and affrighted: for if they suffered their ranks to close againe, they should abide another conflict, and the same perhaps doubtfull and dangerous. The Ensigne-bearers he commaunded to advaunce their banners: and thus at length with putting all their power and good will together, they discomfited the enemie, and put him to flight. After they shewed their backs once and tooke them to their heeles, running away on all sides, then the legionarie horsemen were sent out after to follow the chase: fourteene thousand Boians that day were slaine, a thousand  and nine hundred taken prisoners alive: 221 horsemen: three of their leaders: and of ensignes were woon 212, and chariots 63. The Romanes likewise woon not this victorie so cleere, but it cost them some bloud. For of their owne souldiours and allies together, there died above five thousand: 23 Centurions, besides foure Colonels of Allies, and two Marshals of the second legion, to wit, M. Genutius, and M. Martius.
Atone and the selfe same time in manner, both the Consuls letters were brought to Rome. Cornelius his letters, touching the battaile fought at Mutina with the Boians: but the other of Q. Minutius from Pisae, were written to this effect, That whereas by lot it belonged to him to hold the assembly for the election of new magistrates, yet considering in how doubtfull tearms of hazard his affaires stood in Liguria, that he might not possibly depart from thence without  the utter ruine of the allies, and hinderance of the weale publicke: therefore if it might seeme so good unto the LL. of the Senat, he would advise them to send unto his brother Consull, That he, who had finished his warre, might returne to Rome for to hold the foresaid generall assembly for the election: but in case he should thinke much thereof, because this charge properly appertaineth not to him; hee promised them, that himselfe would doe whatsoever the Senate should thinke good. But he requested them to consider and be well advised, Whether it were not more expedient for the common-weale to proceed rather to an interreigne, than that he should leave the province in that state of jeopardie.
The Senat hereupon gave in charge to C. Scribonius for to send two embassadours both of Senators calling, unto L. Cornelius the Consull, who should carrie also with them unto him the letters of his colleague written and sent unto the Senate:  and withall, to let him understand, that unlesse he would come himselfe to Rome for the election of new magistrates to succeed, the Senat would suffer an interreigne rather than call away Q. Minutius from the warre unfinished, and wherein he was wholly employed. The Embassadours that were sent, brought word backe, That L. Cornelius would repaire to Rome himselfe for the chusing of new magistrates. As touching the letters of L. Cornelius, wherein he did them

to understand, what happie issue and successe he had in the battaile with the Boians; there was  some reasoning and debate in the Senat house: for M. Claudius his lieutenant had written other letters privately to most of the Senatours, to this effect; That they were much beholden and bound to give thankes unto the good fortune of the people of Rome, and the valour of the soldiours, in that they sped so well as they did: for by meanes of the Consull, not only there were a good number of men lost, but also the armie of the enemies was escaped out of their hands, when they had fit opportunitie presented unto them, of a finall diffeiture and overthrow thereof: and that by this occasion there was a greater number of the souldiours miscarried; for that they who should have rescued and succoured those that were distressed, came too late out of the reregard: and the reason why the enemies got away and escaped was this, because the legionarie horsemen had not the signall soone enough sounded unto them, and could not possibly pursue  them in the chase. Therefore as concerning that point, they would not determine any thing rashly and hand over head, but the matter was referred and put over to a more frequent assembly of Senatours.
A greater object there was to trouble their heads; for the citie was much oppressed with usurie: and albeit the avarice and covetousnesse of men had beene well gaged and bridled by many lawes concerning usurie, yet there was a cautelous devise and shift found out, to avoid all statures in that behalfe: to wit, that all obligations should passe in the names of allies, and be sealed unto them, who were not tied and bound to observe the lawes aforesaid. By which meanes the creditors enwrapped their debtors in what bonds they list, and forced them to pay extreame interest as they would themselves, without stint. For to see into this disorder and enormitie, and  to redresse the same, it was thought good and order taken, to set downe and limit a certain day, namely, upon which the usurers were last restrained. From which day all those allies should come in and declare and prosesse, what mony they had put forth upon usurie to any citizens of Rome; and that the creditour should have right to recover those monies put forth from that time, according to such conditions as the debtour would himselfe. Hereupon, after there were discovered great summes of money and debts contracted by this fraudulent practise, M. Sempronius a Tribune of the Commons, by advise of the Senate propounded a law, and the Commons alowed it, That the same course of putting out money practised betweene citizen and citizen of Rome, should likewise be in force among the allies of the Latine nation. In this sort went matters in Italie, both within the citie of Rome, and also in the warres abroad.

In Spaine the warre was nothing so much as the bruit that ran thereof. C. Flaminius in high Spaine, was Ilucia, a towne in the Oretans countrey: after which exploit, he laid up his soldiers in their winter harbour. And in winter time there passed certaine light skirmishes (not woorth the naming) against the excursions of brigands and theeves, I may rather say, than enemies: and yet the fortune was variable, and not without some losse of men. As for M. Fulvius he atchieved great matters: for hee fought in a raunged battaile with banner displaied against the Vacceans, the Vectones, and the Celtiberians, before the town Toletum; where hee discomsued and put to flight the armie of those nations, and tooke prisoner alive, their king Hilermus.
Whiles these things thus passed in Spaine, the day drew neere, of the solemne election of magistrates at Rome: and therefore L. Cornelius the Consull having left M. Claudius lieutenant  in the armie, came to Rome: who, after he had discoursed in the Senate house of his owne exploits, and in what estate the province stood, he complained to the LL. of the Senat, that considering so great a warre was brought to an end, by one battaile so fortunately and happily fought, there was no solemnitie to the honour of the gods, performed in that behalfe. Over and besides, he demaunded, That they would decree a procession and triumph with all. But before the Senatours were to deliver their opinions to this demaund, Q.Metellus, who had beene Consull and Dictator, rose up and said, That there had been letters brought at one and the same time; both from the Consull Cornelius to the Senate, and also from M. Marcellus to a great many of the Senatours, and those letter importing contrarieties: whereupon the consultation of that matter had beene deferred and put off, to the end that it might be argued and debated in the presence  of them both, who wrate the letters: and therefore I ever looked (quoth he) that the Consull (knowing especially that his lieutenant had written and enformed somewhat against him, and considering that himselfe was to repaire to Rome) would have brought him also with him; seeing that it had been more meet and besitting him to have delivered the armie to T. Sempronius,

 one that was in the commission and had a commaund, than to a lieutenant. But it should seeme now, that hee was left behind farre enough off of very purpose, for feare he would avow and justifie personally his hand-writing, and charge him face to face: and that if the Consull should make report of any untruth, he might be chalenged therefore, and the thing sisted and canvased, untill the truth appeared clearely and came to light: and therfore my opinion is (qd. hee) that nothing be determined at this present, as touching the demaunds of the Consull. But when as he persisted not with standing, and followed the suit still, namely that they would ordaine a solemne procession, and that himselfe might enter the citie, riding in triumph: then Marcus and C. Titinius, both Tribunes of the Commons, protested, that they would interpose their negative, and cancell the order of the Senate in that behalfe.
 The Censors for that time, were Sex. Aelius Paetus and C. Cornelius Cetbegus, created the yeare before. Cornelius tooke a revieu of the citie and numbred the people; and there were accounted by his survey 143704 polls of citizens. Great flouds arose that yeere, and Tyber over flowed all that flats and plaine places of the citie: and about the gate Flumentana certain houses and buildings were overthrowen withall, and laid along. The gate Caelimontana besides, was stricken with lightning, and the wall about it was likewise blasted from heaven. At Aricia, Lanuvium, and in mount Aventine, it rained stones. And reported it was from Capua, that a great swarine of waspes came flying into the market place, and setled upon the temple of Mars; which beeing with great care taken up and gathered togither, were afterward consumed with fire. In regard of these prodigious tokens, order was given, that the Decemvirs should search and peruse the  bookes of Sibylla; whereupon a novendiall sacrifice (to continue nine daies) was appointed, a publicke procession solemnized, and the citie was cleansed and hallowed. About the same time M. Porcius Cato, dedicated the chappell of Virgin victorie, neere to the temple of the goddesse Vi^ctorie, two yeeres after that he had vowed it. In that yeere also the Triumvirs, C. Manlius Volso, L. Apustius Fullo, and P. Aelius Tubero, (who had preferred a bill of request about the planting of a Colonie) had commission graunted, to conduct a Colonie of Latines into the countrey of Thurium: and thither went three thousand footmen and three hundred horsemen; a small number in comparison of the largenesse and quantitie of the territorie. There might well have beene set out thirtie acres for every footman, and threescore for an horseman: but by the motion and advise of Apustius, one third part of the lands was excepted and reserved, to the end, that  afterwards in time, they might enroll new
Coloners if it pleased them. And therefore the footmen had twentie acres, and the horsemen fortie apeece.
Now approched the end of they yeere, and more ambition there was, and hoter suite for place of dignitie in the election of Consuls, than ever had been knowne any time before. Many mightie men, as well of the Patrity and nobles, as the Commoners, stood and laboured hard for the Consulship, to wit, P. Cornelius Scipio, the sonne of Cneus, who lately was departed out of Spaine after he had atcheeved many worthie deeds. L. Iuintius Flaminius who had ben Admirall of the navie in Greece, and Cn. Manlius Volso, all of the Nobilitie. But of the Commons were C. Laelius, Cn. Domitius, C. Livius Salinator, and M. Acilius. But all mens eies were fixed upon Iuintius and Cornelius: For they desired one place, being both of them nobly descened, and  their fresh glorie for feats of warre, recommended both the one and the other. But above all other things, the brethren of these competitours, two most renowmed warriors of their time, set the debate on a light fire. The glorie of Scipio, as it was the greater of the twaine, so it was more subject to envie. The honour of Iuntius was more fresh, as who that yeer had newly triumphed. Over and besides, the one of them had beene now almost ten yeeres continually conversant in the eies of men (a thing that maketh great men not so highly regarded, by reason that they are growne stale, and the world is full alreadie of them) also he had been twise Consull, and Censour since he vanquished Anniball. But in Iuintius all was fresh and new, to win the good grace and favor of men. And more than that, he neither after his triumph had obtained ought of the people, not, to say a truth, requested any thing. He alledged, that he made suite for his owne naturall and  whole brother by both sides, and not for a cousin german; in the behalfe of a very companion and partaker with him in the managing of the war (for as himselfe served by land, so his brother performed many exploits by sea.) So he obtained, that Quintius should be preferred before his competitor, whom Africanus and his brother [Asiaticus] brought in and graced, whom the whole race of Cornely seemed to countenance, even then when a Cornelius, Consull, was president of the election,

and held the assembly, whom the Senat had given so grave a testimonie of, in adjudging him  to be the best man simply in all the citie, and thought most worthie to receive the goddesse, dame Idea.1, comming from Pessinus to the citie of Rome. Thus were L. Quintius, and Cn. Domiuus Aenobarbus created Consuls, in such sort, that Africanus was of no credite, and bare no stroke at all (ye may be sure) in the election of a Consull out of the third estate of Commons, albeit he emploied himselfe, and did his best for C. Laelius. The next day after were the Prectors elected, namely L. Scribonius Libo, M. Fulvius Centimalus, A. Attilius Serranus, M. Baebius Tamphilus, L. Valenius Tappus, and Q. Salonius Sarra. In this yeer M. Aemylius Lepidus and L. Aemylius Paulus, the Censors, bare themselves so in their office, as they made their yeer to be notable and much spoken of. They condemned and fined many of the citie grasiers or farmers of the common pastures: and of that money which arose of their amercements, were certaine gilded shields made, which  were set up on the finiall or lanterne of Iupiters temple. They made one terrace or gallerie without the gate Trigemina, with a merchants hall or Burse adjoined there to, neere Tyber: and another from the gate Fontinalis they built in length as far as to the altar of Mars, leading to Mars field.
For a long time nothing was done in Liguria worth the remembrance. But about the end of the yeere, twise were the Romanes in great jeopardie: for both the campe of the Consull was assailed and hardly defended, and also not long after, as the Romane hoast marched through a streight pase, the armie of the Ligurians kept the very gullet of the passage, and the Consull seeing he could not make way through, turned his ensignes, and began to retire the same way hee came: but by that time, some of the enemies had gained also the backe part, of the pase, insomuch  as the lamentable remembrance of the Caudine overthrow, not onely presented it selfe to their spirit and mind, but also was in manner an object to their eie. Now had he amongst his auxiliarie or aid-forces, to the number almost of eight hundred horse. Whose captaine promised the Consull, that he and his would breake through whether way hee would, let him onely but tell him which of the two quarters were better peopled and inhabited: for the first thing that he did, he would fire their villages and houses; to the end, that the feare and fright there of might force the Ligurians to depart out of the chase which they held and beset, and run to succour their owne neighbours. The Consull commended him highly, and sed him with hope of large rewards. Whereupon the Numidians mounted on horsebacke, and began to ride about the corps de guard of the enemies, without offering to charge upon any man. At the first, a man that  had seen them, would have thought nothing more contemptible, being both men and horse, litle, spare and gaunt. The horseman unarmed and without weapon, save that hee carrieth about him some light darts: the horses without bridles; and as they ran shutting out their stiffe neckes, and bearing their heads forward without any reining at all, they made a very ill favoured sight. And the riders, for to make themselves more despised, would for the nones seeme to take fals from their
horses, and make their enemies good sport. Whereupon they (who if at first they had been assailed, would have been heedfull and readie to have received the charge) now sat still (many of them unarmed) to behold this pleasant pastime. The Numidians would gallop toward them, and presently ride back again, but so, as by little and little they gained ground, and advaunced neerer to the pase, yet making semblance, as if they had had no rule of their horses, but were caried thither  against their wils. At the last, they set spurs to their horses indeed, and brake through the mids of the enemies guards: and so soone as they had recovered the open ground, they set on fire all the houses neere the high way side, and so forward they burnt the next village they came unto, and destroied all asore them with fire and sword. First the smoke that was descried, afterwards, the outcrie heard of them that were affrighted in the villages, and last of all, the children and old folke that fled to save themselves, made a trouble and hurlyburly in the campe: in some much, as every man of himselfe without advise, without warrant or direction, made what hast he could to runne and save his owne. Thus in the turning of an hand, the campe was abandoned, and the Consull delivered from siege, arrived thither where he intended.
But neither Boians nor Spaniards (with whom that yeare the Romanes made warre) were so  despiteous and maliciously bent against them, as the whole nation of the AErolians. They at the verie first were in very good hope, that presently upon the remoove of the forces out of Greece, Antiochus would have entered Europe, and seazed upon the vacant possession thereof: and that neither Philip nor Nabis would be in rest and doe nothing. But seeing them not to stirre in any

 place, they thought it high time to make some trouble and confusion themselves, for seare least by delayes and lingering, all their designments would turne to nothing: and therfore they published a Diet or Councell to be holden at Naupactum. In which assembly Thoas their Pretour, after he had made grievous complaint of the wrongs received by the Romanes, mooving and solliciting the state of Aetolia (for that they of all other nations and cities of Greece, were least honoured and set by after that victorie, where of they had beene the cause) gave his advise, That there should be embassadours sent to all the neighbour kings, not only to found their minds and affections, but also to incite and pricke them every one forward to enter into armes against the Romanes. So Damocritus was addressed to Nabis, Nicander to Philip, and Dicaearchus the brother of the Pretour unto Antiochus.
Damocritus had in commission to signifie unto the tyrant of Lacedaemon,  That by the losse of his maritime cities, the very strings and sinews of his tyrannie and kingdome were cut in sunder. For from thence was hee furnished with souldiours, from thence had he his ships and fervitours at sea: where as now, hee might see the Archaeans LL. and rulers of Peloponnesus, whiles himselfe was pinned up and enclosed within his walls, and never should he have opportunitie to recover himselfe, if he let passe this that presently was offered unto him. No Romane armie was now in Greece: and never would the Romanes thinke it sufficient cause, to passe over the seas with their legions into Greece, for any occasion of Gyttheum or other Laconians inhabiting the sea coasts. These reasons were laid forth to incense the courage of the tyrant, to the end, that when Antiochus was once passed over into Greece, he being touched in conscience, that he had broken the Romane league, by committing outrage upon their allies, might  of necessitie joine and band with Antiochus.
Semblable remonstrances and reasons used Nicander for to provoke and persuade Philip: and much more matter he had to enforce that point, as the king was deposed from much higher degree of estate than the tyrant had been, and also had sustained farre greater losses. To this, he alleadged the auncient name and renowme of the KK. of Macedonie; and how that nation had over run the whole world, and filled all places with their noble conquests and victories. Moreover he said, That he advised him to take a course, which was safe both to be enterprised, and also easie to bee executed. For he gave not Philip counsell to stirre, before that Antiochus were passed over with an armie into Greece: and considering that he without the aid of Antiochus had maintained warre so long against the Romans and Aetolians, what possible meanes had the Romans to with stand him, assisted with Antiochus and the Aetolians his  allies, who even then were fiercer enemies than the Romanes? Over and besides, hee inferred this reason also, what a brave and doubtie captaine Anniball was, a man even borne to bee an enemie to the Romanes, and who had slaine alreadie more leaders and souldiours of theirs, than were left behind. These were the allegations of Nicander to Philip. As for Dicaerchus, hee had other motiver to persuade with Antiochus.
First and principally above all others, hee affirmed, That howsoever the price and bootie of Philip fell to the Romanes, the victorie was gained and atcheeved by the Aetolians, and none but they either gave the Romanes entrance and passage into Greece, or furnished them with forces for the performance and accomplishment of the victorie. Then hee shewed and made promise what power as well of foote as horse they would present unto Antiochus toward his warres, what places they would give  him for his land-forces, and what havens and harbours for his strength and armie at sea. After all this he stuck not (to serve his own turn) for to overreach and tell a lowd lie as touching Philip and Nabis, in giving out confidently that they were both of them ready and at the point to renue war: and would take the vantage of the very first opportunitie and occasion that could be presented, to recover those things which by warre they had lost. Thus the Aetolians laboured to set all the world at once upon the top of the Romanes. Howbeit, the KK. were either not moved at all with their solliciting, or bestirred them more slowly than they looked for. But as for Nabis, he sent immediately about all the townes by the sea side, certeine persons of purpose to sow discord and kindlie seditions among them: and some of their principall citizens he woon by gifts and presents to his owne purpose and designements: but such as stifly continued fast and firme in  alliance and allegeance with the Romanes, those he made away and murdred. Now had T. Iuintius given in charge and commission to the Achaeans, for to guard all the Laconians that dwelt upon the sea coasts: and therefore presently they both dispatched their embassadors unto the Tyrant, to put him in mind of the confederacie and association with the Romanes, and to warne him and give him advertisement, that in no wise he would trouble that peace, which he had so

earnestly craved and sought for: and also sent aid unto Gyttheum, which now the tyrant began  to assault; yea, and addressed other embassadors also to Rome to geve intelligence of these occurrents.
Antiochus the king after he had that winter time given his daughter in marriage to Ptolomaeus the king of Aegypt at Rhaphia a citie in Phoenicia, retired to Antiochia; and in the very end of the same winter, passed through Cilicia over the mountaine Taurus, and came to Ephesus. And from thence in the beginning of the Spring, after he had sent his sonne Antiochus into Soria. Syria for to defend and keepe in obedience the utmost frontiers of his kingdom, least in his absence there might arise some troubles behind his back, he marched with all his land-forces against the Pisidians, who inhabit about (...). Selga.
At the same time the Romane embassadors P. Sulpitius and P. Villius, who as we said before  had ben sent unto Antiochus with direction, first to visit king Eumenes, arrived at Riso. Carpesso., Elea, and from thence went up to Pergamo. Pergamus, where Eumenes kept his royall court. Eumenes was desirous in this heart that Antiochus should be warred upon: supposing verily, that if he were at peace, being a prince so much mightier than himselfe, he would be but an ill and dangerous neighbour to neere unto him: but if warre were once afoote, that he would be no more able to beard and match the Romanes than Philip had been: and that either he should wholly be overthrowne and come to utter ruine; or if, being vanquished he had peace given unto him by the Romanes; then, as he lost much thereby and would be weaker, so himselfe should gaine by the bargaine, and grow mightier, that afterwards he might be able easily of himselfe to make his part good, and hold his owne against him, without the help and aid of the Romanes: or if any misfortune  should happen unto him, he were better by farre, to hazard any fortune whatsoever in the Romane societie, than either alone to endure the lordly dominion of Antiochus and be subject, or in refusing to obey, be compelied there to by force and armes. For these causes he employed all the credit and authoritie he had, yea and addressed all counsell that he could devise for to prick on and set forward the Romanes in this warre. Sulpitius remained behind sick at Pergamus. But Vilius advertised that the king was occupied and busied in the Pisidian warre, went to Ephesus: and whiles he abode there some few dayes, he endevoured and made meanes to have conference often times with Anniball, who haply at that time so journed there, both to sound his mind if possibly he could, and also to secure him of all feare from the Romanes. In these meetings and communications, no other thing passed nor was done between them. But see what ensued hereupon  of it selfe, as if it had bene a thing wrought and compassed of meere pollicie. Anniball by this meanes was lesse set by and in smaller credit with the king, yea and in all matters began to be more and more suspected and had in jelosie. Claudius (the Historian) who followeth the greeke bookes of Acilius, writeth that P. Africanus was joyned in that embassage, and that he talked and devised with Anniball at Ephesus: and namely maketh report of one conference and speech betweene them twaine: and that is this. Africanus demaunded of Anniball, whom in his judgement, he tooke to have bene the greatest commaunder for feates of armes, that ever was: to which he made answere, that he judged Alexander the king of the Macedonians was simply the most excellent warrior; in this regard, that he with a small power had defeited innumerable armies; and besides had passed as farre as to the utmost bounds of the whole earth, even to those  lands, that a man would think incredible, for any one to reach unto. And when he asked againe whom he deemed worthie to stand in the second place: he answered, that Pyrrhus was the man; for that he first taught how to pitch a camp, and above all other points of military skill, no man knew better to choose out commodious ground and places of advantage, or more cunningly to plant and dispose garisons: besides he had such cast and a dexteritie, to draw and win men unto him, that the Italian nations had leiser have bene subject to him a foreine prince, than to live under the people of Rome, not with standing they had of long time the seignorie and rule of those parts. And when he proceeded still to know whom he reputed for the third, he made no sticking at the matter but named himselfe. Whereupon Scipio tooke up a laughter and replied againe: What would you say then, if your hap had bene to have subdued me? Mary then quoth he, I  would thinke I were worthy to be set before Alexander, before Pyrrhus, yea and before all other martiall men and commanders in the whole world. At this answere, Scipio tooke delight and pleasure, to see how surrelly and caurelously he had like a cunning Carthaginian, couched his words in a certeine kind of flatterie, as if he had sequestred him from out of the raunge and ranke

 of all other captaines, as being by many degrees incomparable, and farre above all others. Then Villius went forward from Ephesus to Apamea: and thither Antiochus also repaired for to meete him, hearing of the comming of Romane legates. In this communication and conference at Apamea, the matter was debated much after the same sort, as it had bene at Rome between Quintius and the kings embassadors. But the newes of Antichus the kings sonne his death (whom I said a little before to have bene sent into Syria) brake off the peace. Great mourning and sorrow there was in the kings court, and much was that yong prince missed and moaned. For, that good proose he had given of himselfe, that if he had lived any long time, he would have proved by all likelyhood of his towardnesse, a great, a mightie, and a righteous king. The derer and better beloved he was of all men; the more suspicious was his death and namely  that his father doubting that he would presse forward and be instant to succeed him in his old age, tooke order by the ministery of certain Eunuches or guelded men (persons greatly accepted with kings for such services) to have him poisoned. And they say, that another cause also set him forward to commit this secret act, because having geven the citie Lysimachia to his sonne Selencus, he had no such place to bestow upon Antiochus his sonne, for to keepe his residence in, whereunto he might have removed him farther off from his owne person, under colour of doing him honor. Howbeit, great semblance and shew there was of much mourning and lamentation all over the court for certeine daies: in so much as the Rom. embassador retired himselfe to Pergamus, because he was loth to converse there uncivilly, at so unseasonable a time. The king returned to Ephesus, and gave over the war that he had enterprised. Where, the court gates being  shut by occasion of the mourning time, he devised and consulted in great secret with one Minio, an inward friend unto him, and whom of all other he loved best, and trusted most. This Minio, a meere stranger and altogether ignorant in foreiene affaires and forces, measuring and esteeming the power and greatnes of the king by his exploits done in Syria or in Asia, deemed verily, that Antiochus had not only the better cause, in that the Romanes demaunded unreasonable conditions; but also should have the upper hand in the triall thereof by warre. When as now the king refused to have any conference and dispute with the embassadors, either for that he knew by good experience that it would be bootless for him so to do, or because he was troubled in spirit upon this late and fresh object of griese and sorrow: Minio undertooke the businesse, and  prosessed that he would speake to the point of the matter and to good purpose: and so persuaded the king to send for the embassadors from Pergamons. By this time Sulpotius was recovered of his sicknes, and therefore both of them repaired to Ephesus;The Oration of Minio. where excused the king, and in his absence they began to treate about their affaires.
Then Minio with a premeditate oration began in this wise. I see well (qd. he) that you Romanes pretend unto the world a goodly title of setting free the cities of Greece, but your deedes are not answerable to your words: and ye have set downe unto Antiochus one manner of law to be tried unto, and practice your selves another. For how commeth it about that the Smyrneans and Lampsacenes should be Greekes, more than the Neapolitanes; the Rhegines, and Tarentines, of whom you exact tribute and require ships, by vertue of the accord and covenants between you? Why send you yeerely to Saracose and  other Greeke cities of Sicily, a Pretor in soveraigne authority, with his rods and axes? Cerres, ye have nothing else to say, but that ye have subdued them in warre, and by right of conquest: have imposed these conditions upon them. The like; yea and the same cause know yea that Antiochus alledgeth as concerning Smyrna, Lampsacus, and other cities and states of Ionia and Aeolis: For having been conquered in war by his auncestors and progenitors; having I say been made tributarie and taillable, he chalengeth of them the auncient rights and duties due from them, and to him belonging. And therfore if ye wil' debate and treat the question according to aquitie and reason, and not rather pick quarels and seeke occasion of war, I would gladly know what ye will answere to him in this point? To this Sulpitius made answere in this wise. Antiochus (quoth he) hath done very well, and with good regard of modestie, in that having no other matters to plead unto for his defense and the maintenance of his cause, he hath made choise of any other rather than himselfe to  be the speaker. For what one thing is there alike in those cities which you have named and put in comparison? Of the Rhegines, Neapolitanes and Tarentines, we demaund that which is our due according to the deeds of covenants endented, and hath ever bene since time that first they were in subjection under us; that I say which we have chalenged and enjoyed by vertue of one continued course and tenor of right, by us ever practised without any intermission or interruption.

And are you able to avouch, that as those nations neither by themselves nor by any other, have  altered and chaunged the accord betweene us and them; so the cities of Asia, when they once became subject to the auncestors of Antiochus, remained alwaies in the perpetuall possession of your kingdome? And not rather, that some of them have beene under the obeisaunce of Philip, and others obedient to Ptolomaee? Yea and divers of them for many yeeres have been free and used their owne liberties without contradiction, and no words or doubt made thereof? For admit this once, that (because these cities sometimes were in bondage through the iniquitie of those times where in they were oppressed) there shall be a right pretended, and the same be effectuall to reduce them againe after so many ages into servitude? What wanteth it but ye may as well say, that we have done just nothing, in delivering Greece out of the hands of Philip? and that his successours and posteritie, may claime againeand lay title to Corinth, Chalcis, Demetrias, and the whole Thessalian nation? But what meane I to maintaine the cause of the cities of Greece, whome it were more meet and reasonable, that both wee and the king himselfe would give audience unto, and let them plead what they can for their owne selves? With that he commaunded the embassages of the cities to be called in, which were prepared and instructed asorehand by Eumenes, who made this reckoning, that whatsoever strength went from Antiuchus, should accrue and come unto him and his kingdome. Many were admitted to speake: and whiles every one set forward his owne cause, some by way of complaint, others in manner of demaund, each one putting in for himselfe without regard of right or wrong, so he served his owne time, they fell at length from reasoning to warbling and wrangling: in so much, as the Embassadours returned to Rome as uncertaine and doubtfull in all matters as they were when they came,
without  releasing or obtaining any one thing at all.
When they were dismissed and gone, the king held a councell as touching the Romane war. In which assembly, some delivered their opinion more freely and stoutly than others: but generally the more bitter speech that any one used against the Romanes, the greater hope he had to enter into especiall grace and favour with the king. One above the rest, inveighed much and spake against those proud and insolent demaunds of the Romanes, who imposed hard lawes and conditions upon Antiochus, the mightiest king of all Asia, as if he had beene no better than Nabis, whome they had conquered and subdued. And yet (faith he) they left unto Nabis some seignorie and dominion in his owne countrey and citie of Lacedaemon:
wheras if Lampsacum and Smyrna should be at the command of Antiochus, they deemed that an unworthy thing and  a very indignitie. Others opined and said, that those two cities were but small causes, and not woorth the naming, for so puissant a prince to stand upon and to warre for. But alwaies (say they) men begin with just and reasonable demaunds, to make an overture and way to compasse and obtaine that which is unjust. Vnlesse one would beleeve, that when Persians requested of the Lacedaemonians, water and earth, they stood in need of a clot and turse of ground, or a draught of water. In like sort for all the world the Romanes doe but sound and trie the king, in their demaunds touching these two cities. For other cities likewise, so soone as they shall perceive that those two have shaken off the yoke of obedience, will soon revolt and turne to that people which is their deliverer, and at whose hands they hope for libertie. And say, that freedome were not to them more deare and pretious than bondage, yet it is the nature of every man to feed and please  himselfe with a bare hope of a chaunge and new world, much more than with the assured hold of any present state whatsoever. There was in place at this councell, Alexander of Acamania, one who sometime had friended Philip; but of late daies was fallen from him and followed the court of Antiochus, a more wealthie and magnificent prince: and being taken for a politician who had a special insight into the state of Greece, and was not ignorant of the affaires of Rome, had would himselfe into high favour and inward friendship with the king, that he was taken in to be one of his privie counsell, and acquainted with all his secrets.
This man, as if the question in hand had beene, not, Whether war should be levied or no; but, Where, and by What means, and How it should be managed, spake aloud and said, That he made full reckoning and account in his very spirit and heart of the victorie, in case the king would passe the seas over into Europe, to plant and settle himselfe in some part of Greece, and there wage warre: for at his verie first comming hee should see in armes alreadie the Aerolians, that inhabit the very heart and centre of Greece, who would be the only chieftaines and port-ensignes to march before them, readie to venture and enter upon the most difficult and daungerous enterprises of war. Againe,

 in the two cantons and angles as it were thereof, he should find Nabis of the one side from Peloponnesus, at hand to rise and raise those quarters, with intent to regaine the citie of the Argives, to win again the maritime cities, which the Romans have disseized and dispossessed him of, and have mued and shut him within the walls of Lacedaemon. On the other side from Macedonie, Philip would no doubt take armes, so soone as he shall heare the first alarme and sound of trumpet. Full well (qd. he) know I his courage, and of what spirit and stomacke he is: right well I wore that he hath fostered in that brest of his for a long time, anger and despite; like to these wild and savage beasts, which either are kept within yron grates, or fast tyed and bound: and as well I remember, how many a time he was woont (during the wars) to pray heartily to all the gods, to vouchsafe for to give him Antiochus for his helper and assistant: and if now hee might enjoy his  wish, and have the thing so long desired and praied for, hee would without any delay, enter into armes and warre incontinently. Onely (quoth Alexander) we must not linger and stay nor drive off, for as much as herein consisteth the very point of victorie, even betimes to seize upon commodious places of advantage, before the enemies be possessed of them. Also with all speed, Anniball to be sent into Affricke, where by the Romanes may be distracted, and compelled to turne themselves sundry waies. Anniball only was not called to this counsell; for by reason of the foresaid conferences with Villius, the king had him in some jealousie, and therefore he was out of favour, and of no credit and account with him. At the first, he put up this disgrace and made no words, but afterwards hee thought it a better course, both to demaund the cause of suddaine strangenesse and alienation of his, and also to take some good time to excuse and purge himselfe.  And therefore upon a day having simply asked of the king, and heard the cause of his anger toward him.
My father Amilcar (qd. he) o Antiochus, when upon a time he sacrificed unto the gods, caused me (a verie little one) to be brought and presented before the altar, where he forced me to touch the same with my hand, and to take an oath, Never to be friend unto the people of Rome. To accomplish and fulfill this oth, I maintained the wars for the space of sixe and thirtie yeere; by vertue of this oth, in time of peace I was driven out of my native country; and being fled from thence, this oth brought me into your court: and by the guidance and direction of this oth, if you should disappoint me of my hope, yet whersoever I know there are forces, whersoever I heare there is any stirring and rustling of armes, I shall seeke all the word over, untill I find some Romane enemies. And therefore, if there be any of your Courteors that have a mind  and desire to advaunce themselves in your good grace, and would grow by carrying tales and accusing me unto you, let them find some other subject and matter to doe this by me: for I hate the Romanes, and am likewise hated of them. That this is truth which I say, my father Amilcar and the gods in heaven, can testifie. Wherefore, whensoever you shall thinke to make war with the Romanes, see you entertain Anniball for one of your greatest and most assured friends: but if any occurrent shall force you to peace, seeke some other counsellor and not me, to consult withall about that point. This speech was so effectuall, that not onely it prevailed with the king, but also reconciled Anniball unto his grace. And so they departed out of the councell with a full resolution to make warre.
At Rome it was commonly talked and discoursed, that Antiochus was an enemie, but no provision  and preparation there was for warre, but onely whetting the edge of their stomackes. For both Consuls had no other province but Italie assigned unto them to governe. And they were either to agree between themselves, or els to cast lots, whether of the twaine should hold the generall assembly, and be president of the election for that yeere. And he whose hap was not to be charged with that businesse, was to bee in readinesse to lead forth the legions into any place out of Italie, as need should require. And to this Consull it was permitted to enroll two new Legions of citizens, and besides of allies and Latines twentie thousand foot, and eight hundred horse. To the other Consull were appointed those two legions, which L. Cornelius the Consull of the former yeere had under his governance: also of allies and Latines fifteen thousand footmen out of the same armie, and five hundred horse. As for Q. Minutius, his commission was continued  still for the conduct of that armie which hee had in Liguria. And for to supply and make up the broken companies, he was allowed to enroll foure thousand Romane footmen, and one hundred and fiftie horse, and likewise to levie of the allies five thousand foot, and two hundred and fiftie horse for that service. To Cn. Domitius it fell by lot, that he should goe with a power out of Italie, whither soever the Senat gave order; and unto Quintius to governe Gaule. Then the Pretours

election followed, who likewise cast lots for their provinces. M. Fulvius Centimalus had the civile  jurisdiction, and L. Scribonius Libo the forraine. L. Valerius Tappus governed Sicilie, Q. Salovius Sarra, Sardinia: M. Babius Tamphilus high Spaine, and A. Attilius Serranus the base. But these two chaunged their provinces, first by an order from the Senate, and afterwards by an act also of the Commons. For to Attilius Macedonie was assigned and the navie, and to Baebius the countrey of the Brutij. Falminius and Fulvius continued in the government and commaund of Spaine, and to Baebius Tamphilus for the rule of the Brutij, were those two legions appointed which the yeere before lay in the cittie, with commission to take up and levie of allies fifteene thousand foot, and five hundred horse to go thither. Aulus Attilius had in charge to cause thirtie galicaces to bee made with five banckes of oares on a side, and to take out of the harbours and dockes as many old vessels as were sit for service, and to enroll mariners and towers. The Consuls  also were enjoined to deliver unto him two thousand allies of the Latine nations, and a thousand Romane footmen. It was commonly voiced, that these two Pretours with two armies both by land and at sea, were prepared against Nabis, who openly now assailed the consederates of the people of Rome. But still the embassadors were looked for, who had been sent unto king Antiochus, and the Senate commaunded the Consull Domitius not to depart from the citie before their returne. The Pretours, Fulvius and Scribonius, whose charge it was to minister law and execute justice in Rome, had commission to provide a hundred galeaces, besides that fleet which Attilius was to commaund. But before that either Consuls or Pretors went forth into their provinces, there was a procession holden, in regard of the prodigies and fearefull sights that were reported. For word was brought out of Pincenum, that a shee goat had yeaned sixe kids at once, and that it rained earth at Amiternum; and at Formiae, that a gate and wall of the citie were smitten with lightening; and (that which most of all troubled and frighted the Consull Domitius) that an oxe spake these words, ROME, TAKE HEED TO THY SELFE. In regard of the other prodigious tokens, there was a supplication holden; but as for the oxe, the Soothsaiers and bowel-priers gave commaundement, that he should with great care be kept and nourished. The Tyber also with more violence overflowed into the citie than in the former yeere, and overthrew two bridges and many buildings, especially about the gate Flumentana. Moreover, a mightie huge stone shaken out of the Capitoll cliffe, tell from thence into the street called Iugarium, either by the force and violence of raine, or some earthquake (which if there were any, was so little, that it could not bee perceived) and that stone killed many a man. In the countrey also, by reason of this deluge, much  cattell was carried away with the floud, and many farme houses and graunges were borne downe and laid along.
Before that L. Quintius the Consull was arrived into his province, Q. Minutius fought a batteil with the Ligurians in the territorie of Pisae, and slue nine thousand enemies; the rest he discomfited, put to flight and chased into their campe; which being assailed, was defended manfully with much fighting untill darke night: and then the Ligurians slipt away in the night season secretly. And by the dawning of the next day the Romans entred and seised therof when it was emptie of the enemies. Lesse pillage was there found, for that ever and anone what booties soever they gate in the countrey they sent home to their houses. Minutius not with standing gave the enemies no repose from that time forward. For being departed out of the territorie of Pisae hee  came into Liguria, where he destroied their borroughes and castles, and put all to fire and sword. There the Romane souldiours filled their hands with the Tuscane prises; sent thither by the forragers and robbers.
Much about this time the embassadors returned to Rome, from the KK. who brought word and made relation of nothing that was sufficient to enforce them to proceed in any hast to warre, but onely against the Lacedaemonian tyrant, by whom (as the Achaean embassadors also gave intelligence) the sea coasts of Laconia were wronged and assailed, against the covenants of the league. Whereupon Attilius the Pretour was sent with a fleet to defend the associates. And for as much as there was no imminent perill from Antiochus, it was thought good, that both the Consuls should goe into their provinces. Domitius tooke his journey, and went the neerest way  by Ariminum, and Quintius came into the Boians countrey by the way of Liguria. And these two Consuls armies in divers quarters, wasted all abroad the enemies countrey. At the first some sew of their gentlemen and horsemen, together with their captaines; afterwards, all those of Senatours calling; and last of all, as many as were of any havoir, worth and worship, to the number

 of fifteene hundred fled to the Consull.
Likewise in both Spaines that yeere, the affaires went prosperously: for not onely C. Flaminius won by force of mantelets and engines of batterie the rich and strong towne Litabrum, and tooke prisoner alive their lord Corribilo a noble prince, but also M. Fulvius the Proconsul fought with two armies of the enemies twise, and put them to the worse: and woon by assault two townes of the Spaniards Vescelia and Holone, with many other fortresses: the rest of themselves revolted unto him. After this hee made a journey into the Oretanes countrey, and there having gotten two townes,or Noliba. Noliba and Cusibi, he set forward and marched to the river Tagus. In that quarter there stood Toledo.Toledo, a small citie, but strongly seated: whiles he assaulted it, there came a mightie armie of the Vectones to aid the Toletanes, with whome hee fought a set field, and woon the  day, and having deseated the Vectones, hee forced the Toletanes with engines of batterie, and woon the towne.
But all the warres which at that time were in hand, nothing troubled the LL. of the Senate, so much as the expectation of the war, which Antiochus had not yet begun and enterprised. For albeit they had ever and anone certaine advertisements and intelligences of all things by their embassadours, yet many flying tales and headlesse bruits there went without any certaine authors, reporting lies as well as truths. And among the rest there ran a rumor, that Antiochus, so soone as he was come into Aetolia, would presently put over a fleet into Sicilie. Whereupon the Senat, not with standing they had sent Attilius the Pretor with a fleet into Greece, yet for as much as there was need not of forces onely, but also of authoritie to entertain the hearts and affections  of their allies, they sent over T. Quintius, Cn. Octavius. Cn. Servilius, and P. Villius, as embassadors into Greece, and gave order, that M. Babius should advaunce his legions out of the countrey of the Brutians, toward Tarentum and Brundusium, that from thence if need required, hee might saile over into Macedonia. Moreover, That M. Fulvius the Pretour should put out a steer of thirtie saile, for the defence of the coast of Sicilie, and that the admirall thereof should have full commission there to commaund (now L. Oppius Salinator, who the former yeere had beene one of the Aediles of the Commons, had the conduct of those ships.) Also, that the same Pretour should addresse his letters unto L. Valerius his Colleague, and advertised him that it was to bee feared, that the armada of King Antiochus would crosse over out of Aetolia into Sicilie; and therfore it was the will and pleasure of the Senate, that he should take up and enroll into that armie  which hee had alreadie, of tumultuarie souldiours twelve thousand footmen, and foure hundred horse, by whose means he might defend that coast of the province which looketh toward Greece. For the levie of these forces, the Pretour tooke musters not onely in Sicilie, but also in the Isles adjacent and lying there about, and fortified with good garrisons all the townes upon the sea side which lie toward Greece. Those rumours aforesaid were fed still and maintained by the comming of Attalus the brother of Eumenes, who reported that king Antiochus was passed over Hellespontus with an armie: and that the Aetolians were in that forwardnesse, that they would bee prest and readie in armes against his arrivall. Great thankes were given as well to Eumenes in his absence, as to Attalus there present in place. Also order was taken, that he should have a lodging alowed him at his pleasure, and his charges borne for his diet and housekeeping. Moreover,  over, there were given him as presents, two great horses of service, two paire of horsemens armours, as much silver plate as amounted to an hundred pound weight; and of gold plate, as much as weighed twentie pound.
And for as much as messengers one after another advertised and gave warning, that war was at hand, it was thought requisite and expedient, that the new Consuls should be chosen in all convenient speed: whereupon a decree passed from the Senat, that M. Fulvius the Pretor should forth with dispatch his letters unto the Consull, to certifie him of the Senates pleasure, namely, that he should commit the government of his province and the armie unto his lieutenants, and remine himselfe unto Rome, and in his way send out his writs aforehand for the publishing of an assembly generall for the election of Consuls. The Consull obeied these letters, directed foorth  his summons in maner aforesaid, and came to Rome. In this year also great ambition there was, and much suite for the dignitie of government. For that three noblemen stood for one place, namely, P. Cornelius Scipio the sonne of Cnius, who the former yeere had the repulse, L. Cornelius Scipio, and Cn. Manlius Volso. The Consulship was conferred upon P. Scipio, so as it might appeare to the whole world, that this honour was deferred onely, and not fully denied to so worthie

a personage. His adjoinct companion in government was M. Acilius Glabrio, a man by calling  a commoner. The morrow after were the Pretours chosen, to wit, L. Aemylius Paulus, M. Aemylius Lepidus, M. Iunius Brutus, A. Cornel. Mammula, C. Livius, and L. Oppius, both surnamed Salinator. This Oppius was he that had the conduct into Sicilie of a fleete of thirtie saile. Meane while that these new Magistrates cast lots for the government of their provinces, M. Babius was commaunded to passe over with all his power from Brundusium into Epirus, and to keepe his forces about Apollonia. And M. Fulvius the Pretor of the citie had in charge to build fiftie new Galeaces called Quinqueremes, of five banks of ores on either side. And thus verily the people of Rome was provided against all enterprises and attempts of king Antiochus whatsoever.
Neither was Nabis behind for his part in levying warre; but assaulted with great force the towne of Gytheum; and of a mischeivous and malicious mind against the Achaeans, for sending  a garison to aid the besieged townesmen, he forraied and wasted their countrie. The Achaeans durst not go in hand with warre, before their embassadors were returned from Rome, and until they might know the pleasure and wil of the Senat: but after the return of those embassadors, they both published a Diet and generall Counsell at Sicyone, and also sent their embassadors to Quintius for his advise and counsell. In this Diet, all their opinions inclined and tended to make warre out of hand: only the letters of T. Quintius made some stay of the enterprise, wherein he advised them to expect the Pretor and navie of the Romanes. Now when the States there assembled in counsell were distracted, some persisting still in their former opinion, and others of mind to take with them the advise of him unto whom they had sent for counsell: the multitude at length looked what Philopaemenes would say in that behalf. The Pretor he was for the time, and in those  daies surpasied all other in wisedome and authoritie. Then he rose up and used this preface and said, That it was a good custome among the Aetolians, and well ordeined and provided, that the Pretour himselfe in all consultations of warre should not deliver his owne opinion; and therefore willed them of their selves to resolve and determine with all speede possible what they pleased. As for the Pretor, faith he, he will be readie to execute with fidelitie and carefull diligence their decrees accordingly: yea and indevor, so farre forth as mans pollicie may reach unto, that they snal not repent of their resolution, be it war or peace. This brief speech of his was more forcible and effectuall to incite them to take armes, than any persuasive oration, wherein he openly could have shewed his desire to follow the warres. And therefore with exceeding accord of all  in generall they agreed upon warre. As for the time and meanes of managing the same, it was wholly referred to the discretion of the Pretor, to use his owne libertie and pleasure. Philopamenes, besides that Quintius so advised, was also himself minded to wait for the Romane fleete which on the sea side might defend Gytheum: but fearing again that their present necessitie could abide no delaies, and least not only Gytheum should be lost, but the garison also miscarie, which was sent to the defence of the warre, he set aflore and put to the sea the Achaeans shipping. The Tyrant likewise had rigged and dressed a small fleete to empeach any aid and succors that haply might be sent to the besieged by sea, to wit, three covered ships with hatch and deck, three Brigantines or Pinnaces, and as many Gallions. For the old ships were by composition and covenant delivered up to the Romanes. And to make proofe and triall of these new vessels; how swift and nimble they were, and withall to see how all things els were well fitted for a battaile, if neede  were; he made every day certeine shewes and representations of fight at sea, and exercised both mariners and souldiours by such kind of false alarmes: supposing: that herein principally consisted the hope of his siege, in case he could cut off all their aid from the sea side. Now the Pretor of the Achaeans, as he was egall to any of the best and most renowned commaunders and captaines of that time in land service, either for experience and practise, or wit and pollicie: so at sea he was but a novice and a learner, as being an Arcadian borne, an Inlander farre within the maine, and ignorant besides of all foreine forces, but that he had borne armes and served a little in Candie, whiles he had the leading there, of some aid-souldiers. One old Gallie there was a Quadrireme, taken at sea 80 yeeres before, at what time as she caried Nicaela the wife of Craterus from Naupactum to Corinth. And having heard much talke of this ship (for indeed she had  bene sometime of great name in the kings royall ^^eete) he commaunded her, all rotten as she was now, and readie to fall in peeces, to be shot into the sea from out of the Bay of Argium. This ship as admirall, made way before the rest, wherein Tiso of Patra, a captaine generall of a fleete was abourd; and encountred the ships of the Laconians, making saile from Gythaeum

 And at the first the chaunced to affront and run against a new strong ship, and being old of her selfe, leaking and taking water at every joynt she was rent asunder and fell apieces. All within her were taken prisoners. The rest of the fleete having lost their captainesse, fled as fast as possibly their ores could make speede and away. Philopaemenes himselfe was in a light foist, frigot or pinke, and fled amaine, and never stayed untill he was arrived at Patrae. This mishap nothing discouraged and abated the heart of this martiall warriour, who had run through many and sundrie adventures: but contrariwise wrought this effect, that he assured himself and said, That if he were overtaken and put to the worse in service at sea, wherein he had no skill, he would so much the rather quit himselfe so upon the land (where he had such experience and was so readie) as that the Tyrant should not long joy and make boast of his winnings. Nabis pussed up  with pride of his fortunate victorie, and persuading himselfe assuredly that he had no cause to feare any more danger from the sea, purposed likewise to stop up all the avenues and passages by land; and therefore beset all the wayes betimes with strong guards, which he bestowed in convenient places. And retiring with a third part of his forces from the siege of Gythaeum, he encamped before Pleiae. This is a place that overlooketh and commaundeth Leuca and Acra, by which wayes it seemed that the enemies would make their approch with their armie. Whiles he kept a standing camp there, and few of his souldiours were provided of tents and pavilions, and the rest of the common fort had made them cabins of reedes, wound and interlaced one within another, and the same covered with leaves only to geve them some shade; Philopaemenes devised, before that he were discovered and came in sight of the enemies, to assaile them at  unwares and not looking for his comming, after a new fashion of warre that they little doubted. Certeine small craies or boats he got together into a secret blind bay, lying within the territorie of Argos: in which he bestowed certeine souldiours nimbly appointed, most of them having round bucklers, with slings, darts, and such like offensive light weapons. From thence he coasted along the river neere the shore, untill he was come to the promontorie or cape adjoyning close to the enemies camp: then he went aland, and by knowen wayes he came by night unto Pleiae: and whiles the watch was fast asleepe, as mistrusting no such feare neere hand, he set fire upon the cabins aforesaid in every quarter of the camp. Many men were consumed with the fire before they wist that the enemie was come: and they that were ware of them, had no meanes to help  and save their fellowes: so with fire and sword all went to wrack. Some very few escaped out of this extremitie of danger, and fled to the maine camp before Gythaeum. Thus Philopaemenes having discomfited and frighted his enemies, led his armie forthwith to wast Tripolis in the territorie of Laconia, bounding fast upon the confines of the Megalopolitanes: and having driven from thence great prizes of men and cattaile, hee departed before that the Tyrant could send any guards from thence for the defence of the countrey. And when hee had gathered and assembled his armie at Tegea, and published and made knowne unto the Achei and other Allies, a Diet or generall counsell to be holden there, whereat also were the chiefe States of the Epirots and Acarnanians: he determined (for as much as both the hearts of his owne people were sufficientlie recovered after the disgrace and shamefull dishonor received  at sea; and also the courages of his enemies well cooled and they affrighted) to leade his forces against Lacedemon: supposing that, the onely meanes to draw the enemy away from the siege of Gythaeum. And first hee encamped before Cariae within the enemies ground. But that very day was Gythaeum forced by the enemies and woon. Philopaemenes nothing ware thereof, set forward, and encamped neere Barbosthenes, a mountaine, ten miles from Lacedaemon. Nabis also, having gained Gythaeum, departed from thence with his armie lightly appointed; and marching apace beyond Lacedaemon, seized upon a place, called, The Camp of Pyrrhus: which hee made no doubt but that the enemies intended to be possessed of. And then from thence he went to meere them. Now by reason of the narrow way, they tooke up in their march almost five miles of ground in length. At the taile of the armie were the horsemen, and especially, where the aid-soldiers marched: because Philopaemenes thought,  that the tyrant would charge his men behind with his mercenarie souldiours, in whome hee reposed his greatest trust. Two things fell out contrarie to his expectation at once, which troubled him much: the one was, that the place was gotten by the enemies before, which hee intended to have seized upon for his owne advantage: the other was, for that hee saw the enemie affront his vaward in a place so rough and rugged, that without the gard of his lightarmed

souldiors, he could not possibly march forward and advaunce his ensignes. Now Philopaemenes had a singular dexteritie and skill, yea and great experience in leading an armie, and in making choice of his ground either to pitch or fight: and not onely in time of warre, but also in peace, he busied his head and emploied himselfe principally therein. His manner was, when he rode forth any whither and was come to a streight passage hard to passe through, to looke every way, and diligently to vieu and consider the situation and positure of the place on all sides: and if he were alone, to cast about and devise with himselfe; but if there were any in his companie, to aske their advise, in this wife: What if the enemie appeared and shewed himselfe in that place; How if he came affront or aflanke on this or that side; nay, How if he should charge upon our backe, what were best to be done? It may be the enemies will encounter vs directly raunged in battaile array; it may be they march disorderly and loosely, minding nothing  els but their way, and to travaile on. Thus I say, would he either devise with himselfe or seeke advise of other, what place he were best to seaze for his owne purpose and commoditie: also what number of armed men hee should need to employ; or what kind of armour and weapons were needfull to use (for therein also lay no small importance.) Moreover, where hee should bestow his carriages? where he should lay his baggage? and where hee should place and dispose of the multitude that were not meet to beare arms? what strength and what maner of guard was needfull for their defence? and whether it were more expedient to goe forward still the way that hee was entred into, or better to goe backe againe as he came? likewise, what ground was meet to be chosen for to pitch his campe upon? what compasse and space were necessarie to be taken up for the fortification of the place? from whence he might have convenient watering? from what  quarter he might be best provided of fodder and fewell? Finally against the morrow, which way were safest to remoove the campe? and what forme and manner of march were best? In these courses and discourses, he had from his childhood so inured and exercised his spirits, that hee was never to seeke what to doe upon any such sodaine occasion or occurrent presented unto him. And now at this present, seeing his enemies so neere, first and foremost he made a stand with his vauntgard; then he sent out toward the formost ensigns, his auxiliar Candiotes that came to aid him, and those horsemen which they call Tarentine, whose manner is to have with them, two horses a peece; and then commanding his own men of arms to follow after, he possessed himselfe of a rock standing over a brook or running rill, from whence they might water commodiously: into that place he gathered togither all his bag and baggage; there hee bestowed all the pages  and horse-boies, and followers of the campe, whome he environed also with armed men: and as the nature of the place would give him leave, he fortified his campe. But to pitch pavilions in a craggie, rugged, and uneven ground he found much adoe. Now were the enemies about halfe a mile off: and at one and the same riveret they watered both, with the guard of their light armed souldiors: but before that they could scuffle and skirmish togither (as commonly they doe when the camps stand so neere one to another) the night overtooke them. It appeared plainely there would be some fighting the next day about the brooke for water: and therefore in the night season he bestowed close in a valley, farthest out of sight from the enemies, as many of his targuettiers as possibly the place would containe and hide. When daylight was come, the light armed Candiotes and those Tarentine horsemen (of both sides) entred into skirmish upon the  verie bankes of the brooke. Letemnastus the Candiot had the leading of his countrymen; Lycortas the Megapolitane commaunded the light horse. The Candiots, who likewise were auxiaries and aid-souldiors to the enemies, and the same sort also of the Tarentine horsemen, guarded those that came to water for them. Doubtfull was the skirmish for a good while (as beeing managed and maintained of the one side and the other by men of one nation, and those furnished with the same kind of weapons) but those that were for the Tyrant, were more in number than the other. And by reason that Philopaemenes had given charge and direction to the captains, after they had held skirmish a while, to seeme to recule and flie, thereby to traine the enemie into the aforesaid place of ambush; they followed hard in chase upon them as they fled along within the valley, and most of them were either slaine or wounded before they saw the enemies  hidden there within. Now those targuettiers aforesaid, were set in that order (so far forth as the breadth of the valley w^^ld permit) that they might easily receive their fellowes as they fled, within the spaces betweene their rankes and files. Then at once they arose, fresh in heart, and ordered in good array, and charged upon the enemies, disordered, disbanded, loose, scattered,

 wearie with travell, and faint of their wounds. Then was it out of doubt and past all peradventure where the victorie went: for presently the Tyrants soldiers turned their backs, fled a good deale faster than they made pursuit before, and were beaten into their camp: many were either killed or taken prisoners as they fled: and they had ben put in affright also within the camp, but that Philopaemenes commanded to found the retreat, searing more the rugged and broken ground, and the disadvantage and difficulties thereof, in case he had rashly ventured forward any farther, than he did the enemie. Then he, taking his conjecture by the issue of the fight, and guessing by the nature of Nabis the Generall, in what feare and fright he mought be, sent unto him one of his auxiliaries that were straungers, counterfeiting himselfe to be a rennegate revolt, to informe him assuredly, that the Achaeans determined the next day to march as far as to the river Eurotas, which  runneth hardby the walls of Lacedaemon, for to stop the passage, that neither the tyrant might retire himselfe into the citie when he would, nor any munition or victuals be caried from thence into the campe: moreover, that they would give the attempt, and assay if they could sollicit any of the citizens to revolt from the tyrant. This counterfeit, carried himselfe so in this errand, that the tyrant beleeved not so much his words, as took hold therby of a good pretence and honeti occasion for to quit and abandon the camp: and therfore the next morow, he commanded Pythagoras, with the auxiliarie souldiers and the horsemen, to keepe a good guard about the trench and enclosure of the campe: himselfe in person with the strength of his armie, marched as it were to abattaile, and commanded to advaunce forward the ensignes in all hast toward the citie,or rather, Philopaemen. Philopamenes perceiving that the armie marched so fast through the narrow passage downe the hill,  put forth all his owne horsemen and the auxiliarie Candiots, against the guards of the enemies that warded before the campe. They, seeing the enemies to approach, and themselves forsaken of their owne fellowes, at first went about to retire within their hold: but afterwards when they perceived the whole armie of the Achaeans advauncing against them in order of battaile, fearing that they and their tents should be at once surprised, made apace after their owne hoast which was gone a good way before. With that, the targuetiers of the Achaeans assailed the campe, entred upon it, and ransacked the tents, whiles the rest went forward and pursued the enemies. The way was such, as that an armie at libertie and free from feare of enemies, might hardly and with much adoe rid any ground and march without encumbrance: but so soone as  the skirmish began in the taile of the rereward, and the noise and crie of them affrighted behind was heard in the vauntgard: every man made shift for one, flung away weapons, and fled into the woods on either side of the way; and ere one could turne about, all the waies were strewed and choked up with armour and weapons, and especially with darts or javelins, which lighting for the most part with one end full against the enemies, were instead of a staked or empalled palaissade to hinder their passage. Philopaemenes having given commaundement to his light armed aid-souldiours to prease forward still, and to follow the chase as fast as they could (knowing well that the horsemen would have much adoe and trouble in their flight) conducted himselfe the maine armie and heavily charged, by a more open way to the river Eurotas: where hee encamped himselfe a little before the going downe of the sunne, and there he staied  for his light appointed souldiours, whom hee had left to follow after the enemies. Who being come about the time of the first watch, brought word, that the tyrant with some few was entered into the
citie, but the unarmed multitude were dispersed, and wandered all about the forrest and the woods. Then hee willed them to repose and refresh their bodies: which being done, himselfe chose out of all the souldiours besides (who because they were come first into the camp, had well hartened themselves with taking their refection and some small sleepe) certaine elect and speciall men, and tooke them forth immediately with him, having about them nothing but their swords, and set them in good order to keepe two port-waies, by which men goe to Pharae and Barbosthenes, where he presumed that the enemies would take their way and retire themselves upon their flight: and nothing was hee deceived. For the Lacedaemonians, so long as the day light lasted, had with drawne themselves to the middle of the forrest, through by-lanes and blind paths;  but when the night was once come, and that they descried lights within their enemies camp, they kept themselves aloofe overagainst them within close and secret lanes; and when they were once passed beyond, and thought all to be in safetie and securitie, they came downe into the more open high waies, where they were received and caught up by their enemies that forelaied them in ambush: so they were every where by numbers either killed or taken prisoners; insomuch as

scarce one fourth part of their whole armie escaped. Philopaemenes having shut up the tyrant  close within the citie, spent almost thirtie daies consequently ensuing, in wasting and spoiling the territorie of the Laconians: and when he had thus weakened and in manner broken the backe of his enemie, he returned home, and the Achaeans held him a paragon, and equall to the Romane Generall for glorious deeds of armes, nay, in the service of the Laconian war they preferred him before the other.
During the warre betweene the Achaeans and the tyrant, the Romane embassadours, who carefully and diligently visited the cities of the Allies, for feare least the Aetolians had alienated any of their affections from them to king Antiochus, travelled but little in going about to the Achaeans, whom by reason of the hatred they bare to Nabis, they hoped verily to be fast and faithfull ynough unto them in all other things. And first they came to Athens, from thence to Chalcis, and so into Thessalie: and after they had conferred with the Thessalians in a frequent counsell of theirs, they turned their way to Demetrias, where there was published a solemne Diet to bee holden by the Magnetes. Where they were to frame their speech more curiously than in other places, because certaine of their great men and potentates were estranged from the Romans, and altogether made for Antiochus and the Aetolians. The reason was this, because when news came that Philip his sonne, who was left hostage with the Romanes; should bee rendered againe unto him, and likewise the tribute remitted which had beene imposed upon him, among other false tales and untruths, it was reported, That the Romanes would redeliver Demetrias also into his hands. And rather than that should come to passe, Eurylochus (a principall and cheefe man among the Magnesians) and some others of that faction, desired to have a new world and an alteration, by the comming of the Aetolians and Antiochus. To these Magnesians, they were to couch and place their words so, in ridding them of that foolish vaine feare which they had conceived, that thereby they did not put Philip cleane beside his hope, and so give him occasion to bee ill affected unto the Romanes; considering that he alone was to them of farre greater importance in al respects, than were the Magnesians, put all together. Thus much onely they said by way of advertisement, That as all Greece generally was much beholden and bound unto the Romans for the benefite of Libertie, which they by their meanes enjoied, so that cittie and State especially above all others was obliged unto them. For there, not onely a garrison of Macedonians had been maintained to keepe them in awe, but also the king had built him a roiall pallace, to seat himselfe there, to the end, that they might evermore have in their cie, their lord to commaund  them. But in vaine, and to no purpose was all this, in case the Aetolians brought Antiochus in his steed to make his resiance in the house and pallace of Philip; and would needs entertaine a new and unknowne king in lieu of the old, so long a time and so well knowne. The soveraine magistrate of that cittie, they call Magnetarches; and for that time Eurylochus was the man: who bearing himselfe big and stout of his high place, said plainely, That hee knew no cause, why either hee or the Magnesians should suppresse and smudder the rumour that ran so rife touching the deliverie of Demetrias into Philip his hands. For rather than to suffer that, the Magnesians were to oppose themselves, yea, to doe and dare any action whatsoever. And in the vehement heat of speech he went to farre, that inconsiderately hee cast out one word and laid, That Demetrias seemed free in outward shew and appearance, but in very truth was at the commaund  and devotion, yea, and at every becke of the Romanes. At this speech there arose a dissonant bruit and murmuring of the assemblie, which jarred and varied one from another, whiles some soothed him up, others were offended, and tooke it in great despight, that hee should presume to utter and speake so much. And Quintius was in such an heat of choler there with, that stretching forth his hands to heaven, he called the gods to witnesse this ingratitude and disloialtie of the Magnesians. At whose words they were all greatly terrified. Then Zeno one of the chiefe, a man at that time of great authoritie and reputation, as well in regard of the honourable port that he ever caried in the whole course of his life, as also for that he alwaies stood firme and sure to the Romane side, be sought Quintius and the rest of the embassadours with teares, Not to impute the folly of one man to the whole cittie, for every man is to beare his owne burden, and as  he hath brued, so to drinke, and abide the smart of his owne scratching. As for the Magnesians (saith hee) they acknowledge to owe unto T. Quintius and the people of Rome, not onely their freedome, but all other things els that are most deere and precious unto men. Neither could a man pray or with at the hands of the immortall gods for any thing, which the Magnesians had

 not received by their meanes: and sooner would they like franticke persons plucke the very heart out of their own bellies, yea, and teare themselves in peeces, before they would violate and break the amitie which they had with the Romanes. This speech of his was followed and seconded with the humble praiers of the multitude. Eurylochus departed out of the assembly, and through bywaies and blind lanes recovered the gates, and from thence fled streight into Aetolia. For now by this time, and every day more than other, the Aetolians discovered and shewed themselves how they were affected to revolt. And happily at the same time, Thoas, a principall personage of that nation, whome they had sent as embassadour to king Antiochus, was newly returned, and brought with him Menippus the kings embassadour. Who, before they had audience given them in a counsel assembled for them, had filled every mans eares and blabbed forth, what forces were  prepared both for land and sea, what a mightie power was comming, both of foot and horse, how Elephants were sent for out of India, and above all (where with they thought the minds of the people would bee most mooved) That there was such a masse of gold brought, as would buy all the Romanes out and out. It was easie to see what trouble and broile such language might make in the generall diet and assemblie. For the Romane embassadours had intelligence, both of their comming, and of all that ever they did. And albeit there was little hope or none at all to doe any good, yet Quintius thought it not amisse, that some embassadours from the allies and associate cities should be present at that Counsell, such as might admonish and put the Aetolians in mind of the Romane alliance and societie, and not sticke to speake their minds franckly, yea, and thwart the king his embassadour. The Athenians of all other were thought the meetest men for that  purpose, both in regard of the authoritie and reputation of their citie, and also for the auncient league betweene them and the Aetolians. So Quintius requested them to send their embassadors to the Panaetolian parliament.
When the assembly was met, and the Counsell set, Thoas first declared his embassage: and after him was Menippas called in, who being entred in place, spake in this manner: It had been (quoth hee) the best course for all them that inhabite both Greece and Asia, that Antiochus had intermedled in these affaires, during the upright fortune and entire state of Philip: then, every man had enjoied his owne, and all had not beene reduced to the appetite and devotion, nor brought under subjection of the Romanes. And even yet (quoth he) in case yee persist still in the same mind, and purpose resolutely to accomplish and finish these your designes and commensed enterprises, possible it is by the favor and helpe of the gods, and by the meanes  of the Aetolian association, that Antiochus may recover the State of Greece, crased as it is, and much broken, and bring it again to her first fresh hue, to her lively and lightsome lustre, which consisteth in true libertie, even that which is able to stand alone and maintain itselfe, and dependeth not upon the will and pleasure of others. The Athenians, who first (after the kings embassage was delivered) had audience given them and libertie to speake their mind, without making any mention at all of the king, Advertised the Aetolians of the Roman societie, and put them in mind of the favours and good turnes done by Quintius to all Greece in generall: advising them to take heed, that without discretion they overthrew not the welfare thereof, by running rashly and too soone into a new world of straunge courses and fine devises: for hote, hastie, and headie counsels are at the first sight and entertainment, pleasant and amiable; in the handling and managing,  hard and difficult; in the end and issue, heavie and dangerous. Consider how the Romane Embassadours, and namely Quintius among them, are not far off: and whiles things stand in good termes of integritie, it were better to treat and debate of matters in question and doubt, by words and reasons, than to set all Asia and Europe togither to take armes and to make lamentable and deadly warre one upon another. The multitude desirous of a chaunge, enclined altogither, and were wholly devote to Antiochus, being of opinion, that the Romane Embassadours were not to be admitted into the Counsell: but the more grave and auncient persons of the nobilitie and states-men, obtained thus much by vertue of their authoritie, That they should have audience graunted unto them. And when the Atheniens had made relation of this decree and conclusion passed, Quintius was of mind to go into Aetolia: for this accoumpt he made, either to  obteine somewhat that he came for, or els to have all gods and men to beare him witnesse, that the Romanes would enter into the action of warre justly, and in manner upon constreint and necessitie.
Quintius being thither come, began at first to discourse before the whole assembly, as touching the societie of the Aetolians with the Romanes, and how often they had broken for their parts the faithfull accord between them: and when he had so said, he used a briefe speech

concerning the right of those cities that were in question. And if they thought that they had  any law and reason of their side, how much better (quoth he) were it to send embassadors to Rome, either to argue and expostulate the matter with them, or to demaund their advise (whether they would themselves) than to cause the people of Rome to make warre with Antiochus and the Aetolians together, not without great trouble of the whole world, and certeine ruine of all Greece? For none should feele the smart and calamitie of this warre sooner than they that are the very causes thereof and began first. Thus spake the Romane embassador by way of prophesie, but in vaine and to no effect. After him Thoas and the rest of that faction, were heard with the generall applause of all: and they effected so much; that without any farther protoging of the Diet, and referring the matter to another day, yea and without staying so long untill the Romanes were out of the place and absent, they concluded to make a decree, by vertue whereof  Antiochus should be sent for to affranchise Greece, and to decide the quarell betweene the Romanes and the Aetolians. This decree was not so proud and insolent, but Damocritus their Pretor accompanied it with as arrogant and reprochfull a frump of his own. For when Quintius required of him to see the said decree, he without any respect of the honorable personage of the man, made answer, That for the present time he had somwhat els to do of greater importance; but he would give him the decree and an answer with all shortly, and that within Italie, encamped upon the banke of Tyberis. So great a spirit of senselesse follie in those dayes had possessed the nation of the Aetolians, and their chiefe magistrates! Then Quintius and the delegates returned to Corinth.
After the Romanes were dismissed, the Aetolians held no more generall counsell of the whole nation, because they would make semblance and seeme to do nothing of themselves as  touching the cause and question of Antiochus, but sit still and expect the comming of the king. Mary, they treated and debated the matter by their Apocleti (for so they call their speciall and privie Counsell which consisteth of certeine efect chosen persons) by what meanes there might be an alteration and change in the affaires of Greece. This was held of all men for certeine, that in every citie and State, the chiefe and the best men generally were for the association of the Romanes, and contented themselves with the present condition wherein they stood: but the multitude and those who had not all things to fall out to their owne good liking, were desirous of a change. And one day above the rest, the Aetolians entred into a designement and plot, which was not only out of all measure audacious, but also most shamelesse, namely, to surprise and possesse themselves of Demetrias, Chalcis and Lacedaemon. And to each of these cities  there was sent one of their principall personages, namely, Thoas to Chalcis; Alexamenus to Lacedaemon, and Diocles to Demetrias. This Diocles had the help and assistance of Eurylechus a banished man (of whose flying away, and the occasion thereof we have spoken before) who otherwise had no hope at all to returne againe into his native countrey. The kinsfolke and friends of Eurylochus and the rest of that faction, upon instructions given them by his letters, willed his wife and children to present themselves in the frequent assemblie of the citizens in habit of mourners, in poore array, and vailed after the manner of humble suppliants, there to beseech them all and some, not to suffer him a guiltlesse person, neither convicted nor condemned, to wax old and pine aw^^n exile. All that were plaine and simple men seemed to be
touched with pitie and commiseration. The wicked and seditious persons conceived some hope to make a confusion  in the State by these Aetolian troubles: in so much as every one was of opinion and gave his voice, that he should be restored and lent for home. This ground being laid and matters thus prepared, Diocles with his horsemen (for then was he the captaine of the Cavallerie) tooke his journey, under a colour and pretense to reduce and bring home this banished person his host and good friend; and in one day and night traveiled a mightie great journey, and came within sixe miles of the citie. And betimes in the morning by day light, accompanied with three elect troupes he marched forward, commaunding the rest of the horsemen to follow after. When he approched the gate, he caused them all to alight on foot and to leade their horses in their hands by the reines of their bridles, and to go without order, resembling travailers and waifaring men, so as they seemed more like to the ordinary train of captain Diocles, than to the men of armes and  warriours under his charge: and leaving one of his troupes at the gate, for feare least the horsemen behind might be shut out, he led Eurylochus by the hand, and brought him through the mids of the citie and the market place home to his house: and all the way he was met with many of his lovers and friends that welcomed him, and joyed for his returne. An on the whole citie

 was full of horsemen, and all places of oportunitie and advantage were seized and possessed by them. Which done, divers were sent to massacre the chiefe of the adverse part in their houses. Thus the Aetolians became maisters of Demetrias.
As for Lacedaemon, they devised in no hand to force the citie, but by some wile to entrap and surprise the tyrant. For seeing the Romanes had despoiled him of all his sea coast townes: and the Achaeans driven him within the walls of Lacedaemon, there was no doubt, but who so ever could first take his life from him, should carie away all the thanks, and curry especiall favor with the Lacedaemonians. Good occasion and pretense they had to send unto him a power of armed men, for that he had importuned them by his prayers for some aids, considering that by their advise and persuasion he had rebelled. So there were given unto Alexamenus a thousand  footemen, and thirtie elect horsemen, drawne out of all the floure of the citie.
Damocritus the Pretour delivered unto them from the privie counsell of that nation (of which we have before spoken) That they should not beleeve that they were to be employed in warre against the Achaeans, or in any other service, according as each one might imagine and conceive in his owne head: but he charged them to be readie to performe and execute obediently whatsoever sodain designement Alexamenus upon the present occasion should happen to attempt, were it never so unlooked for, strange, inconsiderate, and audacious: and to rest upon this, That they were sent with him to accomplish that, and for no other purpose. Thus Alexamenus with the conduct of these men thus prepared to his hand, came unto the Tyrant: and no sooner was he arrived, but he possessed him presently with a world of hopes: giving him to understand, That Antiochus was  alreadie passed over into Europe; that shortly he would be in Greece, and over-spred all seas and lands with his armies and armadoes; that the Romanes should full well know and find, that they have not now to deale with such an one as Philip; that the numbers of his foote and horses by land cannot be counted, nor his ships at sea numbred; that the battaile of his Elephants at the very first sight will decide the matter and finish the warre. Moreover, that the Aetolians with all their forces, were ready and prest to come to Lacedaemon, (as neede required) at any time: but indeede, desirous they were to shew and muster before the king at his arrivall, a goodly number of armed souldiours. Nabis therefore himselfe should doe verie well, not to suffer those forces which hee had, to decay with long repose and idlenesse, but bring them forth and traine them abroad, make them to run in their armour, thereby both to  whet and sharpen their courages, and also to exercise and inure their bodies: for by use and custome, the labour will be lighter; and by the courtesie and graciousnes of their Generall, not without delight and pleasure. Hereupon, they began to issue out of the citie, and oftentimes went into the plaine lying hard by the river Eurotas. They of the tyrants guard kept commonly in the battaile or middle ward: and himselfe with three horsemen at the utmost (with whom Alexamenus for the most part was) used ordinarily to ride before the ensignes, taking survey and viewing the utmost points and wings of the armie. The Aetolians were placed in the right wing, as well those that came before to aid the tyrant, as those thousand that were newly arrived with Alexamenus. Now had Alexamenus taken a custome, one while to tourney as it were amongst  the rankes before in the companie of the tyrant, and to instruct him in some matters sounding to his commoditie: otherwhiles, to ride to his owne men into the right wing, and soone againe to returne to the Tyrant, as if he had given them charge of somewhat necessarie to be done. But upon that day which was appointed for to doe the feat and murder the tyrant, after hee had ridden forth with the tyrant to the usuall place, and kept him companie a while, he tooke occasion (as his maner was) to make a step aside to his own soldiors; and then he went in hand with those horsmen which were sent with him from out of Aetolia, and said thus unto them:
Now sirs, you must adventure and execute that lustily and without delay which you were commaunded to performe by my direction and leading. Be ready with heart and hand, and be not slack and idle to exploit that, which yee shall see me to undertake and enterprise. And looke whosoever he be that either standeth still, or will seeme to argue and interpose his owne wit and advise to crosse mine, let him  make account, he shall never go home againe to his owne countrey. With that he set them all a quaking, for well they remembred what their charge was when they came foorth from home. Now was the Tyrant a comming on horseback from the left wing: Then Alexamenus commanded his horsemen to couch their launces downe, and to have their eye upon him. Hee also setled himselfe to take a good heart unto him, which was not a little daunted at first with the cogitation

of so great a designment that he had projected. When he was now approched and come  neere the tyrant, he ran with full carriere at him, gored his horse, and overthrew himselfe to the ground. He was not so soon unhorsed and laid along, but the horsemen stabbed him with many a thrust; wherof the most part did no harme, considering they were driven against his corslet: but in the end, they found where his bodie was naked and unarmed, so he gave his last gaspe before he could bee rescued by his guard in the maine battaile aforesaid. Then Alexamenus taking with him all the Aetolians, made all the hast he could to possesse himselfe of the royall palace. The Pensioners and Squires of the bodie, seeing this murder done before their eyes, were at first mightily affrighted: but afterwards perceiving the armie of the Aetolians to go their waies and depart, they ran to the breathlesse carkase left among them, and of men that should have guarded his bodie and revenged his death, they became a sort of idle gazers and lookers on. And  surely there would not a man have once stirred, in case the multitude had immediatly been called to an assembly; and if after armes laid downe, they had been entertained by him with some oration or remonstrances framed according to the time. The Aetolians were kept many togither, in armes still, without any outrage or wrong done or offered to any one person. But all things that they did, hastened the speedie ruine and destruction of those that had committed this fact: as it could not otherwise be in all reason, but they should so be served, who had plaid so leaud and treacherous a part. The captaine and ringleader of all this mischief, kept him selfe close shut within the royall pallace, spending both night and day in rifling and searching the Tyrants coffers and his treasurie. And the Aetolians for their part also fell to ransacking, as  if they had woon that citie by assault, which they made countenance and semblance to set free. The indignitie of these their prankes, the contempt with all and small regard made of them, encouraged and animated the Lacedemonians to gather togither and consult of the matter. Some were of opinion and said, That the Aetolians were to be thrust out by the head and shoulders, and to be sent away with a mischiefe, and their owne libertie to be recovered, which under a colour of being restored, was intercepted and taken from them: others advised and said, that for fashion at leastwise, some one of royall blood should be set up for to be the head in this action. Now there was of that race and streene one Laconicus a young child, brought up with the children of the late Tyrant: him they mounted upon horsebacke, and then they tooke armes with all speed, and as many Aetolians as they could light upon, wandring here and there in the streets, they ran upon and hewed in peeces. Then they assaulted the pallace, where they also murdered Alexamenus, albeit with some few about him he made resistance and defended himselfe. The rest of the Aetolians gathered togither about Chalcioecos (which is a chappell of Diana made of brasse) and there likewise they were massacred. A few of them flang away their weapons and sled, some escaped to Tegea, and others toLeon^a^^^; L^^d^^. Megalopolis: where being apprehended by the magistrates, they were sold in port sale, to them that would offer most. Philopaemenes hearing of the Tyrants death, went to Lacedaemon, where he found all things out of order and in confusion by reason of feare. And having called forth the principall and chiefe citizens, hee used unto them such a speech, as indeed Alexamenus should have made, and therby knit the Lacedaemonians in league and alliance with the Achaeans: which he effected the sooner, because it chaunced even then, that Attilius was come beforeCabode Tagu, or Paleopoli. Gythaeum with four and twentie galleaces of five banks of  ores on a side.
About the same time, Thoas had not so good speed before Chalcis; by means of Euthymidas, a great and cheefe man of the citie (one, who by the might and stronger hand of those that sided with the Romans, had been expelled the city after the comming of T. Quintius and the embassadours or delegates) and also of Herodotus of Canus, a merchant and a man that in regard of his welth and riches bare a great side in Chalcis: Thoas, I say, sped not so well by their means, notwithstanding that the supposts and part-takers of Euthymidas were well disposed to betray the towne; as Eurylochus did in the surprising and seizing of Demetrias. This Euthymidas from Athens (for there he had made choise to dwell) first came to Thebes, and so from thence went forward to Salganea. Herodotus abode at Thronium, and not farre from thence within the gulfe of Malea, hee  had 2000 footmen, and Thoas two hundred horsmen, and about thirtie light Caravels, Which Herodotus was commaunded to set over into the Island Atalanta with sixe hundred footmen, that from thence, when he perceived once the land-forces to approch Aulis and Euripus, hee might cut over to Chalcis. As for themselves, they conducted the rest of the forces in all the hast they

 could, and most by night journies marched unto Chalcis. Mictio and Xenoclides (who had the managing of the affaires in Chalcis, and might doe all in all there, now that Euthymidas was banished) remained in Chalcis, and whither they mistrusted somewhat themselves, or had some inkling and intelligence of the matter, I wot not, but affraid they were at first, and had no other hope at all but by flight to save themselves: howbeit afterwards when their feare was well allaied and setled, seeing evidently, that not onely their owne countrey was betraied, but also the Romane societie abandoned, they plotted in this wife, and entred into a course as followeth.
It fortuned at the very same time, that a solemne anniversarie sacrifice was celebrated at Eretria, to the honour of Diana Amarynthis: to which solemnitie there resorted not onely the inhabitants of those places neere at hand, but also a number of Carystians. Thither they sent certaine  Oratours to request and entreat the Eretrians and Carystians, both to take some pittie of their estate, considering they were borne in the same Island, and also to have some regard to the alliance of the Romanes, and not suffer Chalcis to fall into the hands of the Aetolians: who no doubt, if they might get Chalcis, would not bee long ere they had Euboea too. Syrly lords (say they) were the Macedonians, and rigorous, but the Aetolians would be much more unsupportable. These cities were principally respective to the Romanes, whose vertue and prowesse in warre, whose justice and bountie in victorie they had lately experience of, and therfore both States armed the flower and manhood of all their youth, and sent them. The townesmen of Chalcis having committed the guard of their walls to these, went foorth themselves with all their forces, passed over Euripus, and encamped neere Salganea. From which place they sent first an herauld, and  after him embassadors to the Aetolians, to demaund of them, Wherein they had so offended either in word or deed, that their allies and friends should come to molest and assaile them so by way of hostilitie? To whom Thoas the Generall of the Aetolians made this answer, That they were not come to annoy and trouble, but to deliver and free them from their servitude under the Romanes. For bound they were and tied now with a brighter and more glittering chain indeed, but farre heavier, than at what time as they had the garison of the Macedonians within their castle. The Chalcidians replied againe and inferred, that they neither were in bondage, nor needed at all the garison of any. And thus the embassadors departed from the parly, and returned to their owne people. Thoas and the Aetolians, whose whole and onely hope was to come upon them on a suddaine and surprise them at unwares, returned home againe as they came, being not able to  maintaine open warre, nor to assaile a citie so well fortified both by sea and land. Euthymidas being advertised that his countreymen lay in campe at Salganea, and that the Aetolians were dislodged and gone, retired himselfe also from Thebes to Athens. And Herodotus likewise, after hee had wistly and with great longing, expected fromTalandi. Atalanta certaine daies together, to see some signall (but in vaine) sent out a pinnace or brigantine, to know what the cause might be of such stay: and understanding that the enterprise was gi\`ven over by his complices and fellowes in the complot, he returned to Thronium from whence he came.
Quintius likewise having intelligence of these occurrents, as he sailed with his fleet from Corinth, encountred Eumenes in Euripus neere Chalcis. And thought good it was betweene them, that Eumenes the king should leave at Chalcis five hundred souldiours in garrison, and himselfe  go directly to Athens: and Quintius kept on his way toDimi^rlada. Demetrias whither he intended, supposing, that the deliverance of Chalcis would make somewhat to induce the Magnesians to embrace againe the societie of the Romanes. And to the end that those persons in Demetrias who sided with him, might have some forces for their defence, he wrote unto Eunomus the Pretour of the Thessalians, to put the youth in armes: and he sent Villius before unto Demetrias to found their affections, not minding otherwise to give the attempt, unlesse some part of them enclined to respect the auncient societie. Villius entred the mouth of the haven with a five banked galleace. Thither ran the whole multitude flocking unto him. And Villius demaunded of them whither they had leifer that hee came to them as to friends or enemies? Vnto whom Eurylochus the Magnetarches, answered, That he was come unto his friends: but hee willed him to forbeare the  haven, and suffer the Magnesians to be at peace and libertie, and to beware, that under a pretence of parle, he did not sollicite and disquiet the multitude. After this there was no farther talke and speech betweene them, but plaine debate and altercation: whiles Villius the Romane blamed and challenged the Magnesians as unthankfull persons, and forewarned them of the miseries and calamities that hung over their heads; and again the multitude cried out aloud, and accused as well

the Senate as Quintius. Thus Villius without doing any good, returned to Quintius. But Quintius having dispatched a messenger to the Pretour, that he should reduce home his forces, retired himselfe againe by sea to Corinth.
The affaires of Greece thus interlaced and blended with the Romane, have caried me away as it were out of my lists: not for that they were so necessarie and important to be written, but onely because they were materiall to the cause of the war against Antiochus. After the Consuls were elect (for there I began my digression) L. Quintius and Cn. Domitius the Consuls went into their severall provinces. Quintius into Liguria, and Domitius against the Boij. As for the Boij, they held themselves quiet, yea, and the whole bodie of their Senate with their children, their captaines also with their Cavallerie, to the number in all of fifteene hundred, yeelded themselves to the Consull. But the territorie of the Ligurians was over run and wasted, and some fortresses woon: whereby not onely there were prises gotten of all sorts, and prisoners taken, but also diverse captives, as well citizens as allies, were recovered out of the enemies hands. This very yeere a Colonie was planted at Vibo, by an act of Senate and Commons: and there went thither three thousand and seven hundred footmen, and three hundred horsemen. The Triumvirs, who had the placing of them, were Q. Naevius, M. Minutius, and M. Furius Crassipes. Every footman was endued with fifteene acres of land, and the horsemen twise as much. It was a territorie held last in the tenure of the Brutians, and they had conquered it first from the Greekes.
About the same time, there happened at Rome two most fearfull accidents; the one of them continued long, but was not altogither so vehement and terrible: for there was an earthquake endured eight and thirtie daies. All which time, the lawsteed or vacation from all courts of law  and civill causes, continued in great feare and pensivenesse: in regard whereof, a supplication was holden for three daies. As for the other, it was not a vaine feare, but a very losse indeed that touched many men: for there began a skarfire in the beast market; and continued a day and a night, burning many houses standing on the Tyber side; and all the shops and warehouses, with marchandise of great price, were consumed. Now was the yeer well drawing toward an end, and daily more and more the bruit and rumour of the warre with Antiochus encreased: and likewise the care that the LL. of the Senat had thereof. And therfore they began to treat as concerning the provinces of the Magistrates elect, to the end, that all of them might be more circumspect and intentive to their charges. So a decree passed, that the Consuls should have the governance of Italie, by name, and also to go whithersoever the Senat should please to dispose of them: and  all men knew well enough, that the warre against Antiochus was upon the point. Also ordained it was, that hee whose lot it was to manage that warre, should have the conduct of foure thousand footmen of Romane citizens, and three hundred horsemen; besides sixe thousand allies of the Latine nation, and foure hundred horsemen. L. Quintius the Consull was appointed to take musters for those souldiors, that there should be no stay, but that the new Consull might immediatly put himselfe in his journey, to what expedition soever the Senate thought good. Item, It was decreed as concerning the provinces of the Pretours, in this manner: namely, That the first lot should assigne the double jurisdiction, civill and forreine, as well among citizens as strangers: the second, should concerne the Brutians: the third, the navie; and the same to saile whithersoever the Senat would appoint: the fourth, for Sicilie: the fift, for Sardinia: the sixt, for  the nether Spaine. Over and besides, L. Quintius the Consull was commaunded to enroll two new legions of Romane citizens, besides twentie thousand foot and eight hundred horsemen of allies of the Latine nation: and this armie they set out for that Pretour, who was to governe the Brutij. Two chappels that yeere were dedicated to Iupiter Capitolinus: the one of them L. Furius Purpureo vowed in the Gaules warre, as Pretour; the other, when he was Consull: and Q. Martius Ralla the Duumvir, dedicated them. This yeere, there passed many sharpe and grievous sentences and judgements upon usurers: against whome (being privat men) M. Tuccius and P. Iunius Brutus the two Aediles of the chaire, commended action. Of that silver wherein they were fined, was made a charriot with foure wheeles, guilded; and set up it was in the Capitoll in the cabinet of Iupiter above the top of his shrine: likewise twelve bucklers guilded. The same Aediles  also, caused the porch or gallerie to be made without the gate Tergemina, among the carpenters.
As the Romanes were wholly amused upon preparation for this new warre, so Antiochus for his part sate not still: three cities there were which kept him backe and checked his progresse, to

 wit, Smyrna, Alexandria in Troas, and Lampsacus; the which he never could to that day force by assault, or draw into amitie with any conditions whatsoever; and to leave them behind in those tearmes, when he should in proper person passe over into Europe, he was not willing. Somewhat also he was impeached by a consultation as touching Anniball. For at first he was staied and hindered by occasion of the open ships which hee intended to send with him into Affricke. And afterward buzzed it was into his head by Thoas the Aetolian especially, and question moved, whether it were good simply to send him thither at all, or no? This Thoas, when Greece was all in an hurrey and full of troubles, bare them in hand, that Demetrias would be in their power and at their devotion. And like as w^^^ his leasings touching the king, in multiplying and magnifying his forces, he had brought many of the Greekes into a fooles paradise, even so also after the same manner  he ceased not to feed the king with lies, and fill him with hopes, making him beleeve that all men wished for him with all their hearts, and would run by heapes to the sea strond, to meet him so soon as they could but ken his fleet under saile.
This selfesame man was so bold also as to alter the kings mind as touching Anniball, which seemed before resolved and settled. For he persuaded him that the kings navie was not to be dismembred, and part thereof to be sent away; and if hee were to make out any of the ships from the rest, yet Anniball of all other was not to have the conduct thereof, a banished person and a Carthaginian; who was like yaough to be of many minds, and to change a thousand times in a day, such was his present condition and fortune, and such was his nature and disposition. And as for that glorious name for martiall prowesse (which is the cause that Anniball is so much set by, and which recommendeth him as a speciall and singular  gift to the world) it is too much, and farre unsitting for any one captaine under a king: and more meet it were that the king himselfe should be regarded and seen above al other, that the king, I say, and none but the king should be the leader, conducter, and commander of all. Again, if Anniball chaunced to miscarie with the fleet, or to have his forces defeated, the losse would be counted no more than if any other meaner captaine had done it: but if the affaires should prosper and speed well, Anniball should go away with all the honour, and not Antiochus. Moreover, say that fortune were so kind as to give Antiochus the upper hand of the Romanes, and the entire victorie over them for ever, what hope or likelyhood is there that Anniball would be content to live under the king, and subject to him alone, who hardly could brooke and endure the commaund and soveraignetie of the whole State wherein he was borne? He hath not caried himselfe so, eversince  his first youth, bearing a mind with him to compasse the dominion of the whole world, as that now in his old age hee can abide to have a lord and superior over him. To conclude: the king (quoth he) hath no such need of Anniball in this war, as to make him a commaunder: well may be use him for a counseller, and so forth to have him in his train and companie; for some meane fruit and use of such a nature, cannot be combersome, hurtfull, and daungerous: but if high and great matters be reached at, soon they may beare down and overcharge both the giver, and also the receiver. And no spirits are so readie to envie and mallice others, as they whose birth and parentage, whose degree and estate is not answereable to their hautie minds: and such commonly, as they hate the vertue, so they depresse the good of another. Hereupon that course of sending Anniball into Affricke, was forthwith laid aside and cleane cast behind, which was so well devised  in the beginning of the warre.
Antiochus bearing himselfe aloft now, principally for that Demetrias was revolted from the Romanes unto the Aetolians, determined no longer to delay the matter, but presently to take a voiage into Greece. But before that he embarked and took the sea, he went up to Ilium from the sea side for to sacrifice unto Minerva; and when hee was returned to his fleet, he made saile with 40 close covered and hatched ships, and 60 uncovered and undecked, and after these followed 200 vessels of burden, charged and fraught with victuals, munition, and warlike furniture of all sorts. And first he fell with the IlandI imbro. Imbros: and from thence he cut over to Scyathos, where after he had rallied his ships which had bene skattered one from another in the wide and deepe sea, he arrived at Preleum, the first towne of the maine and continent. VVhere Eurylochus the Magnetatches, [i. the soveraign of Magnesia] and the principall citizens of that State, who were come from Demetrias met him and joyned with him; who rejoycing exceedingly to see so goodly a companie of them in his traine, the next day put into the haven of the citie of Demetrias: and not far from thence landed all his forces, which amounted in the whole to tenne thousand foot, five hundred horse, and sixe Elephants: a small power (God wot) and unsufficient, to seize upon Greece, all naked

and alone, farre shorter than to hold and mainteine warre with the Romanes. After it was  reported that Antiochus was come to Demetrias, the Aetolians proclaimed a counsell, wherein they made a decree to send for Antiochus. For now the king knowing that they would passe such an Act, was departed from Demetrias, and had withdrawne himselfe to Phalera within the gulph of Malea. And after he had received once the patent of that decree, he went from thence to Lamia, where he was received with exceeding favour of the common people, with clapping of hands, shouts, acclamations, and other signes whereby the multitude useth to shew and testifie their great joy.
VVhen they were assembled together and set in Counsell, Phaneas the Pretor and other chiefe citizens brought him solemnely in: where after Oy^^^ ^ade, thus the king began his speech, first excusing himselfe, In that hee was come with a farre smaller power than all men hoped or looked for. And even this (quoth he) may serve in steed of the greatest argument  that may be of my exceeding love and affection toward you, in that being so unprovided and unfurnished of all things, and at a time so unseasonable for to saile, as too earely to take the sea, I have not thought much but am willingly come at the call of your embassadors: being thus assuredly persuaded, that the Aetolians seeing me once, would suppose that in me alone consisted all their hope and defence whatsoever. And yet I will accomplish I assure you, and satisfie to the full even your contentment also, whose expectation for the present may seeme to have bene disappointed: for so soone as the time of the yeere will serve, and the spring is once come, that the seas are navigable, I will overspread all Greece with men, horse, and munition; I will take up all the sea coasts with fleets; I will spare for no cost, no paine, no perill, untill I have taken from their necks the heavie yoke of the Romane empire, set Greece free indeed, and made the Aetolians  the chiefe commaunders therein. Nay with mine armies besides shall come all kind of provision and furniture out of Asia. But for the present (faith he) the Aetolians must see and take order, that my people may be served with corne and other victuals at a reasonable rate. To this effect when the king had spoken with the great assent of all men, he departed. After the kings departure, there arose some contention betweene two great men of the Aetolians, to wit, Phaneas and Thoas. Phaneas was of opinion, that it was better pollicie to use Antiochus for a mediatour and reconciler of peace, or to be an umpire or arbitrator to decide the controversies betweene them and the Romanes, rather than to be the Generall of the warre. For his very comming and majestie would be more effectuall than all his forces, to strike some reverence in the Romanes, and cause them to be respective unto him. For men oftentimes yeeld and remit many things of themselves willingly to avoid warre, which they cannot be forced unto by warre and by armes, when they are once entred into action. Thoas inferred againe and said, that Phaneas spake not this for any desire and love to peace, but his meaning was to scatter and dispatch this furniture and preparation of war, for this intent, That by this redious lingering, the kings courage might abate, and the Romanes gaine time to make themselves readie. For, that there was no reason possibly to be gotten at the Romanes hand, they had tried sufficiently by good experience, in sending so many embassages to Rome, and in debating the matter so often with Quintius: neither would they ever have sought unto Antiochus and craved his aid, if all their hope otherwise had not bene cut off and cleane failed. And now since his helping hand is presented unto them  sooner than all men thought or looked for, they were not now to begin to faint and geve over, but rather to request and intreat the king, that since he was come himselfe in person (which was the greatest matter of all) to set free and maintein Greece, he would send for his forces both at sea and land. For, the king in armes, might peradventure obteine something: but disarmed if he were, little or no reckning would the Romanes make of him in the quarell and question of the Aetolians, no nor in his owne affaires whensoever he should reason and debate thereof. And here went the hare away. They all opined streightwaies to stile the king with the name of Imperator [i. Emperour:] and they chose thirtie of the chiefe personages to assist him in counsell for all things requisite. Thus the Diet was dissolved, and every man slipt away and retired to his owne citie. The next day the king sat in consultation with their Apocletes, In what place they  should begin the warre. And it was thought best, first to assaile the citie of Chalcis, which lately the Aetolians had assaied in vaine. And for to effect this service, there was more expedition and speed required, than any other great forces and preparations. Hereupon the king set forward with 1000 footmen which followed him from Demetrias, and marched by the way of Phocis: The chieftaines also of the Aetolians, having levied some few companies of their youth, tooke

 another way, and met with him at Chaeronea, and followed with ten covered ships. The king encamped neere Salganea, and himselfe in person with the chiefe of the Aetolians crossed the Eurypus: and when he was landed and not farre gone from the haven, the magistrates and chiefe men of Chalcis came forth without their gates, and some few of both sides met together for to parlie.
The Aetolians were earnest to persuade with them; That so far-forth as they might without impeaching the Romane amitie, they would assume the king also to be their allie and friend, for as much as he was passed into Europe not to make warre, but to deliver Greece, and set it free in very deede, and not in word only and false semblance, as the Romanes had done. And nothing was there more for the good and benefit of the cities in Greece, than to enterteine the societie and friendship of them both. For under the defence and savegard of the one, they might  be sure to guard themselves from the violence and outrage of the other. But if they accepted not of the king, they were best to take heed and see what danger they presently incurred: considering the succors of the Romanes to relieve them were so farre off, and the forces of Antiochus their enemie to annoy them, so neere even at their gates, whom of themselves with their owne power they were not able to withstand. To this, Mictio one of their chiefe men made this answere: Imervaile much (quoth he) who they be, that Antiochus for to deliver and set free, hath taken the paines to leave his owne kingdome, and to passe over into Europe. For mine owne part, I know no citie in Greece, that either hath Romane garison, or payeth any tribute unto them, or is bound to unjust and unreasonable covenants, or endureth any hard lawes and conditions against their wils: and therefore the Chalcidians have neede of no person to restore them to  freedome, since they be free alreadie; ne yet of a garison for their defence, considering that by the grace and favour of the same people of Rome, they enjoy peace and libertie alreadie. As for the king, we refuse not his amitie, ne yet reject we the friendship of the Aetolians. And we will take it for a speciall point of friendship that they shall do us, if they gently will depart out of our yland and be gone: For as for us, we are resolute in this, not
to receive them within our walls, no nor to contract with them any societie, without the advise and consent of the Romanes. VVhen these matters were related to the king, who stayed behind with the ships, he determined presently to returne to Demetrias, for that he was not come with such a power as to attempt anything by force: where, seeing his first enterprise came to nothing, he devised and conferred with the Aetolians what was to be done next: and concluded it was, to sound the Achaeans, and Aminander  the king of the Athamanes. They supposed also that the nation of the Boeotians was cleane estranged and badly affected to the Romans ever since the death of Barcellios, and those troubles that ensued thereupon. They were persuaded also that Philopoem^^^^ a great potentate, and principall leader of the Achaeans, was both malicious and odious unto Quintius for emulation and jelousie of honor in the Laconian warre. Aminander had espoused and taken to wife Apamea the daughter of one Alexander a Megapolitan, who vaunting himselfe to be descended from Alexander the Great, named his two sonnes, Philip and Alexander, and his daughter, Apamas: whom being thus advanced by mariage with a king, her elder brother Philip accompanied into Athamania. This Philip, a vaine-headed yong man, the Aetolians and Antiochus had induced into a foolish hope (considering that for certeine he was of the royall bloud) to obteine the kingdome  of Macedonie, if haply he could bring about to joyne Aminandera and the (...) to Antiochus. And these vaine conceits of great behests wrought mightily not with this Philip only; but also with Aminander:
Now in Achaea there was a counsell holden at Aegium, and audience geven there to the embassadors of Antiochus and the Aetolians, before T. Qaintius: VVhere the king his embassador spake first, and being (as all those commonly are, that vaud their intertainment and of ^sain^^nance of kings) full of foolish bable, and making sea and land ^^^sound a gaine with his vain^^ pratling and senselesse words; set tale on end, and told them, what an infinite (...) of horsemen were passing over by Hellespont into Europe: whereof, some of them were in complet harnesse, armed at all peeces, whom they call Cataphracti: others were archers; and (...) on horseback,  against whom there was nothing close, nothing some enough, who when their back^ are turned, and their horses run away, shoote so much the more surely, and even point blanke. And albeit these forces of horse by his report, were sufficient of themselves to defeit all the enemies of Europe if they were put together, yet he added besides a mightie number, I wor not how many of footemen: and terrified them with naming (...) of strange nations, that scarcely had been

heard of before, to wit, the Dakes, the Medians, the Aelymaeans and Cadusians. But for his  forces at sea, there was no bayes, no harbors, nor havens in all Greece able to receive them. The Sydonians and Tyrians (say they) hold the rightside, the Aradians, and the Sidets out of Pamphylia keep the left; nations for skill and valour at sea incomparable. As for money and other provision and furniture for the warres, it were needlesse to discourse of, since they themselves knew well enough, that the realms of Asia have alwaies stowed with gold, as their proper foison. So as the Romanes now were not to deale with Philip nor with Anniball, the one a chiefe person among many others of a citie, and the other limited within the confines only of the kingdom of Macedonie; but with the great Monarch of all Asia, yea and of some part of Europe. And yet he, as mightie a potentate as he is (notwithstanding he is come from the utmost coasts and bounds of the Levant sea, to deliver and enfranchise Greece) demandeth nothing of the Achaeans  prejudiciall to their fealtie and allegeance to the Romans their first allies and associates: for he required not them to take arms with him against them, but only not to intermeddle nor take a part: his seeking is, that (as behooveth good friends and mediators between both parties) they would with all well and peace among them, and not interpose themselves in the quarrell of war. Archidanius likewise the embassador for the Aetolians, requested in manner the same, That they would hold themselves quiet and in repose (a thing most easie and safe for them) and being but lookers on the warre, wait and attend the issue of other mens fortunes, without the hazard of their own: yet he staid not so, but proceeded so far and overshot himselfe so much in words, that he brake forth at length into ill language, one while railing against the Romans in generall, another while against Quintius in particular; calling them ungratefull and unthankfull persons, reproching, upbraiding, and hitting them in the teeth, how not onely they had gotten the victorie of Philip, but also saved themselves by the vertue and valour of the Aetolians: and as for Quintius, he was to thanke them and their meanes, as much as his own life came to and the preservation of his armie. For wherein at any time (qd. he) perfourmed he the dutie and devoir of Generall in the field? Seene him indeed I have in the time of battaile and in the campe, take the flight of birds, kill sacrifices, and make vowes verie deuoutly, like some holy parish-priest or divining prophet, whiles I my selfe was faine in his defence to expose and present my bodie to glaives and darts of the enemies. To these challenges Quintius made answere in this wise, saying, That Archidamus had more regard in whose presence he spake, than to whome he directed all his speech: for the Achaeans know very well, that all the valiancie of the Aetolians, standeth in  bragging words and not in martiall deeds, as men that love to be heard in Diets and assemblies rather than seene in the field and battaile; and therfore no marvell if he made so small reckning to speake unto the Achaeans, considering that he knew, how well acquainted they were with the maners and fashions of the Aetolians. But he hath besides vaunted and made great brags before the kings embassadors, and in their person, before the king himselfe in absence. And if a man had not knowen before, what it was, that had so knit and united Antiochus and the Aetolians togither, he mought perceive it evidently by the speeches of the embassadors: for by exchanging lies a good reciprocally, and by bragging of their forces which they have not, they have inflated and pussed up one another with vaine hopes, whiles they tell and would make them beleeue, That Philip by them was vanquished, That the Romanes by their valour were protected; and  other gay matters, which erewhile ye heard: building castles in the aire, to the end, that you and other stares and nations would side with them and take their parts: The king againe (by his embassadour) overspreadeth all with clouds of horsemen and footmen, and covereth whole seas with fleets and armadaes. Now in faith this is mine hoast of Chalcis up and downe, a friendly man I assure you, and a good fellow in his house, and one that knoweth how to entertaine his guests and bid them welcome. And verily I can liken this manner of dealing to nothing better than to a supper of his: VVe went upon a time to make merrie with him, and I remember well it was at midsommer (when the daies are longest and the sun at the hotest) where he made us passing good cheere. And as we wondred how at such a season of the yeer he met with that plentie of venison, and such varietie withall; the man (nothing so vainglorious as these fellowes here) smiled  pleasantly upon us and said, VVe were welcome to a feast of a good ^^me swine and no better: but well fare a good cooke my masters (qd. hee) who by his cunning hand, what with seasoning it, and what with serving it up with divers sauces, hath made all this faire shew of wild flesh, and the same of sundry sorts. This may fitly be applyed to the king his armies and forces: of

 which even now so great boast was made. For these divers kinds of arms, these many names of nations never hard of before, to wit, the Dakes or Daheans (I wot not what to cal them) the Medes, the Cadusians, the Elimaeans, they are but Syrians when all is done; who for their base minds by nature, are much better to make a sort of slaves than a companie of good soldiers. And would to God (you my masters of Achaea) I could represent unto your eies the port and train of this great king, when he ran from Demetrias, one while to Lamia to the councell of the Aetolians, and another while to Chalcis: you should see in this kings camp hardly two pretie legionets, and those but lame ones neither and not well accomplished: you should see the king somtime as good as begging graine of the Aetolians, to measure out among his hungrie souldiors: otherwhiles making shift to take up monies at interest to make out their pay: now standing at the gates of Chalcis,  and anon shut out from thence and excluded clean: and when he had don nothing els but seen Aulis and Euripus, returning faire into Aetolia. Antiochus (you see) hath yeelded but small beleefe to the Aetolians, and the Aetolians have as litle trusted and relyed upon the vanitie of the king. And therefore the lesse should you be deceived by them, but rather repose your selves assuredly in the fidelitie of the Romans so often tried, so often knowen and approoved. For whereas they say, It is your best course not to be imbarked and interessed in this warre, I assure you, there is nothing more vaine than this, nay nothing so hurtfull unto your estate. For you shall be a prize and prey to the victour, without thank of either part, without any worth and reputation. Quintius was thought by the Achaeans to have spoken not impertinently, but to have answered them both, fully: and an easie matter it was to approove his speech unto those, that were well enough  enclined to have given him gentle hearing: for ther was no question nor doubt at all, but that everyman would judge them to be friends or enemies to the Achaean nation, whom the Romans held for theirs: yea and would conclude in the end of an act, to denounce warre both against Antiochus and the Aetolians. Moreover, according as Quintius thought good, they sent presently an aid of 500 soldiers to Chalcis, and of as many to Pyraeeum. For at Athens there had like to have ben a sedition and mutinie, whiles some drew the multitude (which commonly is bought and sold for mony) to take part with Antiochus upon hope of large rewards and great bounties, untill such time as Quintius was sent for by them that took part with the Romans: in so much as Apollodorus (who gave counsell and persuaded to revolt) was accused by one Leon, and being condemned, was banished. Thus verily the embassage returned from the Achaeans to the king with heavie  answer. The Boeotians delivered no certaintie: this only was their answer, That when Antiochus himselfe was come into Baeotia, then they would consider and consult what they were best to do.
Antiochus being advertised, that both the Achaeans and king Eumenes also had sent men for the defence of Chalcis, thought good to make hast, that his forces might not onely prevent them, but also if it were possible receive them and cut them short as they came. And for this intent, hee sent Menippus with three thousand souldiors or thereabout, and Polyxenidas with his whole fleet. Himselfe a few daies after marched with sixe thousand of his owne souldiors; and of that levie, which on a suddaine might be gathered at Lamia, no great number of Aetolians. Those five hundred Achaeans aforesaid, and the small aid that king Eumenes sent under the conduct  of Xenoclides the Chaleidian, having safely passed Euripus before that the waies and passages were beset, arrived at Chalcis. The Romanes also who were upon five hundred, at what time as Menippus encamped before Salganea, came to Hermeum, where is the advenue out of Boeotia into the Iland of Eubaea. In their companie was Miction sent as Embassadour from Chalcis to Quintius, for to crave some succour: who perceiving that the waies were laid and the streights kept by the enemies, leaving his intended journey by the way of Aulis, turned to Delium, minding from thence to cut over into Eubaea. This Delium is a temple of Apollo situate upon the sea strond, and five miles distant from Tanagra, from whence there is a short cut (little more than a league) over an arme of the sea unto the next parts of Euboea. In this temple and sacred grove about it, so religious, so priviledged and secured (as are those franchised houses and sanctuaries which the Greekes call Asyla) and at that time, when neither warre was  proclaimed, or at leastwise not so farre proceeded, as that in the hearing and knowledge of any man there had been sword drawne, or bloud shead in any place: In this place, and at this time, I say, whiles the souldiours wandered at their leisure and pleasure, some gone to see the temple abovesaid and the grove, others walking upon the strond unarmed, and a great sort also of them scattered over the fields (such as were gone for forrage and sewell) all on a suddain Menippus

finding them loose and disbanded, charged upon them, and slew them, and to the number  of fiftie hee tooke alive: very few escaped, among whom was Mictio, who got into a small vessell of merchandise. This occurrent, as it troubled and disquieted Quintius and the Romanes, for the losse of their souldiours, so it seemed much to encrease the right of their just quarell to make warre upon Antiochus. Antiochus having advaunced his armie, and approched Aulis, after hee had once again addressed Orators, partly of his owne subjects, and partly Aetolians to Chalcis, for to follow those causes which of late he had commensed, but in more minatorie tearms, now prevailed easily, notwithstanding Mictio and Xenoclides laboured to the contrarie, that the gates should be set open unto him. All those that were for the Romans, abandoned the citie a little before the kings comming. The souldiours of Achaea and king Eumenes, kept Salganea. The Romane souldiours also (who were but few) fortified and made a sconce upon the water of Euripus, to be a defence for the passage. Menippus began to assaile Salganea, and the king himselfe to set upon the sort of Euripus aforesaid. The Achaeans and the souldiours of Eumenes first grew to composition, and having capitulated to depart without any harme, quit their place of garrison. The Romanes held out longer, and stoutly defended the hold of Euripus: but even they also being so streightly invested both by land and water, and seeing now the ordinance and engines of batterie, brought and readie to bee planted against them, would no longer endure the siege. VVhen as now the king had possessed himselfe of the head citie of Euboea; all the other citties of that Island, refused not to submit and come under his subjection. And hee thought hee had made a good beginning and entrance in this warre, in that so great an Island, and so many citties commodiously seated, and of such importance, were reduced under his obeisance.


THE XXXVI. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the sixe and thirtith Booke.
MArcus Acilius Glabrio the Consull, with the aid of king Philip, vanquished king Antiochus, neere to  Thermopyle, and drave him out of Greece. He also subdued the Aetolians. P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica the Consull (reputed and iudged by the Senate, the best man in the citie) dedicated the temple of the mother of the gods, whom himselfe had brought into the Palatium. He also when he had overcome the Boians, tooke them upon surrender to his protection, and triumphed over them. Over and besides, here are set downe the prosperous battailes fought at sea, against the admirals and captaines of king Antiochus.

SO soone as P. Cornelius Scipio the sonne of Cneus, and M. Acilius Glabrio, the two Consuls, were entred into their magistracie, the LL. of the Senate enjoined them (before any speech and question moved as touching the provinces) to sacrifice greater beasts in all those temples, wherin the custome was for the more  part of the yeare to celebrate the solemnitie of Lectisternes, and to make their praiers in this manner, That where as the Senate intended a new war, the gods would vouchsafe to blesse and happily conduct the same to the good and publicke weale of the Senat and the people of Rome. All those sacrifices prooved good and as they ought to bee: even

 the very first beasts that were slain, prognosticated fortunat successe, and shewed apparent signes that the gods were pacified and well pleased. And thus the soothsaiers and bowel-priers out of their learning, answered, It was evident, that by this warre the bounds and limits of the Romane empire should be extended, and that both victorie and triumph was foresignified. These answers being reported, and mens minds settled, and their cousciences resolved of all scruples as concerning the gods, then the LL. of the Senate graunted out an order, that a bill should bee preferred solemnly unto the people in this forme, PLEASETH IT YOU, AND IS IT YOUR VVIL, THAT VVAR SHOULD BE ENTERPRISED AGAINST ANTIOCHUS, AND ALL THAT TAKE HIS PART? AND IF THIS BILL PASSE AND BE GRAUNTED, ARE YEE PLEASED, THAT THE CONSULS, IF THEY THINKE SO GOOD, REFERRE THE VVHOLE MATTER UNTO THE  SENAT TO TAKE ORDER FOR THE MANAOING THEREOF ACCORDINGLY? P. Cornelius propounded this bill, and the people acceptedthereof.Whereupon the Senate set downe a decree, that the Consuls should cast lots for the government of Italie and Greece: and that he whose hap it was to governe Greece, should (over and above that number of souldiours, which L. Quintius by authoritie and commission from the Senat had for that province either enrolled or levied) receive that armie also which M. Baebius the Pretour caused to passe over the yeere before into Macedonie, by vertue of an order by the Senat, in that behalfe enacted. And license he had, if need so required, to take up aid-souldiours from among the allies without Italie, so as hee exceeded not the number of five thousand. Also agreed it was, that L. Quintius the Consull of the yeare before, should be deputed lord Generall for that warre. As for the other Consull, unto  whome had beene allotted the charge of Italie, he was commaunded to levie warre against the Boians, and to have his choise, whether armie he had leisser have o
f those two which the former Consuls conducted: and when he had received one, to send the other to Rome, that those legions of citizens should be in readinesse for to bee sent whither it pleased the Senate. This order being taken in the Senate, as touching the appointment and assignation of those provinces, then it was thought good, that the new Consuls should cast lots for their governments. To Acilius besel Greece, and Italie to Cornelius. After this, by a speciall lot there passed an act of the Senate, That whereas the people of Rome had ordained to wage war at that time against king Antiochus, and those that were under his dominion, the Consuls should cause a procession to bee solemnised. Also, that the Consull M. Acilius should conceive and make a vow to Iupiter, for to celebrate the  great Games in his honour, and to bring offerings to every altar. This vow was by him pronounced in this forme of words, according as P. Licinius the Arch-priest endited and prompted unto him. IF THAT VVARRE VVHICH THE PEOPLE HATH DETERMINED TO BE ENTERPRISED AND MADE AGAINST KING ANTIOCHUS, SHALL BE PERFORMED ACCORDING TO THE MIND AND CONTENTMENT OF THE SENAT AND PEOPLE OF ROME, THEN SHALL THE PEOPLE OF ROME CELEBRATE UNTO THY HONOUR, o IUPITER, THE GREAT GAMES FOR THE SPACE OF TEN DAIES TOGETHER, AND OBLATIONS SHALL BE BROUGHT TO EVERY ALTAR, OF THAT PRICE, AND AMOUNTING TO THAT SUMME VVHICH THE SENATE SHALL ORDAINE AND SET DOVVNE. AND VVHAT MAGISTRATS  SOEVER SHALL EXHIBITE THOSE GAMES, OR IN VVHAT PLACE, YEA, AND AT VVHAT TIME SOEVER THEY SHALL BE REPRESENTED, THE SAID GAMES SHAL BE HELD FOR GOOD, AND REPUTED AS VVEL DONE, YEA, AND THE OFFRINGS ACCEPTED AS RIGHTLY PRESENTED. After this there was published and proclaimed by both Coss. a supplication for the space of 2 daies. When the Coss. had cast lots for the parting of their governments, the Pretors likewise went presently about the same for their provinces. To M. Iunius Brutus fell both the jurisdictions, as wel of citizens as aliens. A. Cornel. Mammula had the charge of the Brutij, M. Aemylius Lepidus of Sicilie, and L. Oppius Salinator of Sardinia. C. Livius Salinatur was L. Admirall of the navie, and L. Aemylius Paulus governor of the nether Spaine. And in this manner following, were the armies and forces distributed and appointed. Vnto A. Cornelius were assigned the new souldiours which the former yeere L. Quintius the Consull, by vertue of an Act of the Senate,  had enrolled. And his commission was to defend and keepe in order all that tract and coast about Tarentum and Brundusium. As for L. Aemylius Paulus, who was to take a voyage into the farther Spaine, he was allowed (besides the armie which he was to receive of M. Fulvius the Propretour) to have the conduct of three thousand new souldiours sootemen, and three hundred horse: so that of them, two third parts should
consist of allies of the Latin nation, and one third

of Romane citizens. The like supply was sent unto C. Flaminius into the higher Spaine, whose  commission was renewed for to have the commaund there still. M. Aemylius Lepidus had commaundement to receive the government of the province, and withall, the conduct of the armie, at the hands of L. Valerius, whom he was to succeede; and if he thought so good, to keepe with him in the province L. Valerius, in qualitie and place of a Viz-pretour: and so to divide the province, that the one part should reach from Agrigentum to Pachinus; the other halfe from Pachinus to Tyndarium: also, that L. Valerius should defend the sea coasts and the river with a fleete of twentie Gallies. The same Pretour aforesaid was to levie and gather a double tenth of corne, and to take order for the convoy thereof to the sea, and so to be embarked and transported into Greece. The like commission had L. Opimius, to exact and take another tenth in Sardinia; but that graine was to be brought to Rome, andnot to be caried over into Greece. C. Livius the  Pretour, and admirall of the navie, was appointed with 30 saile readie rigged and trimmed, to saile into Greece with all speede, and to receive the ships that Acilius had: likewise to repaire, rigge and furnish the old vessels that rid in the harbours, or lay atone side up in docks. M. Iunius the Pretor his charge was, to levie mariners and rowers from among the libertines, for to serve that Armada. And there were sent Embassadors into Africk to Carthage, and into Numidia, three into either part, for to seeke and purvey corne to be sent into Greece, for which the people of Rome would make present payment. And so wholly imployed was the citie, to prepare and take order for this warre, that P. Cornelius the Consul published an Edict, that no Senatours, nor any that had authoritie to give their opinion in the Senate, neither any inferior magistrates, should take any journey out of thecitie, farther than they might make returne againe the same day: Item, that there should not be five Senatours absent at once from Rome.
C. Livius the Pretour, whiles he used all diligence and care to prepare and provide his fleete, was impeached and hindered a time, by occasion of a debate and contention that arose betweene him and the Coloners of the sea side. For when they should be gathered and sent to sea, they appealed to the Tribunes of the Com. from whom they were put over and referred to the Senate: and the Senate with one voyce and accord pronounced and determined, that these Coloners were not exempted from sea-service. The Colonies that contended with the Pretour about their immunitie were these, Hostia, Fregena, Castrum novum, Pyrgi, Antium, Tarracina, Minturnae and Sinuessa.
This done, the Consull Acilius by order from the Senate, consulted with the colledge of the  Feciales or Heraults at Armes, and demaunded their advise, Whether the warre should be proclaimed and defiance geven to Antiochus himselfe in person; or it were sufficient, to intimate and denounce the same to some one of his garisons? Also, whether they would advise to proclaime warre against the Aetolians apart by themselves; or whether it were not meete and convenient first to disclame and renounce their societie and friendship, and then to proclaime and denounce hostility? The Fecials answered, that heretofore they had determined and cleered this point, at what time as their opinion was asked as touching Philip, to wit, That it was all one, and made no matter, whether the defiance were given him to his face, or only intimated to some garison of his. And as for the Aetolians, this was their mind, that they had quit alreadie their amitie, and abandoned all societie, in that when our embassadors so oftentimes had redemaunded  amends for wrongs done, they never thought good to make restitution or satisfaction. Moreover, the Aetolians had themselves sent defiance first and proclaimed warre against the Romanes, when as by force they seized Demetrias a citie of our allies, and advaunced before Chalcis, to assaile it both by land and sea: and lastly, in that they had sollicited king Antiochus and brought him into Europe for to levie warre against the Romanes. All things now being sufficiently provided, M. Acilius the Consull published an Edict and proclaimed, That all those souldiours whom L. Quintius had enrolled, likewise all those whom he had levied of the allies of the Latine nation, who were to go with him into his province, likewise all the Colonels and Marshals of the second and third legion, should render themselves, and be readie altogether at Brundusium upon the15 May. Ides of May following. Himself upon the5 May. fifth day before the Nones of  the same moneth, departed forth of the citie clad in his rich cote of armes. And at the same time the Pretors also tooke their journeys into their severall provinces.
Much about that time there arrived at Rome embassadors from two kings, to wit, Philip of Macedonie, and Ptolomae king of Aegypt; promising their aid of men, money, and corne

 for that warre. And besides from Ptolomaeus there was brought36000 pound sterling, after angell touch. 1000 pound weight in gold, and the weight of60000 pound sierl. 2000 pound in silver: howbeit, nothing was received, but much thanks rendered to both the kings. And whereas both of them offred to come with all their power into Aetolia, and to be there in person, Ptolomae was discharged of that offer of his, but the Embassadors of Philip received this answere, That he should highly please and content the people of Rome, in case he would not faile the Consull M. Atilius. In like manner there came Embassadours from the Carthaginians and Masanissa. The Carthaginians made promise of aI suppose that here wanteth the multiplica^n number, VIZ, 1^0. For it is (...) s^^rable to the proportion of the rest that followeth, nor to the magnificence of so great estate, to send some thirtie quarters of wheat who heretofore allowed a hundred times as much, and yet, the same proportion of bailey which now at this present is set downe. thousand Modij of Wheate, and of Barley five hundred thousand for the armie, and likewise to bring halfe so much to Rome; praying the Romanes to accept the same at their hands as a free gift and gratuitie: adding moreover, that they would man our a fleete at their owne charges,  and were readie also to make one entire payment of the tribute behind, which they were of dutie to pay by sundry termes of many yeeres. The Embassadors of Masanissa, promised in the behalfe of their king, to send five hundred thousand Modij of wheate, and 300000 thousand of barley into Greece to the armie, besides 500 men of armes and twentie Elephants, unto M. Acilius the Cos. As touching the corne, this answere was returned unto them, that they were content to accept thereof, so that they would take money therefore to the worth. As to the fleete aforesaid, which the Carthaginians made
offer of, they acquit them cleane, save as many ships as they were to find and provide according to the tenure of the accord and composition between them. Last of all, concerning the tribute money, none would they receive before the day.
Whiles the affaires passed thus at Rome, Antiochus being at Chalcis, because he would not  sit still and do nothing, all a winter time, partly himselfe sollicited (by sending his embassadors) the minds of the States, and partly also there came unto him embassadors from thence of their owne accord: and namely among others, the Epirots presented themselves by the common consent of their whole nation, and the Eleans also came out of Peloponnesus. They of Elis craved aid against the Achaeans, who (they verily thought) would first take armes against their citie, because war was denounced against Antiochus nothing to their will and good liking. Vnto them were sent 1000 footemen under the leading of Euphanes the Cretensian. The embassage of the Epirotes plaid with both hands, meaning to deale roundly and simply with no side, but to go between the bark and the tree.
Gladly they would make court to the king and curry favor with him, but so, as they stood in good termes still with the Romanes, whom they were loth to offend. For  their request to him was, that he would not draw them without great and important cause into the quarell, considering that they for the defense of all Greece lay open and exposed to Italy, and were sure before others to feele the Romanes fingers, and receive their first assaults. But in case he were able of himselfe with his forces by land and sea to defend Epirus, and furnish it with garisons sufficient, they would with hart and good will accept of him and his into their cities and porttownes: but if so be he could not effect that, they besought him not to offer them, naked and unarmed men, to the violence of the Romane warres. Their drift was in this their embassie (as it appeered) that if the king and his forces came not into Epirus (as they rather thought nay then yea) they might reserve themselves and all they had, safe, entier, and at their owne libertie for the Romane armies, and win withall the kings good grace, in that they seemed to make  an offer to receive him: or if hee came indeed, yet they might conceive good hope to find favour, and have pardon at the Romanes hands, in that they had not expected their succors being so farre off, but rather yeelded to the forces of Antiochus being present there in person. In such sort they caried themselves in their embassage so perplexed and intricate, that the king knew not well how to answere them redily: but said, that he would send his owne embassadors unto them for to parle and treat of all affaires perteining in common as well to them as to him. Then went he himselfe into Baeotia, which countrey in colour and shew pretended these causes of anger and spight against the Romanes, that before I have mentioned, to wit, the murder of Barcillas, and the armies by Quintius levied against Coronea, occasioned by a massacre committed upon Roman souldiers: but in very truth this was the reason, The singular discipline and order  of that nation in old time, was going downeward and endlong many yeeres and ages alreadie, and the popular government of many, growne to decay and ruine, which can not possibly continue long without some chaunge and alteration of State. Well, to Thebes hee came, where all the principall and chiefe States of Baeotia came flocking from all parts to meet him: Where, in the generall Diet and Councell of that Nation (notwithstanding hee had

founded the battaile and began the fray already by giving the first blow, in that hee had forced  the Romane garison neere Delium and Chalcis, which were no small signes nor doubfull overtures of warre, yet hee began with the same kind of speech which hee first used in the parle and conference at Chalcis, and which his embassadors had followed in the generall assembly of the Achaeans, namely, demaunding that they would enter into amitie with him, without prosessing themselves enemies to the Romans, or pretending hostilitie against them. But there was no man there but soone found him, and saw him well enough: howbeit there passed an act and decree in favour of the king against the Romanes, under a vaine and slight pretext and colourable shew of words. Having gained this nation also, he returned to Chalcis, from whence he sent out his letters before to the States of the Aetolians, that they should meet him at Demetrias, where hee would conferre and consult with them of all their affaires tobe managed; and thither came he  by sea at the day appointed. Aminander also was sent for our of Athamania to this consultation, yea and Anniball the Carthaginian (whose counsell was not required a long time) was present at this frequent Diet and assembly. Much parle and great opining there was as touching the nation of the Thessaliaus; and all there in place were of opinion, that they should be founded how they stood affected: but about the manner and some circumstance there of, they were of divers minds, whiles some advised it to be done and executed out of hand: others thought good to put it off from winter season (considering now they were in the mids thereof) unto the prime and beginning of spring: others againe said, that embassadors onely should be sent: and some hot-spurres there were, that gave councell to goe against them with all their forces, yea and to fright and terrifie them if they made slow hast. Now when all the knot and difficultie of th
is deliberation  consisted in this one point, Anniball was requested by name to deliver his mind and speake to the cause in question: who turned the king and all that were present from other wandring cogitations, and induced them to the entier consideration of the totall warre; and to that effect framed his speech in this wise.The speech of Anniball.
If since the time that we passed over into Greece, my hap had bene to be called to any counsell, when as some question was touching Eubaea, the Achaeans and the Baeotians, I would have delivered that advise then, which now I purpose to utter this day in the question concerning the Thessalians. Above all things my counsell is, that Philip and the Macedonians may by all meanes possible be wrought to this our association in the warre. For as touching Eubaea, the Baeotians and the Thessalians, who doubtethe, but that they (as nations that  stand not upon their owne bottoms and are of no force by themselves) will alwaies flatter them that are present in place, and be readie to crave pardon upon the same feare that they ever shew when they are to take counsell and resolve? who doubteth (I say) but so soone as they shall see the Roman armie in Greece, they wil turne to their accustomed obedience? and that it will be imputed to them no fault at all, that when the Romanes were so far off, they were not willing to try the force of you (a puissant prince in person among them) or of your armies? How much rather ought we then, nay how much better and more important would it be, to joyn Philip unto us than these? For if he once enter into the cause and be seen in action, he can not possibly start from us nor draw his head out of the collar: and moreover, he bringeth that power with him, which is not to be help for a simple succor and addition to mend our forces, but such as lately of it selfe without the help of others, was able to make head against the Roman puissance. Let me have this prince  on my side, and (be it spoken without offence of any man here) what need I doubt of the sequele and issue? especially when those, by whose meanes and assistance the Romans prevailed against Philip, I see now ready to enter the field against them? The Aetolians (I say) who as all the world knoweth vanquished Philip, shall now togither with Phi
lip, enter into armes and fight against them. Over and besides, Aminander and the whole nation of the Athamanes (whose service in that warre, next to the Aetolians, stood the Romans in best stead) shall be of our side. Philip at that time (o king Antiochus) susteined the weight and burden of the whole warre, when you sate still and stirred not: now both of you togither, two most mightie monarchs, with the puissance of all Asia and Europe, shall wage warre against one citie and people, which (to speake nothing of mine owne fortune good or bad) certainly in our fathers daies was not able to make their part  good with one only king of the Epirotes; how hardie soever they will be when they shall be matched with you both togither. But what mooveth me to think, yea and assureth me, that Philip may be woon unto us to joyne in this action? One thing is this, a common good and benefit, even the greatest bond that is of societie: and yet there is another besides it, namely, an inducement proceeding

 from you that be here of Aetolia: for Thoas your embassador (who is present in place) among other matters that he was wont to alledge for to animate and move Antiochus to come into Greece, evermore assured him of this principally, and avowed that Philip grumbled, bit the lip, and fretted, That under the colour and shew of peace, there were imposed upon him hard conditions of servitude and slaverie. And he verily, I mean Thoas, set out the fell anger of the king, and in all his words compared it to the wood rage of a wild beast bound with chaines, or beeing enclosed in some cage, would willingly breake the grates and barres thereof. Now, if hee be disposed thus, and of that courage, let us burst his bonds asunder, let us (I say) force open his yron cage, that his rage pent up so long may now break out upon the common enemies. And suppose that our embassage effect nothing at his hands, yet may we provide and take order, that if we cannot  work and win him to side with our selves, yet that he shal not combine and band with our enemies. Your sonne Seleucus is now at Lysimachia, who shall not so soone with those forces which hee hath about him, begin to invade and wast (by the way of Thracia) the confines of Macedonie, but he shall withdraw and turne Philip cleane away (from giving succour to the Romanes) to the defence especially of his owne. Thus have you heard mine advise as touching Philip: now, for the whole course and managing of the warre what mine opinion was, you have not beene ignorant from the first beginning. If then, I might have had mine owne waies, and my counsell had ben taken, the Romans should not have received newes and intelligences of the taking of Chalcis in Eubaea, nor of the forcing and winning of a litle pile upon Euripus; but they had heard by this, that all Tuscan, that all the coast of the Ligurians and of theLombardis. Cisalpine Gauls was up in arms and  on a light fire of war;
and (which would have feared and frighted them most) that Anniball was in Italy. And now (things standing as they do) my advise is, that you send for all your forces both by land and sea. Let your carricks and hulks with victuals and provision follow after your armada and ships of warre. For in this place, like as wee are too few to performe any martiall exploits, so wee are too many, considering our small store of victuals. And when you have rallied and united all your forces together, devide your navie in two parts: the one you shall keepe in the rode of Corcyra, to impeach the Romanes, that they shall not passe in safetie and securitie, the other you shall cause to saile unto that coast of Italie which looketh toward Sardinia and Affricke. Your selfe in proper person, with all your land-armie shall march onward into the territorie of the Bylliones: thence shall you have good means for the defence of Greece, as making the Romanes  beleeve, that you are upon the point to passe the seas, yea, and being readie indeed to crosse over, if need should require. This generally is my counsell; mine, I say, who as I will not take upon me a singular skill in all kinds of war, so me thinks I should know how to war with the Romans, as having learned my skill thereby, as well to my cost as advauntage, and as much with my good as harme. And looke whatsoever designements I have projected unto you, I promise and protest, that I will be faithfull and forward in the execution thereof: and the gods approove and blesse that course, which your selfe shall thinke the best. To this effect, in a manner, was the Oration of Anniball directed; which all that were in place and heard it, rather praised for the present, than put in practise and effected afterwards. For no one thing was done of all that hee had said, save onely that Antiochus sent Polyxenidas for a navie and armie out of Asia; yes there were embassadors also  dispatched to the generall Di
ets of the Thessalians. And a day was appointed for the Aetolians and Aminander to meet the armie at Pherae, whether king Antiochus came streight after with his power. And whiles he staied there, expecting Aminander and the Aetolians, he sent out one Philip a Megapolitane, with two thousand men to gather up the bones and reliques of the Macedonians about Cynoscephalae, where the warre with Philip was determined, and the quarrell decided by a famous battell: were it that therein he followed his own head and tooke a conceit, therby to wind himselfe into grace and favour with the Macedonian nation, and to bring the king into obloquie and disgrace, because he had left his souldiours unburied; or that, as it is the vaine (or vanitie rather) engraffed in kings by kind, he set his mind and busied his spirits in matters, for apparence gay and goodly, but in effect fond and foolish. There he made a mount (as it were) of a  number of bones gathered together into one place, that lay scattering and strewed here and there: a thing (no doubt) that the Macedonians conned him no thanke for, and which Philip (you may bee sure) tooke in soule scorne and despiteous disdaine. And therefore Philip, who at that time minded to take counsell of Fortune, and to bee directed by her, as shee enclined now, sent to Marcus Baebius the Viz-pretour, and advertised him, how Antiochus invaded Thessalie, and if

it pleased him to stirre out of his winter harbour, he would meet him, that they might conferre  both together what were best to be done.
While Antiochus lay now encamped before Pherae, where Aminander and the Aetolians had joined with him, there came embassadors from Larissa, expostulating, Wherein the Thessalians had so offended either by deed or word, that he should molest and trouble them with warre? and with all beseeching him to retire and withdraw his forces, and debate the matter (if he had ought against them) by his embassadours. At the same time they sent five hundred men in armes, well appointed, under the governance of Hippolochus, to lie there in garrison, who because they could not passe thither, by reason that all the avenues were seized and kept by the kings forces, returned to Scotusa. As for the embassadours of the Larissaeans, the king made them a gracious answere, and said, That he was entred into Thessalie, not by way of hostilitie to distresse them, but  in friendly manner to maintaine and establish the freedome of the Thessalians. Likewise he sent an embassadour to Pherae, to signifie so much to them and in the same tearmes. But the Pheraeans giving him no answere againe, dispatched unto the king an embassadour of their owne, one Pausanias, a principall man of their citie. Who after he had pleaded the semblable remonstrances to those, that had beene in the like case allcadged and laid foorth in the behalfe and name of the Chalcidians, in that Counsell holden neere the streights of Euripus, and besides, uttered something else with more boldnesse and courage; the king dismissed him, after hee had willed them to consider more of the matter, and be well advised, that they tooke not that counsel which anone they would repent, whiles they sought to bee too warie, provident, and forecasting for the future time. When this embassage was related at Pherae, the citizens tooke no long time to deliberate, but soone resolved in the maintenance of their faith and loialtie to the Romanes, for to undergoe whatsoever hazard the fortune of warre should present
unto them. Whereupon, both they addressed themselves to defend the citie with all their might, and also the king began to assault and batter the walls on all parts at once. And knowing well ynough (as in truth there was no doubt) that in the issue of the siege of that cittie which hee first enterprised, lay the whole importance and consequence of all, either to make him despised ever after, or feared and dread of the Thessalians; therefore he terrified the besieged inhabitants, on every side, and by all meanes possible that he could devise. The first assault they sustained stoutly and manfully; but afterwards, seeing many of the defendants were either overturned and slaine, or greevously butt and wounded, their hearts began to quaile: yet reclaimed by the rebukes and chastisements of their captaines  and leaders, and animated by their effectual exhortations, to persist still in their purpose and resolution, they quit the utmost compasse of their wall (seeing at what default they were for want of men) and retired themselves more inward into the citie, into one part thereof, which was strongly fortified with a mure of lesse circuite and cloisture than the other. At the length overcome with travaile and calamities, and fearing, That if they were forced and taken by assault, they should find no mercie nor pardon with the conquerour, they yeelded themselves. The king following the traine of victorie, delaied no time, but whiles the fright was fresh, sent foure thousand armed men presently to Scotusa, where the townesmen made no stay, but rendered the towne and themselves incontinently, having before their eies the fresh bleeding example of the Pheraeans, who tamed by fine force of wofull miseries, were compelled to doe that at last which they obstinately  refused at the first. Together with the citie itselfe was surrendered also Hippolochus and the Larissaean garison under his hand. All of them the king sent away without any hurt or violenc
e offred unto their persons: for he thought thereby to win the hearts and love of the Larissaeans. Having accomplished these exploits within ten daies after his first comming to Pherae, hee marched toward Crano with all his armie, and at his first comming woon it. Then hee regained and seized Cypaera and Metropolis, and the borroughes and forts about them: so as now all those quarters were subdued and put under his subjection, except Atrax and Gyrto. Then he determined to assaile Larissa, supposing, that either upon the fearefull terrour of other cities forced, or in regard of his demerite in dismissing the garrison so courteously, or by the present example of so many citties yeelding unto him, they would not long persist in their obstinacie. And for to terrific them  the more, he commaunded the elephants to march in the forefront of the vaward, and approched himselfe in a square battell, with foure sides, in such sort, as the hearts of many of the Larissaeans waved in doubtfull suspence, betweene forced feare of present enemies, and kind regard of absent friends.
 In this time Aminander, with the whole youth and manhood of the Athamanes, became master of Pelineum. Menippus also with three thousand Aetolian footmen and two hundred horse went to Perrhoebia, woon Mallaea and Cyretiae by assault, and wasted the territorie of Tripolis. Having perfourmed these exploits with great expedition and celeritie, they returned to Larissa unto the king, and arrived even then when as the king was in consultation what to doe with Larissa: for the councell was divided into diverse opinions. Some thought it good to proceed forcibly, and not to deferre but assaile the cittie walls with fabrickes and engines of batterie on all sides at once: alledging that the towne being situate in a plaine toward the champaine field side, might be approached unto with ease and invested every way. Others againe inferred one while, that there was no comparison between the strength of this citie and of Pherae: otherwhile,  that it was now winter time, and a season of the yeere far unfit for warlike executions, and most of all others for the siege and assault of cities. As the king thus hung in the equall ballance of hope and despaire, the embassadours of Pharsalus arrived, who as good hap was, being come to surrender up their towne, revived his spirits and mightily comforted his heart.
M. Baebius in this meane while having parlied and confered with Philip in the Dassaretians countrey, sent Appius Claudius by the common advise of them both, to the succour and defence of Larissa; who passed through Macedonie, and by long journies came to the top of those hills that commaund Gonni. Now this Gonni is a towne twentie miles distant from Larissa, feared just in the very streights of that forest and pase called Tempe; who having taken up a larger circuit of ground to encampe in, than was proportionable to his number, and made more fires in  shew than need was for that companie, gave semblance unto the enemie (which was the thing he aimed at) that all the Romane forces were there, togither with king Philip. King Antiochus therefore pretending unto his armie, that the unseasonable winter time approached, after he had stayed one onely day before Larissa, dislodged, and from thence departed, and so returned to Demetrias. The Aetolians likewise and the Athamanians repaired to their owne countries.
Appius, albeit hee saw that the siege was levied (which was the only cause of his comming) yet downe he went to Larissa to encourage and confirme the harts of the allies against the time to come. And a two-fold joy there was, both because the enemies were gone and had quit their countrey, and also for that they saw the Romane garison within their walls. King Antiochus departed from Demetrias to Chalcis, where he fell in fancie and love with a damsell of that citie,  daughter of Cleoptolemus a Chalcidian. Now after he had made meanes to the maidens father first by intercession of messengers and mediatours, and after by importuning him in his owne person with earnest requests by word of mouth (who was very loth and unwilling to entangle and tie himselfe, in matching her so high above his own calling) at length so overcame the man, that he obtained his desire: and as if it had been a time of settled and confirmed peace, he proceeded to consummate and celebrate the mariage. And forgetting cleane, how at one time he had undertaken the charge of two affaires so important, to wit, the warre with the Romanes, and the deliverance of Greece, he passed away the rest of the winter in feasts and bankets, and in those delights and pleasures, which ordinarily (you wote well) follow upon the liberall drinking of wine; yea, and when he had thereby rather wearied his bodie than fulfilled his appetite, hee gave himselfe  to sleepe without compasse. The like roiot and loosenesse of life tooke hold of the rest of the kings captaines, by his example in all places, but in Baeotia especially, such as commaunded the garisons. Nay the very souldiours were let loose and given over to take voluptuous waies, and not one of them would put on armour, keepe the watch, attend the guard, or doe any thing pertaining to the dutie and charge of a souldiour. And therfore at the beginning of the spring, when he was come by Phocis and Cheronea, to the Rendez-vous, w
here hee had appointed from all parts his forces to meet, hee soone perceived that the souldiours had spent the winter as licentiously as their leaders, and kept no better order and streighter discipline. Then he commaunded Alexander the Acarnanian, and Menippus the Macedonian, to lead the armie to Stratus, a town in Aetolia. Himselfe having done sacrifice at Delphi to the honor of Apollo, went forward to Natupactum.  And after the Diet holden of all the States of Aetolia, in the way which leader to Stratus, along by Chalcis and Lysimachia, hee encountered his owne forces aforesaid, that came by the gulfe of Malea. Where Mnesilochus, a principall Acarnanian, but wrought and bought with many gifts and presents, not only himselfe woon that nation to take part, and to side with the king, but also had drawne to his owne mind and affection Clytus their Pretour, who at that time had

the soveraigne rule there, and might do all in all. He seeing that the Leucadians (who are the  chiefe of all the Acarnanians) could not be easily induced nor brought to revolt, for the awe wherein they stood of the Romane fleete, which either was with Attihus, or about Cephalenia, went cunningly to worke with them. For having delivered his opinion in their generall Counsell, That the inland parts of Acarnania were to be well guarded and defended; and that as many as were able to beare armes should go forth to Medio and Tyrrheum, for feare those places should be seized by Antiochus and the Aetolians: there were againe some who made answere and said, how there was no such neede that all should be raised and levied so tumultuosly in hast; for a garison of five hundred men was sufficient. And when he had obteined that number of young and able men, he placed three hundred of them in garison at Medio, and two hundred at Tyrrheum: his reach and drift was to have them put into the kings hands for hostages. And  even at that time arrived the kings embassadors at Medio. Whose embassage being heard, they laid their heads together and consulted in the publick assembly what answere to returne unto the king. Some were of opinion to continue still in the Romane societie: others were of advise againe, that the kings offer of amitie was not to be rejected. The counsell of Clytus was meane and in different between both, and therefore accepted: to wit, that they should addresse their embassadors to the king, to intreat him that he would permit them to take a day of deliberation upon a matter of such consequence, in a full Diet of the Acarnanians. In this embassage Mnesilochus, and those of his faction were employed of set purpose: who having dispatched messengers covertly to the king, to advertise him to approch the towne with his forces, trifled out the time themselves, and made no hast to set forward in their embassie. Whereupon these  emb
assadors were scarcely gone forth of the citie, when Antiochus was entred the borders, and anon shewed himselfe hard at the gates. And whiles they that wist nothing of this treason were affrighted, and in great trouble and turmoile called the youth hastily to arme, he was by Clytus and Mnesilochus let into the citie. Some willingly of themselves came running about the king: those also that were of the adverse part, for very feare joyned with him. Whom he seeing to be afraid and terrified, he enterteined with gracious words, and so gently handled them, that in hope of his clemencie so much divulged and spoken of abroad, certeine States of Acamania revolted and turned unto him. Then from Medio he went to Tyrrheum, unto which place he had sent Mnesilochus and his embassadors aforehand. But the treacherie and faiterie at Medio being  discovered, made the Tyrrheans more warie and carefull than otherwise fearefull: who made him this plaine direct answere without any double ambiguitie, that they would admit of no new alliance, without the advise and authoritie of the Romane Generals: so, they shut their gates, and disposed armed men upon their walls. Now it fell out very fitly and happily for confirming and encouraging the harts of the Acarnanians, that Cn. Octavius sent by Iuintius, having received a garison and some few ships of A. Posthumius, who by A^ilius the Lieutenant had bene appointed Governour of Cephalenia, was come to Leucas, and much comforted the Allies, and put them in good hope: who also gave them to understand, that M. Acilius the Consull had alreadie passed the seas with his legions, and the Romanes were encamped in Thessalie. And for as much as this bruit carried a great likelyhood of truth, by reason that the season of the yeere served now for navigation, the king after he had planted a garison at Medio and in other  townes of Acamania, departed from Tyrrheum, and passing through the cities of Aetolia and P
hocis, returned to Chalcis.
Much about this time M. Baebius and king Philip, who had communed and devised together before (during the winter) in the Dassaretians countrey, having sent Appius Claudius into Thessalie, for to raise the siege before Larissa: and because the season then was unmeet and too soone for execution of any exploit, were retired to their wintering harbours, now in the beginning of the Spring joyned all their forces together, and came downe into Thessalie. (Now at that time was Antiochus in Acarmania.) And at their first comming, Philip began to lay siege unto Mallaea, and Babius to Phacium: which when he had forced in manner at the first assault, he wan Phestius also with like expedition. From whence having retired himselfe to Atrax, he tooke  Chyretias, and so consequently surprised Eritium, and after he had planted garisons in these townes that he had thus recovered, he joyned with Philip againe, lying in siege before Mallaea. Vpon the very comming of the Romane armie, when the townes-men had yeelded themselves either for feare of forces, or for hope of pardon, they marched jointly together with one armie,

 to recover those townes where of the Athamanes were seized: to wit, Aeginium, Ericinium, Gomphi, Silana, Tricca, Melibaea, and Pholoria: After this, they invested Pellineum, where Philip the Megapolitane lay in garison with five hundred foote, and fortie horse: but before they gave the assault, they sent a trumpet to Philip to give him warning, that he should not adventure to try the utmost hazard. But he returned this answere againe right stoutly unto them, that he would be content to commit himselfe to the Romanes or the Thessalians, he passed not whether, but put his life and estate into the hands of king Philip he never would. Now when it appeered that they were to proceed by force, and for that it seemed that Limnaea also at the same time might be assaulted, it was thought expedient that the king should go to Limnaea, and Baebius stayed still to batter and force the towne of Pellinaeum.
 It fortuned at the sametime that M. Acilius the Cos. having passed the seas with a power of ten thousand foote and two thousand horse, and fifteene Elephants, commaunded certeine chosen Colonels of footmen to conduct all the infanterie to Larissa, whiles himselfe with the Cavallerie came to king Philip before Limnaea. At the comming of the Consul, the towne was yeelded incontinently: the kings garison was delivered, and the Athamanians withall. Then the Consull went from Limnaea to Pellinaeum, where the Athamanes yeelded first: and afterwards Philip also the Megapolitane rendred himselfe. And as he came downe from the fort, Philip the king chaunced to meete with him, and in skorne and derision commaunded his men to s^lute him with the style of King, and himselfe also by way of mockage, came close unto him, and greeted him by the name of Brother Philip, skoffing and jesting in broad termes, far unfitting  ywis his royall majestie. Then was he brought before the Consull, and put in ward, and not long after sent bound to Rome. All the multitude besides of the Athamanians, as also of king An^^chus his souldiours, which were within the garisons of those townes that were surrendred about that time, were delivered unto Philip, who amounted to the number of three thousand. The Consull departed toward Larissa, to consult and take advise for the generall course of the whole warre. And in his way there met him embassadours from Pieria and Metropolis, for to render their cities. Philip having courteously and lovingly intreated above all other the prisoners of the Athamanians, that by their meanes he might win the grace and favour of that nation, and conceived some hope to conquer Athamania, led his armie thither, and sent his captives aforehand into their severall cities. Now they were of great accoumpt and reputation  among their country men, and with all made report of the king his clemencie toward them, and how lib
erally and bountifully besides he had used them: And Aminander verily, whose presence and majestie had kept some of them in allegeance, fearing least he should be delivered into the hands of Philip (who long time had bene his mortall enemie;) and unto the Romanes, whom he knew to have just cause at that time to be offended with him for his revolt, departed out of his owne realme with his wife and children, and retired himselfe to Ambracia. Thus all Athamania became subject to king Philip, and at his pleasure.
The Consull sojourned certaine daies at Larissa, especially for to refresh his beasts, which first had beene sea sicke, and afterwards were tired with long travaile; and thus when he had renewed as it were, and repaired his armie with a litle rest and repose, he marched to Crato. At his comming  thither, these townes, to wit, Pharsalus, Scotussa, and Pherae, togither with king Antiochus his garrisons that lay there, were yeelded up unto him. And having put unto their choice, either to be gone or tarie still with him: as many of them as he saw willing (and those were about a thousand) he delivered unto king Philip; the rest he sent backe disarmed, to Demetrias. Then he regained Proerna and the fortresses and piles there, about it. Then began he to conduct forward his armie toward the gulfe of Mallea: and when he approched the streights, upon which the towne Thaumaci is situate, all the flower of the youth in their armour, quit the citie, and put themselves in ambush about the woods and passages, and from the higher ground charged upon the Romanes in their march. The Consull at the first sent certaine unto them, to parle neere at hand with them, and to see if they could skare them from such desperate outrage: but perceiving  that they persisted still as they began, hee commaunded a Colonell with two ensignes of souldiours to fetch a compasse about, in such sort, that he gat betweene those armed men and the towne, and kept them from entrance; whereby he possessed himselfe of the citie, being void of defendants. Then they that lay in the forest in ambush, hearing an outcrie behind their backs of the town taken, fled backward out of all parts of the wood, and fell upon the sword. The Consul

then departed from Thaumaci, and the second day came as far as the river Sperchius, and so forward  unto the territorie of the Hypataeans, which he spoiled.
During the time of these occurrents, Antiochus lay at Chalcis, who by this time seeing that he had gotten in Greece, but the pleasure of one wintering, spent so deliciously in Chalcis, and a dishonourable marriage; began to blame the Aetolians for their vaine promises, and especially Thoas; but Anniball he had in great admiration, reputing him not onely for a sage and prudent man, but also for a true Prophet, who foretold him of all things that then were come to passe: howbeit for feare that his cold slacknesse might not overthrow that quite, which his rash follie had begun and enterprised, he sent out his courriers into Aetolia, to give them warning to levie all their youth and assemble them togither; and himselfe for his owne part had brought thither almost ten thousand footmen, who were made up full and furnished by them that after  came out of Asia, and five hundred horsemen besides. To this place, perceiving that there repaired smaller numbers by many degrees than ever at any time before, and that they were but the Nobles onely and some few of their vassals, (who protested, that they had done their endeavour to levie out of their cities as many as possibly they could: but neither by authoritie, nor for love and favour, ne yet with absolute commaund, were they able to prevaile or doe any good with them that refused warfare:) and seeing himselfe thus forsaken on all sides, as well of his owne subjects who dragged behind in Asia, as of his allies who performed not those matters, in the hope whereof they had called him to assist them, hee withdrew himselfe within the streights of Thermopylae.
This mountaine divideth Greece in the verie middle, like as Italie is parted in twaine by the  ridge of the Apennine. On the fore-part of this streight and forest of Thermopylae toward the North, lyeth Epirus and Perrhaebia, Magnesia and Thessalie, also the Phthiotae of Achaea, and the gulie Mallea: but within-foorth Southward, is discovered the greater part of Aetolia and Acarnania, Phocis, Locris, and Baeotia, togither with the Iland Euboea joyning close thereto: behind it, is situate the country of Attica, running into the sea like a promontorie, and besides it Peloponnesus. This mountain taking his beginning at Leucas and the Ponant or Westerne sea, reacheth through Aetolia to the Levant or Easterly Ocean, and is so full of rocks and rough crags betweene, that no whole armies, no nor so much as single travailers lightly appointed, can find but hardly and with much adoe the waies and paths to passe through: the utmost browes and the hils of this mountain bending toward the East, they call Oeta; and the highest pitch and knap therof, is called Callidromos; at the foot whereof, lyeth the vally leading toward the gulfe of Mallea, wherein the plaine is not above threescore paces broad. And this is the only high and port-way by which an armie may march, if it be not otherwise empeached. And hereupon it is,(...)that the passage is called *Pylae:(...) and of some (because there are found therein certaine naturall hote waters of baines) Thermopylae: even that verie place which is so famous and renowmed for the memorable death of the Lacedaemonians, more than for any worthie battaile against the Persians. Here lay encamped Antiochus at this present (carrying nothing that mind nor resolution as those Lacedaemonians did) within the gates as it were of the streights, where he enclosed and stopped the passage besides, with strong defences: And when he had cast a double rampire and trench, yea and raised a mure and wall
where need was (which to doe the place affoorded him  great plentie of stone lying every where) and had made all sure: presuming confidently that the Romane armie would never venture nor be able to breake through those barricadoes that way: he sent of those four thousand Aetolians (for so many were met togither) some to keepe a garrison in Heraclea, situate even before the very gullet and streight; and others to Hypata: for that he made no doubt, but the Consull would assaile Heraclea, and many posts brought word, that all about Hypata was alreadie wasted.
Now the Consull having spoiled the territorie of Hypata first, and then of Heraclea, (where the Aetolian aids did no good and served to no purpose in the one place or the other) pitched his campe over-against the king, even in the verie mouth of the gullet, neere the fountaines of the hot waters aforesaid: both those regiments abovenamed of the Aetolians wer gotten within  the towne Heraclea, and there kept themselves sure. Antiochus, who before he saw his enemies, thought all was fast enough and sufficiently fensed, began then to feare least the Romane souldiours would find out some privie pathes and waies, wherby they might passe and get over those high hils that commaunded his campe: for a rumour ran, that the Lacedaemonians in times past

 were so enclosed by the Persians, and of late daies also king Philip was likewise compassed and environed by these very same Romans. Whereupon he dispatched a messenger to the Aetolians in Heraclea, willing them to doe him thus much service yet in these his warres, as to seize the tops of those hills and to keepe them, that the Romanes might have no passage that way. Vpon this message received, there arose some dissention among the Aetolians. Some were of mind to obey the king his will and commaundement, and to goe accordingly; but others thought better to tarrie Hill at Heraclea, to attend upon fortune, and see what would happen: to the end, that if the king should chaunce to be vanquished by the Consull, they might have in readinesse their forces fresh and in heart, to succour and aid their owne cities neere at hand; or if his lucke were to defeat the Consull, then they might follow the Romanes in chase, when they were disbanded  and scattered asunder. Both parts, thus divided as they were, not onely persisted still in their severall designments, but also put the same in execution by themselves. For two thousand of them remained at Heraclea; the other two thousand parted themselves three waies, namely, to Callidromus, to Rhoduntia, and Tichius, (these are the names of three principall high hills;) and each companie tooke and held one. The Consull when hee saw that the Aetolians were possessed of these higher places, sent M. Porcius Cato and L. Valerius Flaccus, two of his lieutenants (who both had beene Consuls) with two thousand chosen men against these holds of the Aetolians, to wit, Flaccus against Rhoduntia and Tichius, and Cato against Callidromus: himselfe before that hee advaunced his battaile against his enemies, made a briefe speech unto his souldiers in this manner:
My souldiours, I see that the most part of you, even of everie qualitie and  degree, are they that in this very province somtime served under the conduct, charge, and governance of T. Iuintius in the Macedonian war. The streights of that passage then, neere the river Aous, were far more difficult to gaine and get over, than this is; for here are verie gates, yea and one naturall way (as it were) to passe through, as if all els were stopped up between two seas. There were more stronger defences and skonces against them at that time, and those planted in places more convenient and commodious. The armie of the enemies then, was both for number greater, and for men and soldiers much better; for therein were the Macedonians, the Thracians, and the Illyrians, all most fierce and warrelike nations: in this, are Syrians and Asiatike Greekes, or halfe Asians, the vainest kind of people of all others, and borne to serve. The king there,[namely Philip] a most noble warriour, exercised and inured ever from his youth in the neighbour-wars of the  Thracians and Illyrians, and all the nations bordering upon him: but this Antiochus (to say nothing of all his life besides) is he, who being come out of Asia into Europe, for to make war upon the people of Rome, hath done all the long winter time nothing more memorable than this, That for to please his wanton lust hee hath taken to wife the daughter of a privat person; a man (I say) of low degree and base qualitie among other citizens: and this new married man, fed fat and franked (as I may so say) with daintie suppers and delicate bride bankets, is come forth (forsooth) to fight a battaile. His whole strength and all his hope hath beene in the Aetolians, a people of all others most vaine, unconstant, and unthankfull, as yee have tryed heretofore, and Antiochus findeth true at this present. For neither assembled they in great number, nor possible was it to  keepe them togither in
the campe: nay, which more is, they mutine among themselves, and having demaunded and required the guard of Hypata and Heraclea, they have defended neither the one nor the other. Some of them are fled to the tops of the mountaines; others have shut themselves within Heraclea. The king himself hath confessed plainly, that he was never so hardie as to meet in plaine field and affront the enemie, no nor so much as to pitch his campe in open ground; in that abandoning all that countrie before him, which hee vaunted and bragged that hee had taken from us and Philip, hee hath hidden himselfe among the rockes. Hee hath not encamped before the entrance of the gullet and streights (as the same goeth of the Lacedaemonians in times past) but pitched his tents farre within-foorth. And to bewray his cowardly feare, What difference is there between so doing, and housing himselfe within the walles of some citie for to bee besieged? But neither shall those narrow streights save him, no  more than those steepe hilles defend the Aetolians, which they have seized. This one thing hath beene forecast and provided for on all sides, that yee shall have nothing to make head against, but your enemies. Now must yee resolve upon this point, That yee fight not onely for the libertie of Greece (and yet even this also were a brave and honourable title, to bee said for to deliver the same now out of the hands of Antiochus and the Aetolians, which before

you freed from king Philip) nor that yee shall have no other reward and recompence for your;  paines, but that which we shall find now in the kings camp, but also that the great provision and furniture which daily is expected from Ephesus, shall be your prise and bootie, and that yee shall hereafter make a way for the Romane Empire into Asia, Syria, and all those most wealthie and rich realmes, even as farre as to the Levant sunne. And what shall let us then, but that from Gades to the red sea, wee bound and limit our State and dominion, even with the very Ocean that environneth and compasseth the round globe of the earth? What shall hinder us, I say, but that all the nations of the world shall honour and worship the Romane name next unto the immortall gods? Prepare your hearts therefore and courages answereable to so high rewards, that with the leave and helpe of the gods we may to morrow fight a field. After this speech the assembly brake up, and the souldiours being dismissed, made readie their armor and weapons, before they took  repa^^ or repose. And in the morning, by dawning of the day, the Consull put out the signall of battell, and set his armie in array, with a narrow and pointed front, according to the nature and (...) of the place. The king seeing the ensignes of his enemies, led forth his forces likewise. Part of his light armours he planted before the rampier and trench in the forefront, then he placed the (...) and strength of the Macedonians, whome they call Sarissophori, i. Pikemen, for the (...) and safegard of his defences and fortifications. And to flanke these on the left side, he put the archers, the flingers of darts, and flingers of stones, hard upon the foot of the hill, that from the higher ground they might assaile and pelt the naked sides of the enemies. On the right ^lanke of these Macedonians, at the very edge and point of the mures and defenses, which as they were enclosed and mounded with those
places which reach to the sea, and arcunpassable  by reason of the bogs, muddie marishes, quavemires, and quicksands, hee set the elephants with their ordinarie and usuall guard. After them his horsemen and men of armes. Then leaving an indifferent space between, he raunged the rest of his forces in the second ward or middle battailion. The Macedonians who were bestowed before the camp and the trench, at the first sustained the Romanes easily enough (who assaied on every side to make an entrie) for much helpe they (...) of them, who from the upper ground weighed bullets out of their slings, as thick as an haile (...), who launched darts also, and shot arrowes besides. But when as afterwards greater numbers of enemies preased upon them, and charged them with such violence as possibly might not be endured, they gave ground, and retired within their fortifications, keeping yet their array and thei ranks whole. And then from the rampier they made (as it were) another pallisade with their  long pikes that they held out afore them. Now the height of their campe-mure was so reasonable, that as it affourded some rise and vauntage of ground for their owne men to fight upon it, to by reason of the length of their speares, they might reach the enemie under them. In so much as many of the Romanes approching rashly, and venturing to clamber up, were runne cleane through and either they had given over and done nothing, or els more of them had died for it, but that M. Porcius C^to having beaten from the top of Callidromus the Aetolians, and slaine a great part of them (for he surprised them suddainely at unwares, and most of them last asleepe) appeared upon the hill that commaundeth the campe. Flaccus sped not so well at Tichius and Rhodiuntia, who laboured to get up those cliffes and holds, but to no purpose. The Macedonians and the rest that were in the kings hoast and campe, at first, when they descried a farre off nothing  but a multitu
de and number marching, imagined verily, that they were the Aetolians, who having discovered the battell and fight a good way of, were comming to aid them. But so soone as they beheld and discerned neere at hand the ensignes and armour of the Romans, they tooke themselves in their owne errour, and were upon a suddaine strucken with such feare, that they all flung their weapons away, and sled. But both their fortifications and defences in the way, and also the narrownesse of the vale through which they were to bee pursued, hindered the Romanes in following the chase. And the elephants above all which were in the rereward, took up the ground so as that the footmen could hardly passe by them, and the horsemen by no meanes possible; so affrighted were the horses, and caused more trouble and disorder among themselves, than they did during the battell. Besides, the Romanes staied some time behind, whiles they rifled and ransacked  the campe. Howbeit, they had the enemie in chase that day as farre as Lylaeum, killing and taking in the very way, not onely many horses and men, but also slaying the elephants which they could not take alive; which done, they returned to their owne campe, which that day had beene assailed by the Aetolians, who were of the garrison of Heraclea: but that enterprise, as it

 was exceeding bold and andacious, so it tooke no effect at all. The Consull having at the releese of the third watch the night ensuing, sent before his Cavallerie to pursue the enemie, advaunced likewise the ensignes of his legions forward by breake of day. The king by this time had woon some ground, and gotten a good way before; for hee never gave over galloping with bridle in horseneck, untill he had recovered Elatia. Where first he gathered together the broken ends of his armie thus dispersed in flight, and so having rallied a small and poore troupe of soldiours, and the same armed by the halfes, hee retired to Chalcis. The Romane Cavallerie was not able to overtake the king himselfe at Elatia, but overthrew and cut off a great part of his armie, which either for wearinesse rested themselves dragging behind, or else were scattered one from the other, as missing their way in those unknowne quarters, going as they did without their guides: and setting  aside five hundred whichkept about the king, there was not one that escaped of the whole armie. Which was but a smal number, in proportion of 10000, (if they were no more) for so many (according to Polybius) we have written that the king conducted over with him for his part into Greece. What were they then to that great power, which (if we believe Valertus Antias) came with the king, for hee writeth that hee had in his hoast threescore thousand, and that fortie thousand were slaine of them, and above five thousand taken prisoners, with the losse of militarie ensignes two hundred and thirtie. Of Romanes there died in all a hundred and fiftie.
As the Consull marched with his armie through Phocis and Baeotia, the States and citties which were privie to the revolt, and partly culpable, stood without their gates with their infules and veiles in token of peace, and craved mercie, fearing they should have been pilled and ransacted  as enemies. But his hoast journeied every day as in a peaceable and friend countrey, doing no hurt or wrong to any earthly creature, until they were come into the territorie of Corona: where the Statue or image of Antiochus erected in the temple of Minervus Itonea kindled their choler, and the souldiours were permitted to spoile the country lying about that temple. But be thinking themselves, that (considering the said Statue was set up with the publicke consent of all Baeotia) it was an indignitie to deale so hardly with that territorie onely of Corona, the souldiours, were immediately called in and reclaimed, and so they ceased the wasting and spoiling thereof. The Baeotians onely had a checke and rebuke by words, for carrying so unthankefull hearts to the Romanes, of whom they had so lately received such high favours and benefites.
At the very time of the battell aforesaid, there rid at anker ten ships of the kings, in the gulfe  of Malea neere to Thronium, under the charge and conduct of Isidorus. To which place Alexander the Acarnanian, being fled from the conflict, fresh bleeding and full of greevous wounds, brought newes of the unfortunate fight. Whereupon the ships in great feare for this late terror, made hast and away to Ceneum in Eubaea, where Alexander died, and was interred. But three other ships which were come out of Asia, and lay in the same rode, upon the newes of the defeature of the armie, returned to Ephesus. And Isidorus crossed the seas from Ceneum to Demetrias, if peradventure the king were fled thither. About that very time, A. Attilius the admirall of the Romane navie, intercepted and surprised great store of the kings provisions, which had passed alreadie the streights neere the Iland Andros. Some ships he sunke, others he bourded and tooke: as for those that came hinmost in the rereward, they turned saile, and shaped their course  into Asia. Attilius being returned to Pyraeeum (from whence he came) with a fleete of ships taken from the enemies, devided great store of come both among the Atheniens, and other allies also of that countrie.
Antiochus somewhat before the Consull his comming, loosed from Chalcis, and first fell with the island Tenus, and afterwards sailed to Ephesus. Against the Consull his arrivall at Chalcis the gates were set open for him, and Aristotle the Captaine there for the king, quit the place upon the approchment of the Consull. In like manner other cities in Eubaea yeelded without resistance. And so within few dayes (when all troubles were appeased and set in quiet order without the hurt and damage of any one citie) the armie was brought back to Thermopylae, and wan much more honor and commendation for the modestie used after victorie, than for the victorie  itselfe.
From thence the Consull dispatched M. Cato to Rome, by whose certeine and sure relation, the Senat and people might have full knowledge of all the affaires that had passed. Who taking sea at Creusa (a port towne of Merchandise standing within the inmost gulfe of Corinth) arrived at Patrae, a citie in Achaea. From Patrae, he coasted along the rivers of Aetolia and Acarnania,

as far as Corphu, and so cut over to (...)Hydruntum in Italie, from whence he travailed by  land and in exceeding great hast within five dayes came to Rome. Early in the morning before day light he entred the citie, and from the gate rode directly to M. Iunius the Pretour, who assembled the Senate betimes by the breake of day: and thither, L. Cornelius Scipio (who some dayes before had bene dismissed and sent away from the camp by the Consull) hearing at his first comming that Cato was gotten before him, and in the Senate, repaired, even as he was relating the newes. Then these two Lieutenants by the commaundement of the Senate were presented in the generall assembly of the people, where they declared the same which they had done before in the Senate house, as touching the deeds atchieved in Aetolia. And ordeined it was, that a solemne procession for three dayes should be holden, and that the Pretour should sacrifice fortie head of greater beasts, in the honor of what gods he would himselfe:
And at the same time M. Fulvius Nobilior, who two yeeres before went as Pretour into the farther Spaine, entred the citie in pomp of an Ovation, or petie triumph. He caused to be borne before him of silver bigates 130000. And besides that silver in coine and readie monie, 12000 pound weight. Also in gold the weight of 127 pound. Acilius the Consull sent certeine messengers from Thermopylae to the Aetolians at Heraclea, to advertise them that before he came they would now at last be wiser and be thinke themselves (after such experience of the king his vanitie and insufficiencie) for to deliver up Heraclea, and crave pardon of the Senate, either for their wilfull folly, or their blind error. Who used these and such like motives and inducements unto them, namely, That other cities likewise of Greece (during this warre) abandoned the Romanes and revolted from them, at whose hands they had received so many benefites: yet because  that after the king was sled (upon whose assurance they had disloyally broken their allegeance) they stood not out still, nor persisted obstinately in their fault and folly, were received to mercie and protection. The Aetolians likewise albeit they followed not the king, but sent for him, and were rather conducters and leaders, than companions and associates in this warre, yet it they could take up in time and repent, they might be pardoned and saved. But no answere returned they tending to peace: nay it appeered, that the matter would come to a triall by armes, and for all the king was vanquished, yet the Aetolian warre was behind as wholly and entier as before time. Whereupon the Consull dislodged from Thermopylae, and marched directly against Heraclea: yea and the very same day he rode on horseback all about the walls to view the situation of the citie. This Heraclea is seated at the foote of the mountaine Oeta: and through  the towne itselfe standeth in a plaine, yet a fortresse it hath built upon an high gr
ound, which as it overlooketh the citie, so it is so steepe on every side, that it is altogether inaccessible. After he had diligently beheld all things that were to be marked and knowne, he determined to assault the towne in foure places at once. Vnto L. Valerius he gave in charge to plant his platformes and to batter that side where the river Asopus runneth, and where the publick place of exercise is built. T. Sempronius Longus had commission to assaile the castle, without the walls indeed, but yet better inhabited and more peopled (as a man would say) than the towne itselfe. On that side which standeth toward the gulph of Malea, which part yeelded the hardest accesse, he appointed M. Boebius. And from another pretie river which they call Black water.Melas, he set Appius Claudius opposite against the temple of Diana. Through the great industrie and earnest labour of these foure gallants, striving who could performe the best service, the worke went so well forward, that within few dayes the frames and platformes, the Rammes and all other engins of batterie meete for the assault of cities, were finished. For besides that the territorie about Heraclea, being a moorie ground and full of tall trees, affourded them plentie enough of timber to frame and performe all sorts of fabricks: the houses also in the entrie of the citie without in the Suburbs standing void, by reason that the Aetolians had put themselves within the walls, yeelded unto them not onely posts, beames, joists, planks and bourds, but brick and tile, plaster, morter, and stone of all sizes for divers and sundrie uses. So, the Romanes assaulted the towne rather with fabricks, ordinance and artillery, than by force of armes: but the Aetolians contrariwise defended themselves by maine strength and their weapons. For when as the walls should be shaken with the  rammes, they caught not hold of them as the manner is with cords, and by plucking them aside, avoided their jurres; but armed in great number, they caried fire with them to sling upon the terraces and the fabricks. They had besides divers vaults and arches in the walls, at which they could redily and fitly sally out: and ever as themselves closed up the breaches of their walls, or

 made new for the ruinate, they would remember to make more of those vaults still, that in many places at once they might breake forth upon their enemies. Thus for the first dayes, whiles they were fresh in heart, they issued forth oftentimes and many together, and quit themselves right lustily: but afterwards in fewer numbers, and more slackly every day than other. For being evermore employed about many things at once, nothing so much tamed and wearied then, as watching. For whereas the Romanes had a great number of souldiours, and one garded after another successively by turnes; the Aetolians being so few, were constreined without any change, to continue in uncessant labor night and day. Thus for the space of 24 dayes they had no rest nor respit, but day and night was all one unto them, mainteining fight still, and labouring without intermission against the enemies that assailed the citie in all foure quarters at once. When the Consull knew  once that the Aetolians were weerieand overtoiled (partly by counting the time, and partly by that which he had learned of certeine fugitives) he used this pollicie and stratageme. About midnight he sounded the retreat, and having drawne all his souldiours at once from the assault, held them quiet in the camp untill the third houre of the day. After that, he began to give a fresh charge, and continued it unto midnight following, and so gave over againe until the same houre before noone. The Aetolians supposing verily that the cause why they furceased the assault, was for very wearinesse (like as themselves were tired out) so soone as the Romanes had the retrait sounded unto them, departed every man from his ward and quarter, as if they also by the same signal were called away, and shewed not themselves in armor upon the walls before the third hour of the next day. The Consull having at one time geven over the batterie aforesaid at midnight,  began at theThree of the clock in the morning. fourth watch a fresh assault again with all forcible means in three parts: and at one side, he gave commandement to T. Sempronius to keepe his men together, and intentively to observe and wait for the signall: assuring himselfe that in the alarme by night, the enemies would run to those places from whence they heard the noyse. The Aetolians, many of them being sound asleepe, had much to do to rouse themselves, and were loth to rise up from their sweet sleep, their bodies being so weary with toiling, moiling, and watching before. Some of them who were yet awake ran in the darke to the place where the assailants made a noise. Their enemies laboured to get into the towne, some by mounting over the ruines and breaches of the broken wall, others by skaling and climbing with ladders. And against them the Aetolians ran from al parts, redy to succor and help. One quarter, whereas there stood houses without the citie, was neither defended  not assailed: but as there were some redy, and waited for the signall to give the assault, so there was not one of the other part for to resist and defend. Now began the day to peepe, when as the Consul put forth the signall, and the souldiers began to mount over into the citie, and found none to withstand them: some entred at the wals halfe broken downe, other skaled them with ladders where they stood whole and found. And the cry was not so soone heard that the citie was taken, but the Aetolians left their gards on all sides, and fled into the Castle. The souldiers that had woon the towne were permitted by the Consull to rifle and ransake it: which was not done so much upon anger and despite, as in this regard, that the souldiers who had ben kept short and fasting thus long (notwithstanding so many townes recovered out of the enemies hands) might once at length in some one place tast the fruit of victorie. The Consul having called from thence about noone, the  souldiers unto him, divided them into two parts, w
hereof he commaunded the one to cast about the foot of the hils unto a rock or cliffe, which being in height equall to the castle aforesaid, was notwithstanding divided from it by a valley betweene, seeming as if it had bene sometime a part thereof and cut from it. Now these two points of the hils shot up so neere together in the head, that from the top of the one, a man might launce a dart into the castle or fortresse. The Consull with the other halfe of his souldiours staid beneath, expecting a signe and token from them that wereto get up to the cliffe behind, redie therupon to mount up from the towne side into the sort. The Aetolians that were within the castle, could neither abide at the first the shout of those that had seized the cliffe, nor afterwards the assault of the Romans from the citie, both for that their hearts sailed them and were daunted alreadie, and also because they were unprovided of all necessaries  for to endure any long siege and assault: considering that women and children and all the other impotent multitude unmeet to beate arms, wer gotten thither in so great numbers, that the place was hardly able to receive and conteine, much lesse to keepe and maintaine them: and therefore at the first assault, they cast downe their weapons, and yeelded. Among other principall personages of the Aetolians, Damocritus also was delivered; hee, who in the beginning of the war when

T. Iuintius desired to see a copie of the Decree of the Aetolians for the sending for Antiochus, answered, That he would shew it him in Italie, when the Aetolians lay there encamped. For this proud speech of his, the Romanes now conquerours, were the gladder that they had gotten him into their hands.
During the time that the Romanes assailed Heraclea, Philip also besieged and battered Lamia, according as it was before agreed between them: for neere unto Thermopylae, at what time as the Consull returned out of Baeotia, he met with him, of purpose to signifie his joy in the behalfe of him and the people of Rome, for their atchieved victorie; and also to excuse himselfe by occasion of sicknes, that he was not present with him in person in the managing of the wars. From thence they patted asunder, and took divers waies, for to assault these two cities (as I said) both at once: and distant they were one from the other neere 7 miles. And for as much as Lamia  was seated upon an hill, therfore the town discovered and overlooked all the country about; but especially on that side toward Heraclea, where, by reason that it seemeth a lesse compasse, it representeth a full prospect to the eye. When as the Romans and Macedonians laboring a vie and striving who could doe better, were day and night emploied either about their fabricks and pioners worke, or else in skirmish and fight: the Macedonians found more difficultie than they, in this respect, that the Romans were busied in platforms, mantilers, and works all above ground; but the Macedonians were put to undermine: and oftentimes (as it falleth out in such stonie and craggie ground) they met with hard flints and rags not minable, and such as no yron or steel-toole was able to touch and pierce. The king seeing little good done by this meanes, and his enterprise going but slowly forward, began to sound the townesmen, and to tempt them to render the citie, using the mediation therein of their chiefe citizens whome he parled withall: for this reckoning he made, that if Heraclea were forced before it, they within the citie would sooner yeeld unto the Romans than to him, and so the Consull should win all the thanke to himselfe for levying the siege. And nothing was he short of his count; for imme
diately upon the winning of Heraclea, a messenger came unto him from the Consull, willing him to surcease the assault and the siege; alledging it was more reason, that the Romane souldiours who had fought in raunged battell with the Aetolians, should have the reward and recompence of the victorie. By this means Lamia was abandoned, and by the ruine of Heraclea her neighbour citie, avoided and escaped the like calamitie of her owne.
Some few daies before that Heraclea was woon, the Aetolians having assembled a Diet at  Hypata, addressed Embassadours unto Antiochus, and Thoas among the rest, even hee, who aforetime had beene sent unto him. His commission and charge was, first, To request the king that once againe hee would rallie his forces as well by land as at sea, and in person passe over into Greece: secondly, If any other important affaires hindred him, yet that hee would send unto them both men and money. For as it touched his Highnesse, in honour, reputation and credit, not to see his allies abandoned; so it made for the safegard and securitie of his owne realme and royall estate, not to suffer the Romanes (after they had once deffeited the Aetolians) to saile over into Asia at their ease and pleasure, with all their forces. These were no seigned devises, but true remonstances indeed; and therefore prevailed the more with the king. Whereupon hee delivered money presently to the Embassadours, sufficient to destray the charges of the warre, and promised certeinly to send men to serve both by land and sea. Thoas alone of all the Embassadours hee kept still with him, who was not himselfe unwilling to stay behind, because hee might be ever at hand to call upon the king for to persorme his word and behest. But the winning of Heraclea killed the hearts cleane of the Aetolians in the end: and within few daies after that they had dispatched their Embassadours into Asia about the renewing of the warre and sending for the king, they laid apart all designments of armes, and addressed their Oratours unto the Romanes to crave peace. Who, as they began to make some speech, the Consull cut them off, and said, he had other matters of greater importance to thinke upon and to dispatch; and commaunded them to content themselves with a truce for ten daies, and to returne to Hypata; and with them he sent L. Valerius Flaccus, unto whom they should declare those things that they  were about to deliver unto him, and whatsoever else they had to say. When they were arrived at Hypata, the chiefe and principall Aetolians assembled themselves in the lodging of Flaccus, consulting with him what course they were to take in their treatie with the Consull.
And when they went in hand to alledge the auncient rights of the leagues, and to lay abroad their good

 demerits, and what they had done for the Romanes: Flaccus bad them lay a straw there, and speake no more of the priviledge of those covenants and accords which they themselves had broken; shewing unto them, that they should speed better and gaine more by a simple consession of their trespasse, and in recourse o^ely to praier and humble supplication; for as much as all the hope they might have of safetie, rested not in their owne desert and goodnesse of their cause, but in the meere clemencie and mercie of the people of Rome: promising for his part to assist them and second their petitions as well to the Consull as the Senate of Rome, since that thither also they must of necessitie send an embassage. This way seemed to them all, the best simply for their safetie, namely, to put themselves to the disposition and devotion of the Romanes: for they supposed by this meanes to drive the Romanes for very shame to have regard of them,  and not to offer hurt or violent outrage to them, comming in the habit of poore suppliants: and yet withall, if any opportunitie of better fortune should in the meane time offer itselfe unto them, to be their owne masters neverthelesse and at their choise. When they were come before the Consull, Phaneas the chiefe of that embassie, made a long Oration, couching and framing his words sundrie waies right artificially, to mitigate and assuage the wrath of the conquerour, which he knit up and concluded with this speech, saying, That the Aetolians committed themselves and all that they had to the mercie and protection of the people of Rome. When the Consull heard those words: See you doe so then indeed (quoth hee) o yee Aetolians, and take heed I advise you that deale herein bona side. Then Phaneas brought forth and shewed a faire instrument of a Decree, wherein the same was engrossed in plaine termes. Since that (quoth he  againe) you meane good earnest, and are at our disposition, I demaund that yee deliver unto me out of hand Dicaerchus a
statesman of yours, and Menaetes of Epirus, (who beeing entred into Naupactum with a garrison, had compelled the citie to revolt) also Aminander and all the Nobles of the Athamanes, by whose counsell and suggestions yee fell from us and rebelled. Phantas interrupted the Consull before he had well made an end of his speech, Wee yeeld not ourselves (quoth he) to be your villaines and slaves, but as allies to be protected by you: and I am verily persuaded you know not what you do, to impose those things upon us against all the manner and custome of the Greekes. The Consull replied againe; In good faith, I passe not (quoth he) greatly what the Aetolians deeme well or ill done according to the fashions of the Greekes; all the whiles that I, after the custome of the Romanes, have that power and commaund over  them, who crewhile by vertue of their owne decree yeelded unto us, and heretofore by force of our armes have beene vanquished and subdued by us. And therefore, unless that bee executed which I commaund, yea and with speed, my will is, that presently here you bee bound hand and foot: and with that he commaunded chaines and gives to be brought forth, and the Lictours to come about them for to lay hold upon them. Then the stout courage both of Phaneas and the rest of the Aetolians, was well cooled and abated: and so at length they saw in what poore plight they were. And Phaneas made answere, That both himselfe and the Aetolians there present in place, knew well, that those things were to bee performed which were imposed upon them, but (quoth hee) there needs a Counsell of the Aetolians for to enact a decree thereof, and therefore hee requested the Consull to allow a surcease of armes onely for tenne daies. Then Flaccas began to  speake for the Aetolians, and at his request the said abstinence was graunted, and so they returned to Hypata. When Phantas had related in the privie counsell of those elect peeres of that nation calledApocleti, as well the demaunds that were commaunded, as what had like to have fallen upon themselves in person, the peeres sighed deepely and groned againe, to see their miserable condition; howbeit they were all of opinion, that the victour must of necessitie bee obeied: and a generall parliament assembled of the Aetolian burgeoises out of all their townes and cities. When all that multitude was gathered together, and heard the same related againe, their hearts so sretted within them at the crueltie and indignitie of those lordly commaunds, that if they had been well settled in peace, yet such a fit of anger had been ynough to have put them into armes. And to stirre the fume and choler the more, the difficultie of effecting the things demaunded,  helped well: for how possibly could they compasse to deliver Aminander, being as hee was an absolute king? But even then there was presented unto them by chaunce a new hope, For Nicander at that very time, comming from king Antiochus, filled the peoples heads with this vaine expectation, namely that the king made wonderous provision for warre, as well by sea as land. This Nicander having accomplished his embassage, and made returne againe into Aetolia,

within the compasse of twelve daies, after he was embarked, arrived at Phalera in the gulfe of  Malea: from whence having brought the monies which hee had, downe to Lamia, whites himselfe with certain deliver men and lightly appointed, travelled toward Hypata in the evening, betweene the Roman and Aetolian campe, through pathes that he well knew; he chaunced to stumble ere he was aware, upon the corps de guard of the Macedonians, and was brought to the king before supper was done, the table taken up, and the king risen. When Philip was advertised therof, he shewed no other countenance, than if a friend or guest, and not an enemie was come; hee bad him sit downe at the board, and eat his meat.
Afterwards hee kept him there with him still in the roume, and voided all the rest, willing him in no case to bee afraid. He blamed greatly the bad courses and designements of the Aetolians (which evermore lighted upon their own pates) who first had brought the Romanes, and then Antiochus into Greece. But for my part (quoth  hee) since things done and past, may sooner bee blamed than amended, I am content to forget and put all ander my foot, and will never bee the man that will seeme to insult over them in their distresse and adversitie. And so should the Aetolians likewise take up in time, and lay aside all their rancour and mallice to me: and Nicander especially ought to remember this day, on which by me his life was preserved. With that he sent him away with a good convoy, untill he was past all daunger: and this Nicander, as is beforesaid, came to Hypata, even as the Aetolians were in deepe consultation about peace with the Romanes.
M. Acilius having either sold outright or given away to the souldiors the bootie of the countrey about Heraclea, and hearing that the counsell at Hypata nothing tended to peace, and that the Aetolians were run together to Naupactum, for to abide in that place the whole violence of  the warre; sent Appius Claudius afore, with foure thousand souldiours to seize the tops of the mountaines, where as the passages were difficult; and himselfe ascended up to the hill Oeta, and sacrificed to Hercules in that very place which they call Pyra, by occasion that the mortall bodie of that god was there consumed with fire: from whence hee departed with his whole armie, and performed the rest of his journey well, and marched with ease. Being come to Corax (an exceeding high mountaine betweene Callipolis and Naupactum) he lost there many of his labouring beasts and sumpter horses, which together with their loades and fardels, as they went, tumbled downe headlong from the mountaine, and his men also were much troubled and encombered. Whereby it was soone seene, with how lazie and idle an enemie hee had to deale, who had not beter and kept with a guard that difficult passage, to empeach and shut up the thorowfare from  the enemies. Howbeit, as much toiled and troubled as his armie was, hee descended to Naupactum. And having erected one fort against the castle, hee invested all the other parts of the citie, and devided his forces according to the situation of the walls. This siege hee found as toilesome and painefull, as that at Heraclea.
At the same time began the Achaeans to lay siege to Messene also in Peloponnesus, for that it refused to be of their counsell and association. For these two cities, Messene and Elis, were exempt from the Achaean Diet, and accorded with the Aetolians. Howbeit, the Eleans, after that Antiochus was chased out of Greece, gave the embassadours of Achaea a more mild answere, to wit, That when they had discharged and sent away the kings garrison, they would consider of the matter what to do. But the Messenians having without any answer at all, sent the embassadors  away, had levied warre; and fearing much their owne estate, seeing their territorie overspread with an armie, and every where burned, yea, and their enemies encamped neere unto their cittie, addressed unto Chalcis their embassadours to T. Iuintius (the very man who before had set them at libertie) to signifie unto him, That the Messenians were readie both to open their gates, and also to surrender their citie unto the Romanes, and not to the Achaeans. Iuintius so soone as he had heard their embassage, sent a messenger incontinently to Megalopolis, unto Diophanes, the Pretour there of the Achaeans, to commaund him presently to retire his hoast from Messene, and to repaire unto him. Diophanes obeied his commaundement, and having raised his siege, marched himselfe lightly appointed for speed, before the rest of his armie, and about Andania, a small town between Megalopolis and Messene, encountred Iuintius. Vnto whom after he had shewed  the causes of the siege, he received at his hands a gentle rebuke only, for that he had enterprised a matter of so great consequence without his authoritie; with an expresse commaundement also to casse and discharge his armie, and not to disturbe and trouble the peace, made for the good and benefit of all. The Messenians likewise he charged to call home their banished persons into

 their citie, and to joine with the Achaeans in their generall Diet and assembly. And if they either had any matters to refuse, or would willingly provide for themselves against the future time, hee willed them to make their repaire unto him at Corinth, and enjoined Diophanes immediately to summon the Diet of the Achaeans for him, where personally himselfe would be. Where, after he had complained as touching the Island Zacynthus, that by fraud and trecherie they had come by and kept, he required that it should bee restored to the Romanes. Now this Isle had sometime appertained to Philip the king of the Macedonians, and he gave it unto Aminander, in consideration, that he might conduct his armie into the higher parts of Aetolia, through Athamania: in which expeditions and exploits of his, the Aetolians hearts were so abated and quailed, that they were constrained to seek peace. Aminander made first Philip the Megapolitane, governor of this  Island; but afterwards, in time of that war wherin he banded with Antiochus against the Romans, he called him away from thence to employ him in martiall affaires, and sent Hierocles the Agrigentine to succeed him in his place. This Hierocles, after the defeature and flight of Antiochus from Thermopylae, and the expulsion of Aminander out of Athamania by king Philip, dispatched of his owne motion certaine messengers unto Diophanes, the Pretour of the Achaeans, and for a summe of money agreed upon between them, betraied the Island to the Achaeans. The Romanes thought it great reason, that this Island should bee theirs, in recompence for the warres which they had maintained; for as much as M. Acilius the Consull, and the Romane legions fought not at Thermopylae for Diophanes, ne yet for the Achaeans. Diophanes to these chalenges and demaunds sometime excused himselfe and the whole nation, otherwhiles stood to it, and avowed  the action, and maintained the ca
use by a plea of right. Some there were of the Achaeans there, that both protested, how from the beginning they utterly misliked the course, and also at this present much blamed the Pretour for his wilfull obstinacie. And by their advise and authoritie an act was set downe, that the whole matter should be referred and put to Iuintius, to determine what he pleased. Now had Iuintius this nature, if a man crossed and thwarted him, he was sierce and sell; if one yeelded and gave place, he was as gentle again, and pliable. And therfore, without shewing any signe of debate, either in language or countenance, thus he spake.
If I thought (qd. he) and were persuaded in my heart, that it were good and commodious for the Achaeans to hold and possesse this Island in question, I would advise the Senat and people of Rome to let you enjoy it. But like as a Tortoise, so long as she keepeth her selfe close within her shell (I see) is sure and  safe enough, against all blowes and offence whatsoever; but when shee once putteth foorth any parts, looke whatsoever is discovered and naked, the same is weake and subject to injurie: even so you Achaeans, being enclosed round about with the sea, are able easily to adjoyne unto your selves whatsoever lyeth within the precinct of Peloponnesus, and to keep the same also when you have laid it to you: but so soone as for a greedie desire of having more and encroching further, you goe beyond those bonds, you lye open without, and are exposed to all hurt and domage. Thus Zacynthus was delivered to the Romans with the assent of al the Counsel there assembled, and Diophanes durst not say a word more to the contrarie.
At the same time, king Philip asked the Consull as he marched to Naupactum, Whether it was his pleasure, that he in the meane while should recover and regaine those cities which were  revolted from the association of the Romanes? And having a graunt and warrant from him, hee led his forces against Demetrias, knowing well enough in what termes of troubles that city then stood. For being forlorne and in utter despaire, seeing Antiochus had forsaken them and no hope at all remaining in the Aetolians: they looked every day and night either for the comming of Philip their heavie friend; or else even the Romanes themselves a worse enemie, like as they had a more just cause of anger and indignation against them. A confused and disordered fort there were of king Antiochus his souldiours, who being a few at first left there to lie in garrison, grew after to be more, and most of them unarmed; such as after the field was lost [at Thermopylae] thither chaunced to flie, and neither had strength nor heart enough to abide a siege. And therefore when Philip sent certaine messengers before unto them, to signifie, that there  was some hope that they mought be pardoned: they made them this answere, That the gates were open for the king, and that hee might enter at his pleasure. At his first entrance, certaine cheefe men of marke quit the cittie and departed, and Eurylochus killed himselfe. The garrison souldiours of Antiochus (for so they had capitulated) were conducted to Lysimachia through Macedonie and Thrace, accompanied with a convoy of Macedonians, for feare that any man

should do them harme. There were some few ships also in the rode of Demetrias, under the  commaund of Isidorus, which together with their leader and captaine were dismissed. After this, he regained Dolopia, Aperantia, and certeine cities of Perrhoebia.
During the time that Philip was employed in these affaires, T. Iuintius having recovered the Iland Zacynthus, departed from the Diet of the Achaeans, and crossed the seas to Naupactum, which had bin beleaguered alreadie two moneths, and was at the point to be forced and lost: which if it might have bin woon by assault, it was thought that the whole nation and name of the Aetolians there, would have perished for ever. And albeit he had good cause to be highly offended and displeased with the Aetolians, in remembrance that they only checked and impeached his glorie, at what time as he set Greece free: and that they were nothing stirred and moved with his authoritie, when he (forewarning them that those things would happen which  afterwards fell out just so indeed) would have discounselled and skared them from foolish and furious dessignes: yet, supposing that it was a speciall part of his charge and worke, that no nation of Greece (now freed by him) should utterly be subverted and destroyed, he began to walke up and downe along under the walls, to the end that he might be seene, and soone knowne of the Aetolians. And anon the very formost guards tooke notice of him, and noysed it was presently throughout all the ranks and companies that Iuintius was there. And thereupon they ran from all parts up to the walls, every man stretched forth his hands, and with one accord and consonant voyce called by name unto Iuintius, beseeching him to help and save them.
And albeit he was moved at these their piteous cryes with commiseration, yet for that time he signified by the turning away of his head, that he refused and denied them: asking withall, What lay in him to  do them any good? But afterwards, being come unto the Consull, Know you not (quoth he) o M. Acilius whereabout we are, and what we have in hand? or if you be a man provident enough, esteeme you not that it mainly concerneth the common weale? He set the Consull by these words a longing, and caused him to geve more attentive care what he would say, and withall, Why do you not speake forth (quoth the Consull) and utter your mind what the matter is?
Then quoth Iuintius: See you not that after you have vanquished Antiochus, you spend and loose much time here in the siege and assault of two cities, when as now the yeere of your government is welneere come about? And Philip in the meane time without seeing a battaile or the ensignes of his enemies displayed, hath gained and joyned to himselfe not cities only, but so many nations  already, namely, Athamania, Perrhoebia, Aperantia and Dolopia? But it is nothing so good and expedient for us, nor standeth it us so much upon, to take downe the Aetolians and pare their nailes, as to looke unto Philip that he wax not too great: and (seeing you and your souldiours have not gotten yet two cities in reward and recompense of victorie) not to suffer him to go cleere away with so many nations of Greece. The Consull accorded hereunto: but hee thought it a shame and dishonor for him to give over the siege and effect nothing: but afterwards, all the matter was put unto the disposition of Iuintius. Who went againe to that side of the wall, where as a little before the Aetolians called and cried aloud unto him. And when as they intreated him more earnestly and with greater affection to take pitie of the Aetolian people, he willed some of them to come forth unto him.
And immediatly, Phaneas himself with other principall persons of the Aetolians, went out unto him; unto whom lying prostrate and  groveling at his feete: Your present fortune (quoth he) and hard estate wherein you are, causeth me both to temper my choler, and also to stay my tongue. Those things you now see are fallen out, which I foretold would come to passe. And not so much as this is left unto you, That the calamities falne upon your heads can be truly said to have light upon them that have not deserved as much. Howbeit, since it hath ben'allotted unto me as it were by destinie to be a foster-father (as I may so say) to nurce up Greece, I will not cease even to do you good, as thanklesse and ungratefull persons as you are. Send your Oratours to the Consull, to intreat him to graunt you a truce for so long, untill you may addresse your embassadors to Rome, by whome you shall wholly referre and submit your selves to the Senat: and I will not faile to be an intercessor and advocate to the Consull for you, and likewise unto the Senate. And as Quintius counselled them, so  did they. Neither rejected the Consull their embassie, but graunted them abstinence of war for such a terme as within which they might have an answer of their embassage to Rome: so he dislodged, the siege was raised, and the armie sent into Phocis. The Consull together with Quintius passed over the sea to Aegium, unto the generall Counsaile of Achaea. There was much treatie

 and parlle about the Eleans and the restoring of the Lacedaemonian exiles: but nothing was effected in the one or the other. As for the Lacedemonians, the Achaeans were desirous to reserve that for themselves, and to win thereby a thanke as proceeding from their speciall grace. And the Eleans, chose rather to come and be united to the Achaean Parlament of themselves, than by the mediation of the Romanes. The embassadours of the Epirots came unto the Consull, who (it was well knowne) caried not themselves found and upright in the enterteining of the Romane amitie: howbeit, they had not levied a soldiour for Antiochus. Charged they were to have relieved him with monie; and denie themselves they could not but they had sent their embassadors unto the king. And when they put up a petition, that they might be accepted againe into the auncient band of amitie; this answere the Consull returned unto them, That he  knew not yet whether to raunge them in the number of enemies, or peaceable friends, and thereof the Senate should be judge; and therfore he referred their whole entier cause to Rome. And to that purpose a truce he graunted them of foureskore and ten dayes. The Epirotes thus sent to Rome, presented themselves before the Senate, and when they stood rather upon these termes in recounting those things wherein they had not shewed any open hostilitie, than in cleering themselves of those matters that were laid against them; they received such an answer, as wherby they might be thought rather to have obteined pardon, than to have made good and justified their cause. The embassadors also of king Philip about that time had audience geven them in the Senate, who came to congratulate with the Romanes, testifying their owne joy, and wishing theirs for their victorie: and upon their request, that they might sacrifice in the Capitoll, and  offer an oblation and present of gold in the temple of Iup. Opt. Max. the Senat gave them good leav
e. So, they presented and offred a crowne of gold weighing3600 pound (...).one hundred pound. These embassadors had not only a friendly answere and gratious dispatch: but also Demetrius the sonne of king Philip, who had lien as an hostage at Rome, was delivered unto them, for to bring home againe unto his father. Thus was the warre archieved and brought to an end, which M. Aci^has the Consull waged against king Antiochus in Greece.
The other Consull P. Cornelius Scipio, whose lot was to governe the province of Gaule, before that he tooke his journey to that warre which he was to make against the Boians, demaunded of the Senate, that money should be assigned unto him, for to perfume those plaies and games which he had promised by vow, as Viz-preotour in Spaine, when he was driven to a great  extremitie in a battell. This seemed to be a strange and unreasonable demaund. Whereupon the LL. of the Senat ordained, That what plaies the Consull had vowed on his owne head without asking the advise and councell of the Senat, the same he should exhibit and set forth either with the issue of the spoiles gotten from the enemies, (if haply hee had reserved any money raised thereout to that purpose) or else defray the charges out of his owne purse. These plaies and games P. Cornelius represented for the space of ten daies. And neere about the same time, the temple of the great goddesse dame Cybele (or Idaea) was dedicated. This goddesse being brought out of Asia, in the time that P. Cornelius Scipio (surnamed afterwards Africanus) and P. Licintus were Consuls, was conveyed from the sea side into the mount Palatine. The temple was set out to be built at a price (according to an act of the Senat) by M. Livius and C. Claudius the Censors,  when M. Cornelius and T. Sempronius were Consuls. Thirteene yeeres after the bargaine was made for the edifying therof, M. Iunius Brutus dedicated it: and for the honor of this dedication, were the first stage-plaies exhibited, (as Valerius Antias mine author saith) called thereupon Megalesia. In like manner, C. Licinius Lucullus (one of the two Duumvirs) dedicated the temple of the goddesse Iuventus, in the great Race called Circus maximus. The same had M. Livtus the Consull vowed sixteene yeeres before, even that very day in which hee deffeited Asdraball and his armie. The same Livins in his C
ensorship, went through and bargained for the building thereof, whiles M. Cornelius and T. Sempronius were Consuls. And in the honour of dedicating this temple, the plaies were set forth: and all was done with more devotion, because there was a new warre intended against king Antiochus. In the beginning of this yeere in which these things  passed, whiles P. Cornelius the Consull staied still behind at Rome, (for M. Acilius was gon forth alreadie to warre:) it is found in records, that two tame oxen climed up a ladder in the street Carinae, to the tyle-roofe of a certaine house there. And the soothsayers gave expresse order, that they should be burne quicke, and the ashes to be throwen into Tyber. Also it was reported, that at Tarracina and Amiternum, it rained stones sundrie times. Item, That in Minturnae the

temple of Iupiter and the shops about the market place, wer blasted and smitten with lightning;  and in the verie mouth of the river Vulturnus, two ships caught fire from heaven, and were consumed. In regard of these fearefull prodigies, the Decemvirs by order from the Senat, went to the bookes of Sibylla and perused them; and out of their learning pronounced, that a solemne fast should be now instituted in the honour of Ceres, and the same to be observed and holden every fift yeer: also that a novendiall sacrifice for nine daies togither should continue; and a supplication for one day: and that they who went in this procession and supplication, should wear garlands and wreathes of flowers upon their heads: lastly, That the Consull P. Cornelius should sacrifice to what gods, and with what beasts, the Decemvirs would appoint and pronounce. When the gods were pacified, as well by the accomplishment of the vowes accordingly, as by taking order for the expiation of those wonderous signes, the Consull tooke his journey into his province: from whence hee commaunded Cneus Dominitius the Propretour (after hee had cassed his armie) to depart to Rome: and himselfe entred with his legions into the territorie of the Boians.
Within a little of that time, the Ligurians (by vertue of a sacred law that they had) levied and assembled an armie, and by night assailed the campe unawares to Quintius Minutius the Proconsull. Minutius kept his souldiours in order of battaile untill day within his hold, having an eye and circumspect regard, that the enemie should not mount over the trench and defences in any place. And at the day-breake he sallied forth at two gates at once: neither were the Ligurians repulsed (as he hoped they should) at the first charge; for they sustained and held out the skirmish above two houres, with doubful event on both sides. At the last, when band after band  issued out, and still fresh soldiers succeeded in the roume of the wearied, for to mainteine fight, the Ligurians in the end (besides other distresses, lost for want of sleepe also) turned their backs. Of the enemies were slaine above foure thousand; of Romanes and allies, under three hundred. Two moneths after or somewhat lesse, P. Cornelius the Consull gave battell to the Boians and woon the day; slew 28000 enemies, (as Valerius Antias writeth) took 3400 prisoners, gained 124 militarie ensignes, 1230 horses, chariots 247: and of the winners (as hee saith) there died not above 1484. Where (by the way) how litle credit soever (as touching the number) we give unto this Writer, (for in that point there is none overreacheth more than he) yet apparant it is, that a right great victorie it was; both for that the campe was woon, and the Boians after that battell presently yeelded themselves; as also for that in regard of this victorie a joyfull procession  was by order from the Senat holden, and greater beasts slaine for sacrifice.
Not much under or over this present time, M. Fulvius Nobilior returned out of the farther province of Spaine in pompe of an Ovation, and carried in shew 10000 pound weight of silver in bullion; of Bigates in silver coine 130000, and in gold 126 pound weight. P. Cornelius the Consull, having first taken hostages of the Boian nation, and disseized them of the one halfe of their countrey, to the inhabiting whereof the people of Rome, might if they would, send their Colonies; at his departure from thence toward Rome to an undoubted and assured triumph, licensed his armie, with commaundement to meet him there and give their attendance upon his triumph-day. The morrow after that he was come, the Senat had summons to assemble in the temple of Bellona; where, after he had discoursed of his actes and deeds atchieved, he required  that he might be permitted to enter the citie riding in triumph.
P. Sempronius Blaesus a Tribune of the Commons for the time being, stopped forth and said, That his advise was that Scipio should not flatly be denied the honour of a triumph, but to put it off unto a farther day. And why? The warres (quoth he) of the Ligurians have alwaies beene joyned and linked with those of Gaule: which nations being so neere togither, use ever mutually one to succour another. If P. Scipio (after the Boians deffeited in battell) had followed the traine of victorie, and either himselfe in proper person with his brave conquering army passed into the territory of the Ligurians, or but sent part of his forces to Q. Minutius, who now for three yeers (or fast upon) hath ben deteined within those quarters in a warre of doubtfull issue; we might have seene an end ere this of the Ligurian warre also. But now (forsooth) his souldiours are dismissed, and brought home to accompanie  him and to solemnize his triumph; who might well have beene employed still and done good service to the Common-weale: yea and may doe yet (if the Senate be so disposed) by deferring the time of triumph, for to make amends and regaine that, which by over-hastinesse of triumph hath beene over-slipped. And therefore, in my opinion (quoth hee) they should doe well, to

 commaund the Consull to goe his waies back againe, and take his armie with him into his province, and to doe his best and utmost devoir to subdue the Ligurians also. For unlesse they be brought under and made subject unto the people of Rome, the Boians by yee sure, will not long be quiet: either we must have peace of warre at once, in both places. And so P. Cornelius in qualitie of Proconsull (as many others before him, who in their full magistracie triumphed not) may after some few months have his triumph. To this the Consull answered again and said, That neither the Province of the Ligurians was any part of his charge by lot, neither warred he at all with the Ligurians, ne yet demaunded to triumph over them. As for Q. Minutius (quoth hee) I hope that shortly after he hath subdued them, he both will require his due triumph, and shall likewise obtaine the same. For mine owne part, I seek no more but to triumph over the Boians in Gaule,  whome I have vanquished in plaine battell, beaten out of the field and campe; whose whole nation within two daies after the fight and their generall discomfiture, yeelded and rendred themselves into my hands; and from whome I have caried away hostages for assured pledge of future peace: nay, that which is much more than all this, I have had the killing of so many Gaules in open battell, and fought with so many thousands of Boians, as no Generall ever did before me: the better halfe of 50000 men are fallen upon the edge of the sword, and many a thousand taken prisoners; so as the Boians have none left, but old folke and young children. Can any man make a woonder then, why a victorius armie, leaving no enemie behind in the province, is come to Rome to honour the triumph of their Consull? Whose emploiment, if the Senat be disposed to use in any other service and province, Whether of these two waies thinke they, will make them  more willing and readie, to put themselves into new daungers, and enter
into other fresh labour and travell; either to pay them without delay and content them with the due and deserued hire of their former peril and pain, or to send them away with bare hope only, in stead of the substance, for to expect still without effect: since they have beene once alreadie put by and disappointed of their first hope and expectation? Now for mine owne part. I obtained honour ynough that day, on which the Senat sent me (deemed and declared the best man in all the city) to receive that great goddesse and dame of Ida. This title alone, without any other addition of triumph, shall be sufficient to recommend to all posteritie for honestly and honor both, the image of P. Scipio Nasica. This said, not only the whole Senat themselves condescended generally to graunt him triumph. but also with their countenance and authoritie compelled the Tribunes of the Commons  to give over their hold, and surcease their interposition of a negative voice. So P. Cornelius the Consull triumphed over the Boians. In which triumph he caused to bee carried for shew in French chariots, armor, ensigns, and spoils of all sorts: also French vessels of brasse and copper. He commaunded likewise to be led in pomp a number of horses taken, together with noblemen and gentlemen captives. Of chains of gold he made a shew of 1470. Besides, there was born in pomp, of gold 245 pound weight: of silver unwrought and wrougth into plate, not unworkmanly after their maner (and namely in sundry French vessels) 2340 pound weight: lastly of bigats in coin 234. To his soldiors that followed his triumphant chariot he gave 225 Asses a peece, double as much to a Centurion, and triple to an horsman. The next day after he called the people to a generall assembly, where after he had discoursed again of his exploits, and complained of the wrongs that the  Tribune had offered unto him, in that he would have tied him to the war of another, with intent to defraud himselfe
of the fruit of his own victorie, he cassed his soldiors, and discharged them quite.
Whiles these affaires thus went in Italie, Antiochus remaining at Ephesus, rested very secure and carelesse of the Romane warre, as if the Romanes had no purpose nor intention to passe over into Asia. This securitie of his was occasioned by many of his friends, who partly upon ignorance, and partly upon flatterie persuaded him so.
Onely Anniball, who at that time was of greatest credite, and might doe most with the king, said unto him, That hee rather marvelled much why the Romanes were not alreadie in Asia, than doubted of their comming. For a neerer cut (quoth he) it is by sea out of Greece into Asia, than out of Italy into Greece; and a greater motive to warre is Antiochus than the Aetolians. And as for their valour and power, as  hardie they are and mightie at sea, as on land; and their fleet hath hovered a good while alreadie about Malea. Moreover, I heard say of late, that new ships be arrived, and a new Generall come out of Italie, to follow and performe this warre. And therefore, let Antiochus seede no longer upon a vaine hope, and promise himselfe a permanent peace: for shortly hee must make account to fight with the Romanes in Asia, yea, and for Asia, both by sea, and land; and no mean

there is, but that either himselfe must loose his kingdome, or take from them their soveraigne  siegnorie, who affect and pretend to be LL. of the whole world. He was the only man thought to forecast, and truly to foretell what would ensue. Whereupon the king himselfe in person, with those ships which he had readie rigged and furnished, failed to Chersonnesus, with intent to strengthen those places with good garrisons, if happily the Romanes should come by land. The rest of the navie he commaunded Polyxenidas to prepare and put to sea. And all about the Island hee sent about his pinnaces and brigantines as espials to discover the coasts. C. Livius the Admirall of the Romane navie, was arrived at Naples from Rome with fiftie covered ships. At which place he gave commaundement, That the open vessels, which by covenant were due to bee sent from the allies of all that tract, should meet. From whence he sailed to Sicilie, and passed the streights by Messana. And when he had received sixe Carthaginian ships sent to aid him, and called upon  the Rhegines and Locrines, and other associates comprised in the same league and holding by the same tenure, for that shipping which of dutie they were to find, when he had also taken a survey of all his armada at Lacinium, he weighed anker, and put to the maine sea. Being arived at Corcyra, which was the first cittie of all Greece that he came unto, hee enquired in what tearmes the warre affaires stood? (for as yet all was not thoroughly quiet in Greece) and where the Romane fleet was? After he heard that the Romane Consull and king Philip, were about the pase of Thermopylae, and there lay in guard; that the fleet rid at anker in the pott and harbour of Pyraeeum; he thought it good to use expedition, and to make speed for all occasions whatsoever, and incontinently determined to saile forward to Peloponnesus. And having at one instant wasted Samos and Zacynthus as hee went, because they chose r
ather to band with the Aetolians, he set saile for  Malea, and having a good wind, within few daies hee arrived at Pyraeeum, where the old fleet ankered. At Scyllaeum king Eumenes met him with three ships: who had been a long time at Aegina, unresolved in himselfe, whether he should returne to defend his owne kingdome (for he heard that Antiochus made preparation at Ephesus for warre, as well by sea as land) or not to depart a foot from the Romanes, upon whose fortune depended his whole state. Aulus Attilius, so soone as he had delivered to his successor five and twentie close ships of war, losed from Pyraeeum, and came to Rome. So Livius with a fleet of eightie one ships, armed at their beakeheads with brasen pikes, besides many other smaller vessels, (which open as they were, had brasen heads, as is aforesaid; or if they were without such pikes, served for espials) sailed to Delos. Much about that time the Consull Acilius assailed Naupactum. At Delos, Livius for certaine daies was staied by  contrarie winds (for that quarter among the Cyclades is exceeding windie, by reason that these Islands are devided asunder, some with broader gulfes, some with narrower.)
Polexenidas being certified by the post-ships (set in diverse places to discover) that the Romane armada rid at anker neere Delos, dispatched messengers to the king, who leaving all matters which he enterprised in Hellespontus, returned to Ephesus, as fast as ever hee could make saile with his ships of warre, piked at the head: and presently called a counsell, where it was debated, whether hee were best to hazard a battell at sea or no? Polyxenidas was of opinion, That he should not slacke the time, but in any wise give battell and trie a fight, before that the fleet of Eumenes and the Rhodian ships were joined with the Romanes: for so in number they should not bee much overmatched, and for all other things have the better, as well for nimblenesse and agilitie of ships, as for varietie of aidsouldiours. For the Romane ships, as being unworkmanly built, they are heavie of steerage and unweldie, loaden they are and fraught besides with provision of victuals, as they are commonly that come into the enemies countrey. But as for your ships (seeing they leave all about them peaceable and quiet) they shall be charged with nothing but with men and munition. Besides, the skill of these seas and lands, and of the winds in these quarters, will be a great helpe unto you, wheras the enemies must needs be much troubled, for want of knowledge in them all. The deviser of this counsell had credite given unto him on all parts, and the rather, for that hee was the man himselfe to put in execution the same counsell. Two daies they made stay to set all things in order and readinesse, the third day they set forward with a fleet of a hundred saile, whereofleventie were covered, the rest open, and all of the smaller making; and for Phocaea they shaped their  course. The king hearing that the Romane armada approched, departed from thence (for that he was not to bee present in person at the conflict upon the sea) and went to Magnesia neer
e Sipylus, for to levie land-forces. But his navie made saile to Cyffus, a port of the Erythraeans, to attend the comming of the enemie there, as in a place more commodious. The Romanes, when

 the Northren winds were once laid (for they were alost for certaine daies, and locked them in) salled from Delos to Phanae, a haven towne of the Chians, bearing toward the Aegean sea. From thence they cast about with their ships to the citie, and there having victualled themselves, they crossed over to Phocaea. Eumenes who was gone to Elaea toward his fleet, within few daies after, with soure and twentie covered ships, and more uncovered, returned to the Romanes; whom hee found preparing and marshalling themselves (a little short of Phocaea) for a battell at sea. Then set they all forward with a hundred and fiftie close covered ships, and more open and without hatches: and being with side Northeren winds, at the first driven to the sea shore, they were forced to saile single in ranke one after another. But afterwards, as the violence of the wind began to be allaied, they assaied to crosse over to the haven Corycus, which is above Cyssus. Polyxenidas,  as soone as he heard that the enemies were at hand, rejoiced that hee had occasion presented unto him of a navall battell: and himselfe stretched forth the left point of his fleet embattelled farre into the sea, willing the captaines of the ships to display the right wing broad, toward the land: and so with an even front, he advaunced forward to the fight. Which the Romane Admirall seeing, strucke saile, tooke down the masts, and laying together all the tackling of the ships in one place; attended their comming that followed after. By which time there were thirtie in a ranke afront, with which, because he would make them equall to the left wing of the enemie, hee set up the trinkets or small sailes, meaning to make way into the deepe, commanding them that followed still, to make head, and direct their prows against the right wing neere the land. Eumenes was the rere-admirall, and kept the rereward close together: but so soone as they began  to bee troubled with taking down
e their tackling, he set forward with all speed and hast that hee could make: and by this time were they in view one of the other: Two Carthaginian ships led before the Romane navie, which were encountred with three of the kings ships. And considering the ods of the number, two of the kings came about one. And first they wiped away the oares on both sides, then they shewed themselves alost with their weapons, and bourded her, and after they had either overturned or killed the defendants, they were masters of that ship. The other that was in single fight, and assailed but by one, seeing the other ship taken by the enemies, fled backe into the maine fleet, before shee was environned by the three enemies. Livius chasing hereat, and angrie at the heart, advaunced forward with the Admirall ship afront the enemie: against her, those other two which had enclosed the Carthaginian ship aforesaid, hoping to  doe the like by this, came onward; which Livius perceiving, commaunded the rowers to let their oares hang in the water on both sides, for the more stay and steadinesse of the ship, and likewise to cast their yron hookes fashioned like hands, for to grapple the enemies ships, as they approched and came neere unto them; and when they were come to close fight in manner of land-service, then to remember the valour of the Romanes, and not to hold the kings slaves for men of any worth. And with much more facilitie and ease, than the two ships before conquered one, this one for that gained two. By this time the maine fleet on both sides encountred on all sides, and fought pell mell. Eumenes who being in the rereward, came last in place, after the conflict was begun, perceiving that Livius had disordered the left wing of the enemies, made head against the right, where he saw them fighting on even hand, not long after the left wing began to flie. For Polyxenidas,  so soone as he saw himselfe without all question overmatched in valor of the
soldiors, caused the trinquets and all the cloth he had to be set up, and purposed to flie amaine. Those likewise that were toward the land, and fought with Eumenes, within a while did no lesse. The Romans and Eumenes, so long as the marriners were able to plie their oares, and so long as they were in hope to annoy the taile of the enemies, followed the chase lustily ynough: but after that they perceived their owne ships (charged and heavily loaden with victuals) follow after to no purpose, and to lag behind, nor like to overtake them which were the swifter, because they were the lighter; staied at length their pursuit, after they had taken 13 ships both with their soldiors and mariners, and sunketen. Of the Romane Armada there perished but one Carthaginian, which at the first encounter was beset with two ships. Polyxenidas never gave over flight, but made way stil, until he had recovered  the haven of Ephesus. The Romans abode that day in the place from whence the kings armada came, purposing on the morrow to make fresh saile after the enemie. And in the mids of their course they met with those 35 Rhodian ships covered, conducted by Pisistratus their admirall; and taking those also with them, they followed the enemie even as far as Ephesus, where in the mouth of the haven, they rid in order of battel: by which bravado, having wroong as it were from the enemies

a plaine confession that they were vanquished, the Rhodians and Eumenes were sent home. The Romanes setting their course for Chius, first sailed by Phoenicus, an haven towne of Erythraea, and having cast anker that night, the next day they weighed, and arived within the Island, close to the citie it selfe, where having sojourned some few daies, especially to refresh their rowers, they passed forward to Phocaea. Where leaving source quinquereme galeaces, the fleet arrived at Canae, and because the Winter approched, the ships were laid up in their dockes on drie land, and for their safetie were trenched and paled about. In the yeeres end the Generall assemblie for election of magistrates was holden at Rome, wherein were created Consuls, L. Cornelius Scipio, and C. Laelius. For now all men had an eie to the finishing of the warre against Antiochus The next morrow were the Pretours also chosen, namely, M. Tuccius, L. Aurunculeius, Cneus Fulvius, L. Aemylius, P. Iunius, and C. Atinius Labeo.


 THE XXXVII. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the seven and thirtith Booke.
LVcius Cornelius Scipio the Consull, having for his lieutenant P. Scipio Africanus (according as hee had promised, that he would be lieutenant to his brother, if Greece and Asia were ordained to bee  his province, whereas it was thought, that C. Lalius, for the great credite that hee was in with the Senate, should have had that province given him) tooke his voiage for to warre against Antiochus, and was the first Romane that ever sailed over into Asia, as captaine and commaunder of an armie. Aemylius Regillus sought fortunately with the aid of the Rhodians before My (...), against the voiall navie of Antiochus. The sonne of Africanus taken prisoner by Antiochus, was first home to his father. M. Acilius Glabrio triumphed over Antiochus, whome hee had driven out of Greece, as also over the Rhodians. Afterwards, when Antiochus was vanquished by L. Cornelius Scipio (with the assistance of king Eumenes, the sonne of Attalus king of Pergamus) hee had peace graunted unto him, upon condition, that hee should quit and forgoe all the provinces on this side the mount Taurus. And Eumenes, by whose helpe Antiochus was overcome had his kingdome enlarged. To the Rhodians also, for their helping hand, certaine citties were given and graunted. One Colonie was planted, called Bononia. Aemylius Regillus, who vanquished the captaines of Antiochus in a navall battell, obtained also  a navall triumph. L. Cornelius Scipio, who finished the warre with Antiochus, had the like surname given him as his brother, and was called after Asiaticus.

WHen L. Cornelius Scipio, and C. Laelius were Consuls, after order taken for the service of the gods, there was no matter treated of in the Senate, before the suite of the Aetolians. And as their embassadours were instant and earnest, because the tearme of their truce was but short, so T. Quintius, who then was returned out of Greece to Rome, seconded them. The Aetolians, relying more upon the mercie of the Senate, than the justice of their cause, and ballancing their old  good turnes done to the Romanes, to the late harmes and trespasses committed, used humble supplication. But so long as they were in presence before the Senatours, they were wearied with their interrogatories of all hands, who sought rather to fetch and wring from them confession of a fault, than any other answere; and when they were bidden to void out of the Senat house, they

 caused much debate within. For in the handling of their matter it was seen that anger bare more sway than pitie, because they were not so much offended with them, for being enemies, as they blamed them for an unruly, untamed, and unsociable nation. And after much hard hold for certaine daies together, they resolved at length, neither to graunt nor denie them peace. Two conditions were tendered and presented unto them, either to referre themselves wholy to the pleasure and disposition of the Senate, or els to deliver a thousand talents: and withall to hold those for friends or foes, whomsoever the Romanes reputed theirs. And when they were desirous to draw from the Senatours thus much, as to know in what points, and how farre forth, they should submit themselves to the discretion of the Senate; they could have no certaine answere to build upon. And thus without any peace obtained, they were dismissed, with expresse commaundement  to void the citie that very day, and to be gone out of Italie within fifteene daies following. Then they fell to consultation in the Senate about the government of the Consular provinces. Both Consuls desired to have the charge of Greece. And Laelius was a great man with the Senat. Now when the house was minded that the Consuls should either cast lots or agree betweene themselves for their provinces, hee rose up and said, That it was more decent and besitting to put the matter to the judgement of that honourable court, than to the blind hazard of lots. To this Scipio for the present made answer, that he would consider better of it: and after he had conferred secretly with his brother apart (who advised him to be bold and put it to the Senat) he gave Lalius to understand, that he was content to do as he would have him. When this strange course and manner of proceeding (either new and unheard of before, or els after so long disuse of the practise therof,  forgotten and taken up again) caused the Se
nat to arme themselves against a great strife and contention, then P. Scipio Africanus said, That if they would ordaine his brother L. Scipio to have the province of Greece, he would accompanie him in that voiage, in qualitie of his Lieutenant. This one word of his (accepted of them all with a generall consent) stained all debate: for a great mind they had to make a triall, whether Anniball beeing vanquished could aid king Antiochus more, than Africanus the conquerour assist the Consull and the Romane legions. And all in a manner assigned Greece to Scipio, and Italie to Laelius. But the Pretours had their provinces set out to them by lot; L. Aurunculeius obtained the civill jurisdiction of citizens, and L. Fulvius of forainers: L. Aemylius Regillus was L. Admirall of the armada, P. Iunius governed Tuscane, M. Tuccius Apulia and the Brutij, and L. Atinius Sicilie. Moreover that Consull, who was to bee  employed in Greece, had a commission graunted, besides that armie which he should receive of M. Acilius (and those were two legions) to furnish himselfe with a supply of three thousand footmen, and one hundred horsmen of Roman citizens; also of five thousand foot and two hundred horse of allies that were Latines: and besides, graunted it was in the same commission, that when hee was arrived into his province, hee should passe over with his armie into Asia, if hee thought it so expedient for the Common-weale.
Vnto the other Consull was allowed an entier whole armie of new souldiours, consisting of two Romane legions, and fifteene thousand foot and sixe hundred horse of the Latine allies. Q.Minutius had direction (by reason that hee wrate how he had performed in his province all that there was to be done, and that the whole nation of the Ligurians had yeelded subjection) to  translate his forces out of Liguria into the Boians countrey, and to deliver the same to P. Cornelius the Proconsull. Out of that territorie which hee had taken away from them after they were vanquished, those citie legions were withdrawen, which had beene levied and enrolled they yeere before; and committed they were to the charge of M. Tuccius the Pretour, besides 15000 foot and sixe thousand horse of Latine allies: and all these forces were to be emploied for to defend and keepe in obedience, Apulia and the Brutians countrey. As for A. Cornelius the Pretour of the former yeere, (who with an armie had the government of the Brutij) he was commaunded to deliver unto M. Acilius (if the Consull thought so good) the legions transported over into Aetolia, if he would remaine there still: but if Acilius would rather returne to Rome, then A. Cornelius with that armie, was to remaine in Aetolia. Thought good it was, that C. Atinius Labeo  should receive of M. Aemylius, the government of Sicilie and his armie: and if it pleased him, to take up and enroll out of that verie province 2000 foot and 100 horse, for to supplie and fulfill the broken companies. P. Iunius Brutus had commaundement to levie a new armie for the goverment of Tuscane, to wit, one Romane legion, and 10000 foot of Latine allies, and 400 horse. Also L. Aemilius the Admirall, was to receive of M. Iunius the Pretour of the former

yeere, twentie gallies, and the mariners and ores thereto belonging; and besides, to levie himselfe  1000 mariners more, and 2000 footmen: and with those ships and souldiours to saile into Asia, and to receive the fleet of C. Livius. As for them that were alreadie in the government of both the provinces of Spaine and of Sardinia, they were to continue there still for one yeere longer, and to have the same armies at commaund. This yeere were two tenths of corne levied of Sicilie and Sardinia: and order was given for all the Sicilian corne to be sent into Aetolia to the armie: but out of Sardinia, that one part should be brought to Rome, and the other transported over into Aetolia, even to the same place that the other of Sicilie aforesaid.
Before the Consuls set forward into their provinces, it was thought nicer, that the Pontifies should giue order for the expiation of certaine prodigies: for at Rome the temple of Iuno Lucina was smitten with lightning; so as both the lanterne, yea and the leaved dores thereof, were  foully disfigured. Likewise at Puteoli, the towne walles in many places, and one gate, was blasted with lightning, and two men besides were strucken dead therewith. At Nursia it was for certaine knowne, that the day being faire and cleere, there arose a stormie tempest, wherein also two free men lost their lives. The Tusculanes reported, that with them it rained earth. And the men of Reate brought word, that within their territorie a female mule foled. These prodigies (I say) were expiated: and the Latine festivall holydaies were celebrated anew, for that the dole of flesh was not given unto the Laurentines, which of duty should have been delivered. Moreover, a solemne supplication was ordeined, in regard of all errours and faults escaped in divine service and religious observances. Also out of the bookes of Sibylla, the Decemvirs declared and shewed, to what gods, sacrifice should be made: and ten young springals free borne, and ten virgins likewise, whose  fathers and mothers yet lived, were employed about the ministery of those sacrifices. The Decemvirs also by night sacrificed young sucklings. And P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, before hee tooke his journey, erected an arch in the Capitoll (over-against the high street that leadeth thither) with 7 gilded statues and 2 horses: and before that arch, he set up two cesternes or lavers of marble. About this time, 43 principall persons of Aetolia, (among whom were Democritus and his brother) were conveighed to Rome, by two squadrons or cohorts sent of purpose from M. Acilius; and there were laid up fast in the prison called(...). The stone quarries: which done, the cohorts aforesaid
were commaunded by L. Cornelius the Consull, to make returne to the armie. From Ptolomeus and Cleopatra (king and queene of Aegypt) there came embassadors, testifying their joy which they conceived in the behalfe of the Romanes, in these termes, That M. Acilius the Consull had chased king Antiochus out of Greece: exhorting also the Romans to transport an armie into Asia: for that not in Asia only but likewise in Syria, all men were smitten with fear and amazed. As for the KK. of Aegypt, they would be ready to doe for their parts, whatsoever the Senat should set downe. Thankes were returned to the K. and Q. aforesaid, and order was taken, that to the embassadors for a reward should be given 4000 brasen Asses apeece.
L. Cornelius the Consull, having accomplished all things to be done at Rome, published an Edict in a generall assembly, That aswell those soldiors whom himselfe had enrolled for supply, as they who wer with A. Cornelius in the Brutians country, should all meet at Brundusium upon the Ides of15 of Ju^e. Quintilis. Moreover he nominated three lieutenants, Sex. Digitius, L. Apussius, and C. Fabricius Luscinus, for to gather ships togither out of all the sea coasts into Brundusium. And  when hee had prepared and set all things in good order, hee departed from the citie, clad in his rich coat of armes. There presented unto the Consull as he went forth, to the number of 5000 voluntaries, Romanes and allies togither, who had served their full yeeres in the wars under the conduct of P. Africanus, and now wer exempt from solderie, who all offered to go with him and to be enrolled as prest souldiours. Much at the time that the Consull tooke his journey (during the festivall Apollinare games in the honour of Apollo, upon the fift day before the Ides of Iuly) it chaunced, that in the day time when the aire was cleere and faire, there arose a suddaine darkenesse during the eclipse of the sunne, by reason that the body of the moone was directly under the circle and roundle of the sunne. L. Aemylius Regillus also admirall of the warre, at the same time went to sea. L. Aurunculeius was charged by order from the Senat, to build thirtie galeaces  with five bankes of ores, and twentie gallies with three bankes, because a bruit was blowne and blazed abroad, that Antiochus upon the late battaile at sea, was about to prepare a much greater armada.
The Aetolians, after their embassadors were returned from Rome and had made relation, that

 there was no hope of peace, albeit all their sea coasts (especially toward Peloponnesus) were spoiled and wasted by the Achaeans, yet minding more their perill like to ensue, than remembering their losse received, seized the mountaine Corax, intending to impeach and stop the passage of the Romanes. For they made no question nor doubt, but that the next spring they would returne to besiege and assault Naupactum. Acilius, who wist well what they expected, thought it better to goo in hand with an enterprise unlooked for, and namely to assaile Lamia: for thus hee thought, That seeing they had beene alreadie brought to a great under and extremitie by king Philip, now they might be taken sodainly and surprised at unawates, because they stood in feare of nothing lesse. Whereupon, remooving from Elatia, he encamped first in the country of his enemies neere to the river Sperchius: from whence by night he dislodged, and advanced forthwith  his ensignes. and by the day breake had invested their walles round about. Great feare and hurley there was, as in an accident unlooked for: yet all that day they defended the city more resolutely, than a man would have beleeved and thought they could have done in so sodaine a daunger: whiles men stood at defence upon the wals, women set up ladders in many places, and brought the men weapons and darts of all sorts, yea and stories up to the walls unto them. Acilius, after he had sounded the retreat, brought backe his men into the campe about noone: and after they had there refreshed their bodies with meat and rest, he gave them warning (before he dismissed the Praetorium) that ere day-light the next morning they should be ready in armes: for that he would not come backe againe with them into the campe, before they were masters of the towne. At the same time as the day before, hee gave assault in many places: and for as  much as the townesmens strength decaied, their darts and weapons failed, and abo
ve all, their hearts fainted, within few houres hee wanne the citie. After hee had made a riddaunce of the pillage, sold some part, and given away the rest, hee fell to take counsell what to doe afterwards. There was not one man of opinion to go against Naupactum, considering that the Aetolians held and kept the pase of Corax. Howbeit Acilius, to the end that he would not keepe the field in sommer without doing some exploit, and that the Aetolians might not enjoy that peace by the slackness of the Romane souldiours, which obteine they could not at the Senates hand, he purposed to besiege Amphissa: and so the armie was conducted thither from Heraclea, by the mountaine Oeta. When he had encamped himselfe under the towne walls, he began not to invest it round with men as he did Lamia, but with ordinance and engins to batter it. In many  places at once he ran with the ramme against the walls: and albeit they were shaken, the townesmen went not about either to make redie, or to devise and invent any meanes of defence against that instrument or engin. All their hope was in trusty armour and hardie valour. And so often they sallied forth, that they disordred and troubled not only the guards of the enemies, but also those that attended about the fabricks and artillerie. Howbeit, in many places the wall was battred and breaches made: and even at that very instant newes came unto him, that his successor had landed his armie at Apollonia, and was comming by the way of Epirus and Thessalie. Now came the Consull with a power of 13000 foote, and five hundred horse. And by this time was he passed as far as to the vale and levell of Malea: and having sent certein afore to summon the citie Hypata, and received answere againe, that they would do nothing but by a publick decree  of the Aetolians; because the siege of Hypata should not stay him, and Amphissa not yet woon, he led his forces against it, and sent his brother Africanus before. Ere they came, the
Oppidanes had quit the towne, for by this time the wall in many places lay open and naked, and were all fled armed and unarmed into a castle which they had, imprenable. The Consull pitched his tents sixe miles from the towne.
Thither arrived the Athenian embassadors, and first they repaired to P. Scipio, who, as we have said, was gone before the maine armie, and afterwards to the Consull, intreating for the Aetolians. Of the twaine they received a gentler answere at the hands of Africanus, who seeking some honest occasion to leave the Aetolian warre, set his heart and eye wholly upon Asia and king Antiochus: and to this purpose he willed the Atheniens to persuade not only with the Romanes,  but also with the Aetolians, to preferre peace before warre. And speedily, through the motion and persuasion of the Atheniens there was a solemne embassage of the Aetolians dispatched from Hypata.
Induced they were the rather to hope for peace by the speech of Africanus (for to him they came first) who discoursed unto them, how that many nations and cities in Spaine first, and afterwards in Africke, had put themselves under his protection, and in them all hee had left

greater testimonies of his clemencie and bountie, than of his warlike valour and martiall prowesse. Thus they had brought the matter (as they thought) to a good passe, and made it sure: but when they came before the Consull, they had the same answere of him, with which they were sent away from the Senate, and commaunded to avoid. The Aetolians wounded therewith anew, seeing they could win nothing neither by the mediation of the Athenien embassage, nor the gracious answere of Africanus, said they would make report thereof unto their States and countrymen. So, they returned from thence to Hypata, where they were to seeke what to do, and could not resolve: for neither had they whereof to raise a thousand talents: and againe if they should absolutely put themselves into their hands, they feared to feele the smart thereof in their bodies. Therefore they commaunded the same embassadors to go againe to the Consull and to Africanus, and to exhibit a petition, that if they were minded indeed and veritie to graunt them  peace, and not by vaine shew and semblance only to frustrate and delude the hope of poore suppliants, they would either rebate them a quantitie of that grand summe of money, or else accept so of their absolute surrender, that no free citizens might be touched thereby in his person. But nothing could be gotten at the Consuls hands, for to alter or relent any jote: thus was this embassage also sent away as it came, and nothing done. The Atheniens came after them in place, the principall man of whose embassage, Echedemus, seeing the Aetolians wearied with so many repulses, and lamentably to no purpose bewailing the miserable estate of their countrie; put them still in some new hope, and gave them counsell to crave truce for sixe moneths, that they might addresse their Embassadors to Rome, and receive and answere from thence: shewing unto them, that this delay could not augment their present calamitie, which could not worse
be;  but contrarywise, time and space comming betweene, might affoord many accidents whereby their present miserie might be mitigated and alayed. So by the advise of Echedemus, the same men were sent once againe, who had communed before with P. Scipio, and by his meanes obteined of the Consull a truce for that terme; which was the thing they craved. The siege being raysed before Amphissa, M. Acilius after he had delivered up his armie into the hands of the Consull, resigned his government, and departed out of the province: and the Consull likewise from Amphissa returned into Thessalie, intending through Macedonie and Thracia to conduct his armie into Asia.
Then Africanus entred into speech with his brother, and said: The journey which you enterprise L. Scipio, I for my part approve and thinke well of, but all resteth in the will and pleasure  of Philip: who if he be fast and faithfull to the state and empire of Rome, he will graunt us passage, he will affoord us victuals, he will furnish us with all things, which in so long a voyage are necessarie to the help and sustenance of our armie: but if he faile and forsake us once, you must make accompt of no safetie and securitie throughout all Thracia: therefore I am of advise that the kings affection be first sounded. And that will best be done, if the messenger who shall be dispatched unto him, may come upon him on a sodaine, and take him unprovided, and having no time to put any presented plot in practise.T. Sempronius Gracchus, a most nimble and active yong gentleman, was at that time chosen for the furest person to performe this action: who taking fresh post horses all the way as he rode, with incredible celeritie made such speede, that from Amphissa (for thence he had his dispatch) in three dayes space, he arrived at Pella. The king was at a feast or banket when he came, and wine he had taken full liberally. And finding him thus disposed to solace and recreate his spirits, he had no reason to suspect that he was minded and inclined to any change or alteration: and so for that time this guest was bidden welcome, and had good cheere made him. The morrow after, he saw the provision of victuals in great store readie for the armies, he beheld the bridges made over the rivers, and the high waies mended and prepared, where passage was difficult. With these intelligences he returned to the Consull, with as great speed as he went, and met him at Thaumaci. From whence, the armie in much joy, and with greater and more assured hope, entred into Macedonie; where all was provided to their hands. The king at their comming received t
hem right stately, and at their departure conducted them on the way as royally. Very willing, redie and courteous he shewed himselfe: which Africanus much liked and highly commended, being a man, as in all other things singular, so in allowing of elegancie and humanitie, if it were without superfluitie and excesse, nothing nice and streight-laced. Thus they held on their journey unto Hellespontus, passing through Macedonie and Thrace, and Philip still accompanied them, and provided all things

 for their use afore-hand.
After the battaile fought at sea neere Corycum, Antiochus having had all the winter time free without any empeachment to furnish himselfe with forces both for land and sea, above all things studied and devised how to repaire his fleete, for feare hee should bee quite disseized and dispossed of the sea. And evermore this ran in his mind, that he had an overthrow, and yet the Rhodians fleete was away. For thus he cast with himselfe, that if they also should be present at the next conflict (and surely the Rhodians, thought he, will not for any thing be behind againe) hee then should have need of a mightie number of ships, to match the enemies Armada as well in greatnes as goodnesse. And therefore he had both sent Anniball into Syria for to take up the ships of the Phaenicians, and also commaunded Polyxenidas to  repaire those vessels which he had alreadie, and to make and rig others, with so much more diligence as his fight afore was lesse fortunate. Himselfe passed the winter in Phrygia, and seeking for aid out of all places, he sent out as farre as into Gallograecia. The people there at that time were great warriours; keeping still the courages of Gaules, for that the race of that nation was not yet extinct and worne out. His sonne Seleucus he had left in Aeolis with an armie to keepe the maritime cities in obedience, which Eumenes from Pergamus of one side, and the Romanes from Phocaea and Erythrae on the other side, sollicited to rebellion. The Romane fleete, as I said before, wintered at Canae. Thither in the mids almost of winter came Eumenes with two thousand foote, and a hundred horse. Who having given out unto Livius, that great prizes might be raised out of the enemies territorie about Thyatira, had so persuaded and wrought  with him, that he sent with him five thousand souldiours: who being setforth to this rode and expedition, in few dayes drove away a mightie bootie. Amid these matters, there hapned a mutinie i
n Phocaea, by occasion of some that would have withdrawne and turned away the hearts of the multitude unto king Antiochus. The wintering of the fleete was chargeable to that citie. The imposition of a tribute was heavie, in regard that they were put to the finding of five hundred side cassockes, and as many coates for liveries: the scarcitie of corne also was grievous unto them; for which default the ships and the Romane garrison abandoned the place and departed: whereupon that faction which in all their speeches and assemblies drew the common people to side with Antiochus, was rid of all feare. The Senate and the principall citizens of Phocaea were of opinion to continue to the last, in the association of the Romans: but the persuaders  and counsellers of a revolt were of more credit with the multitude.
The Rhodians were not so flow the summer past, but they were as forward now in the spring: for before mid-March, they sent out the same Pausistratus admirall of a fleet of six and thirtie saile. And by this time Livius loosed from Canae, and sailed toward Hellespontus, with thirtie ships, and seven gallies of foure bankes of oapes, which king Eumenes had brought with him, to the end that he might prepare things necessarie for the passage of the armie, which hee supposed would come by land. And first he sel with the bay or port which they cal, The rode of theWhere they lay sometimes against Troy. Achaeans, from whence he went up to Ilium, where, after he had sacrificed to Minerva, hee gave gracious audience to the embassages of the neighbors bordering, which came from Eleus, Dardanus, and Rhoetium, who committed their cities unto his protection. From thence he directed his course to the streights of Hellespontus, and leaving ten ships in the rode overagainst Abydus, with the rest of  the fleet he passed over into Europe, to assault Sestos. As the armed souldiours approched their wals, the frantike priests of Cybele called Galli, bestraught of their wits, presented themselves first unto them before their gates, in their solemn habit and vestiments, saying, That they being the servaunts and ministers of Dame Cybele the mother of the gods, were come by the instinct and commandement of that goddesse to beseech the Roman Generall to spare the wals and the citie. And not one of them had any harme done unto them. Anon, the whole bodie of the Senat with the magistrates came forth to yeeld the towne. From thence they crossed over to Abydus, where (after many parlies, in which they had sounded their minds, and could have no answere tending to peace) they addressed themselves to lay siege to the citie, and to assault it.
 Whiles these things stood thus about Hellespont, Polyxenidas a Rhodian borne, but banished his countrey, and a captaine for king Antiochus, hearing that a Rhodian fleet was gone to sea, and that Pausistratus their admirall, had in open audience given out certaine prowd and disdainefull speeches against him, entred into a privat quarell with him, tossing and devising in his mindnight and day nothing els, but how he might by some effectuall and worthie deedes, checke and consute

those brave and glorious words of his. He dispatched therefore unto him as a messenger, a man well knowne unto him, with credence and instructions to give him to understand, that himselfe would (if he might) stand both Pausistratus and his countrie in good steed: and that Pausistratus (if it pleased him) had meanes to restore him againe into his native countrie. When Pausistratus mervailed hereat, and was very inquisitive to know how this mought be effected; and gave him his faithfull promise (at his request) either to joyne with him in the action, or els to conceale all and keepe counsell: then the messenger declared, that Polyxenidas would make over unto him the kings navie either entier, or the greater part thereof: and in consideration and recompense of this so great demerit, he desired no more but that he might returne into his country. The importance of this matter was so great, that he neither beleeved his words, nor yet neglected and despised the same. So he went to Panormus, a place in the land  of Samos, and there he abode to view and see the thing that was offred unto him. Courriers there ran betweene, and never would Pausistratus geve credit to the partie, untill Polyxenidas wrote a letter with his owne hand in the presence of his said messenger, that he would performe whatsoever he had promised, yea and sent the same letters sealed with his owne signe Manuell. By this sure pledge or gage, Pausistratus made full account that he had the traitour surely bound and obliged unto him. For thus he thought, that Polyxenidas living as a subject under the king, would never hazard the danger of such pregnant matter to appeere against himselfe, testified under his owne hand-writing: so from that time forward the meanes of this pretended and counterfeit treason was devised and agreed upon. Polyxenidas gave him to understand, that he would of purpose lay aside and neglect preparation of all furniture, that he would ne
ither have rowers nor other mariners in any number about his fleete: moreover, under a coulor of calking and  calfretting he would lay up some ships on dry land: others he would send away into the havens neere at hand, and keepe some few riding at anker before Ephesus in the haven, and those (if he were forced to battaile) he would set out to fight. The same negligence that Pausistratus heard say Polyxenidas would use in his fleete, the same himselfe presently shewed in his owne. For some of his ships he sent to Halicarnassus for victuals, and other to Samos the citie, to the end that he might be in redinesse when the traitor gave the signall of assault. Polyxenidas still by false semblance encreased the errors and vaine imaginations of Pausistratus: for some ships indeed he drew aland and laid up dry: and as if he ment to hale up more, he repaired and amendeth the docks. Oremen and mariners he sent not for out of their winter harboroughs to go to Ephesus, but secretly assembled them to Magnesia. Now it fortuned that a certeine souldier serving under king Antiochus, who was come to Samos about some private affaires of his owne, was apprehended there for a spy, and brought to Panormus before the Admirall Pausistratus. Who, being demaunded what they did at Ephesus; I know not whether for feare, or upon small loyaltie that he bare to his prince and countrey, discovered all: namely, that the fleete rid in the haven rigged, decked and trimmed in redinesse: Item, that all the rowers and mariners were sent to Sipylus in Magnesia: Item, that some vessels, and those very few, were drawne up to land, and the docks and harbours were shut up close: and lastly, that never at any time before, the navie was so carefully looked unto, nor sea affaires so well managed. But the mind of Pausistratus was so possessed before, with foolish conceits and vaine hopes, that he would not beleeve these informations  and intelligence
s for true. Polyxenidas having set all things forward and in good readinesse, by night sent for the rowers and mariners from Magnesia: and having in great hast shot to sea and set aflote those vessels which lay at one side upon the land, after he had spent the whole day, not so much in making provision, as trifling out the time for the nonce, because he would not have the fleete to be seene when it set forth, weighed ankar and losed after the sunne was gone downe: and with 70 saile of covered ships, because he had a contrary wind, entred the Bay of Pygala before day, where resting all the livelong day for the same purpose as before, the next night he sailed to the neerest coasts of Samos. From whence he gave commaundement to one Nicander an Archpirate, to set saile for Palinurus, with five close covered ships, there to land; and from thence to march with his armed souldiers over the fields the neerest way to Panormus, and  to come upon the back of the enemies: himselfe in the meane while divided his fleete into two parts, and made way to Panormus, there to keepe the entrie and mouth of the haven on both sides. Pausistratus at first was troubled for a while at this unexpected occurrent: but afterwards, as one that was an old beaten souldiour, he quickly tooke hart againe, and calling his wits together,

 supposed that he might more easily repulse the enemies by land than by sea; and led his souldiours in two squadrons unto the promontories which bearing out into the sea like two hornes, to force the haven: from which two capes or heads he supposed that he might easily set back and put by the enemies with shooting darts from both sides. But Nicander who was sent by land, impeached this disseine of his, so that he was forced sodainly to change his mind and alter that course, and therefore commaunded all his men to go a shipboord and away. Hereupon exceeding feare there was both among the souldiours and also the mariners, as if they were to take their flight by sea and not to fight, seeing themselves invironed at once both by land and sea. Pausistratus supposing the only way to escape and save themselves, was to make way through the mouth of the haven, and so to recover sea-roome; after he had seene all his men embarked, commaunded  the rest to follow, and himselfe first plying and labouring hard with ores, skudded amaine with his ship to the entrance of the haven. Now when she was once past the streight and come into the open sea, Polyxenidas was there to welcome him with three Galeaces of five banks of ores, and so beset him. The poore ship was wounded with the yron pikes bearing out in the beake heads of the galeaces, and so bouged and sunke withall. The defendants upon the hatches were overwhelmed with shot of darts, and among the rest, Pausistratus himselfe manfully fighting lost his life. The rest of the ships were bourded and taken, some before the haven, others within: and some there were that by Nicander were seized as they laboured to lose from the land, and to launch forth. Five ships only of Rhodes, and two of Cous, escaped cleere and fled, which made themselves way even among the thickest of their enemies, by the meanes of a  fearefull burning flame of fire that they had with them. For they set me two long per
ches or poles bearing forward at the prow, like two sprit sailes, in every ship, carying yron pots and pans afore them full of light fire. The Gallies of Erythrea, meeting the Rhodian ships not farre from Samos as they fled, the which were comming to help them, turned their course backward into Hellespontus, unto the Romanes. About the same time Seleucus gained the citie of Phocaea by treason, entring in at a gate which the warders set open of purpose for him. And for feare, Cymae and other townes of that coast revolted unto him.
Whiles these things thus passed in Aeolis, and that Abydus had endured the siege for certein dayes by the defence of the kings garison that manned the walls: now that all were overtoiled and wearied, the magistrates of the citie (by the permission of Philotas captaine of the garison)  articled with Livius upon conditions to render the towne. The only point whereupon they stood, and which stayed the conclusion, was this, for that they could not agree whether the kings souldiours should be sent away armed or disarmed. And whiles they debated hereabout, newes came of the Rhodians defeature, and so the oportunitie of gaining the towne slipt out of their hands. For Livius fearing, least Polyxenidas pussed up with the successe of so great an exploit, would surprize the fleere that rid at Canae, leaving presently the siege before Abydus, and the garding of Hellespont, put to sea afresh those ships that lay dry at Canae. And Eumenes came to Elea; But Livius went to Phocaea with all his fleete, to which he had adjoyned two trireme gallies of Mitylenae. But when he heard say it was kept with a strong garison of the kings, and that Seleucus was encamped not far off, after he had pilled the sea coast, and charged hastily his ships  with a good bootie, and those were prizes of men especially, he stayed no longer there than untill Eumenes might overtake him with his fleete, but directed his course streight to Samos. The Rhodians upon the first newes of this their overthrow, feared much, and withall mightilie forrowed: for besides the losse of their sea-soldiours and ships, they lost also the very floure and strength of their youth: for as much as many yong gentlemen of their nobilitie, accompanied Pausistratus, among other motives, in regard of his authoritie, which was right great and for good desert among his countrymen: But afterwards considering how treacherously they were over-raught, and namely, by one of their owne citizens
, borne among them, their melancholie turned into choler, and their sorrow into anger. Whereupon they sent forth ten ships immediatly, and few dayes after other ten, under the conduct of Eudamus the Admirall over them all:  who albeit he were not for other feates of armes and martiall skill equall to Pausistratus, yet they supposed verily he would be a leader so much the more warie and circumspect, as he was the lesse hardie and courageous. The Romanes and king Eumenes first fell with the Iland Erythraea, where they stayed one night, and the morrow after gained the point of Corycus, a promontorie of the Teians. From whence when they purposed to crosse over to the neerest parts of Samos, not waiting

for the sunne-rising, by which the Pilots might observe the disposition of the weather, they  hoised up sailes against a very doubtfull and dangerous tempest: for the wind turned from North-east to full North, as they were in the mids of their course, whereby they began to be mightily tossed among the surging billows of the rough and angry sea. Polyxenidas supposing that the enemies would take their course directly to Samos, there to joyne with the Rhodian fleete, deparred from Ephesus, and first ankered at Myonesus: from thence he failed to an Iland called Macris, to the end that as the enemies fleet sailed by, he might take advantage to set upon either some ships singled and severed from the bodie of the fleet, or play upon the rail and reregard therof. After that he perceived the whol fleet to be dispersed by force of the tempest, he thought first to take that occasion to fall upon them: but the wind rising still more and more, and raising greater waves, because he saw he could not possibly come neere to bourd them, he cut over to  the Iland Ethalia, minding the next day to assaile the ships in the maine sea as they passed to Samos. Some small number of the Romane ships in the beginning of the night put into the haven of Samia, which they found void and emptie: the rest of the fleete after they had bene tossed and tormented all the night long in the deepe, at length light upon the same harborough. Where being advertised by the pesants of the country, that the enemies ships lay in the rode of Athalia, they fell to consult, whether presently to bid battaile and put it to the hazard, or expect the arrivall of the Rhodian fleet. Deferring therefore that enterprise (for so upon advertisement they were agreed) they traversed to Coricus, from whence they came. Polyxenidas likewise, having staid at anket in vain, returned to Ephesus: and then the Roman ships, while the seas were thus cleere of enemies, sailed over the Samos. Thither also arrive
d the Rhodian fleet few daies after: and that it  might appeare how long looked for it was, they all presently set saile for Ephesus, with purpose either to trie an issue by a battell at sea, or else if the enemie refused the triall, to expresse and wring from him a plaine confession of cowardise: which was a materiall point and of great importance to moove the minds of the other neighbour-cities. Being arrived to the very haven mouth, they embattailed their ships and stood directly affront opposed unto it. And when they saw none make saile not set out against them, the one part thereof rode aflote at ancre still in the very haven mouth; the other discharged the souldiors and set them a land. Vpon whom (as they were driving a mightie bootie which they had raised by harrying all the country over) Andronicus a Macedonian, who lay in garison at Ephesus, sallied forth, even as they approched the walles of the citie; and having eased them of a great part of their prey aforesaid, he chased themselves to the sea unto  their ships. The morrow after, the Romans having bestowed an ambush about the mid-way between, marched in order of battaile against the citie, to see if peradventure they could traine forth the Macedonian again without the walles: but perceiving that no man durst come abroad for suspicion and feare of an await, they returned to their ships again; and when they saw their enemies would not abide them neither at sea nor on land, in the end the fleet sailed againe to Samos from whence it came. Thence the Pretour made out two gallies of Italian confederates, and as many Rhodians under the conduct of Epicrates the Rhodian Admirall, to defend and keepe the streights of Cephalenia, which Hibristas the Lacedaemonian togither with the youth of the Cephalenes, infested with his roving and robbing, in so much as there could no ships passe by sea to and fro with victuals betweene-Italie and that coast. At Pyraeeum Epicrates met w
ith L. Atmilius  Regillus comming to succeed in the Admiraltie: who hearing of the deffeiture of the Rhodians, and having himselfe but two Quinquereme galleaces, brought Epicrates backe with him into Asia with foure ships. There accompanied them also the open ships of the Athenians. And he passed over by the seaArchipelago Aegeum. Thither also arrived Timasicrates the Rhodian in the dead of the night with two Quadrireme gallies from Samos. Who being brought unto Aemylius, declared how he was sent to quiet and defend that sea coast, which the kings roving ships and men of warre by their often excursions from Hellespontus and Abydus, had made too hot for the hulkes and other ships of burden which used to passe that way. As Aemylius sailed from Chios to Samos, two Rhodian Quadrireme gallies were sent by Livius to meet him: and king Eumenes also with two Quinquereme galleaces presented himselfe unto him. Being all arrived  at Samos, Aemylius after he had received the navie of Livius, and sacrificed orderly as the maner was, called a counsell.
At which C. Livius (for his opinion was asked first) spake and said, That no man giveth more found and faithfull counsell than hee, who persuadeth another man to that which himselfe would doe in the same case. As for mee, my intent and purpose was, to

 goe against Ephesus with the whole armada, and thither to bring with me the vessels of burden charged with the heavie ballace of gravell and sand, and to sinke them in the verie haven mouth, for to choke it up. And to make this barre against the haven, it was a matter (said hee) of lesse difficultie, for that the mouth and gullet of the haven, was in manner of a river, long, narrow, and full of shelfes and shallowes. By which meane I should have cut off the benefite of the sea from the enemie, and make him loose the use altogither of his navie. But no man there besides himselfe thought well of this devise. King Eumenes demaunded, what they would doe then after this choking up and stoppage of the haven passage, by sinking the ships? whether they would depart from thence with their owne navie at libertie, to helpe their allies and terrifie and affright their enemies; or never the later still, keepe the haven (as it were) in siege with the whole fleet? For if  they departed, who could make doubt but that the enemie would plucke up those dammes and barres that there lay drowned; yea, and with lesse adoe and trouble, open the haven againe, than it was stopped? and if they meant to carie there neverthelesse, to what purpose then was the haven shut up? But contrariwise, they within Ephesus (quoth hee) being in surety for any daunger from their haven, and having a most rich and wealthie citie of their owne, furnished with all things out of Asia, would passe the sommer season in rest and repose; whiles the Romanes floting in the open wide sea, exposed to the violence of waves and lying at the mercy of tempests, should be driven to keepe a continuall guard, disfurnished of all things, and rather tied up and debarred themselves, for being able to effect those things that were needfull to be done, than in case to empeach and shut up their enemies. Then Eudamus the admirall of the Rhodian fleet,  opined for his part, and spake to
the question, saying, That he rather disliked of that course, than knew himselfe a better, or could advise what was to be done. Epicrates the Rhodian was of mind, to leave Ephesus for the present, and to send part of his ships into Lycia, for to associate unto them Patara, the capitall cittie of that nation: shewing two things of great consequence, that hereby would accrue. For both the Rhodians assured of peace, and secured from all danger of those quarters that lie about their Island, might thereby attend wholly, and employ all their forces upon the regard of this onely warre against Antiochus: and also the Armada which was prepared in Lycia might be stopped and empeached, forver joining with Polyxenidas. This opinion imported, and prevailed most. Howbeit, thought good it was and agreed upon, that Regillus should present himselfe before Ephesus, with the whole fleet, to strike a terror into the enemies.  And C. Livius was sent with foure Rhodian quandrireme gallies, and two Smyrnean open ships into Lycia, with direction to take Rhodes in the way, and with them there to communicate all his counsels. The cities which he passed by, namely,Melaxo. Miletus,S. Pietro. Myndus,Casiello S. Pedro. Halicarnassus,Cabo Crio. Cnidus and Cous, performed willingly whatsoever was enjoined and imposed upon them. Being arrived at Rhodes, hee declared unto the Rhodians the effect of his commission, and withall required their advise. They all approved the designe, and when hee had taken of them to the fleet that he had of his own, three quadrireme gallies more, he sailed toPatoa. Patara. At the first he had a merrie gale of wind, that set them forward directly toward the cittie, and good hope they had with their suddaine terrour to doe some good with the inhabitants: but afterwards, the wind being come about, the sea rose, and the surging waves began to make it troublesome and daungero
us;  howbeit they laboured so with oares that they gat to the shore side. But neither was there about the citie any safe bay to ride in, neither were they able to keepe the sea with anker without the haven mouth of the enemies citie, the sea was so rough, and the night so neere. So passing along by the wall side of the citie, they sailed to the port of Phaenicus, lesse than two miles distant from thence, which was a safe rode for their ships from all daunger of sea, but high cliffes and rockes there were over their heads which commanded them, and those the townsmen quickly seized, with the assistance of the kings souldiours whom they had in garrison. Against whom Livius sent out the aid-soldiers of the Isseans, and the nimblest and most deliver young men of the Smyrneans, notwithstanding the landing places were very difficult and untoward. These sustained the fight at first, so long as they shot darts, and made pettie excursions and profers rather of skirmishes,  than a direct battell, as being but few in number. But after that they ran out of the cittie in great numbers, and that the whole multitude was issued forth, Livius feared least not onely those auxiliars should be environned and enclosed, but also the ships distressed and endaungered from the land: so he brought forth to fight, not the souldiours onely, but all the rable of the marriners also and the rowers, armed and furnished with whatsoever weapons they could find. And even then

also there was a doubtfull and daungerous conflict, wherein besides certaine souldiours. L. Apuslius died in the medley of this suddaine and tumultuarie skirmish. Yet in the end, the Lycians were discomsired, put to flight, and chased into their citie. The Romanes likewise retired to their ships, carrying away with them no bloudlesse victorie for their part. From thence they shaped their course to the gulfe or narrow streight of Telmessus (which of one side touchest Caria, and Lycia on the other) laying aside all hope to assaile Patara any more; and so the Rhodians were discharged and sent home. Livius after he had coasted along Asia crossed over into Greece, to the end, that having communed and conferred with the Scipios (who then abode about Thessalie) he might saile directly into Italie.
Aemylius when he had intelligence, that the designement intended in Lycia was given over, and that Livius was departed into Italie, being himselfe also returned to Samos (for that he was  by violence of tempest repulsed from Ephesus, without effect of his enterprise) thought it was a shame and dishonour, that the adventure was given upon Patara in vaine, and therfore determined in proper person to make a voiage thither with his whole fleet, and to assault the cittie with all the force he could possible. And having passed along Miletus, and all that coast of the associates, they disbarked from the gulfe or creke of Bargillae, and came a land neere Iassus. The cittie was held by a garison of the kings: and the Romanes wasted by the way of hostilitie, the territorie about it. Then Aemylius sent certaine to parle with the cheefe citizens and the magistrates, to found them how they were disposed, and also to sollicite them to revolt: but being answered again that it lay not in their owne power to doe as they would, hee marched forward to give an assault to the citie. Now there were certaine Iassians, banished persons, in companie with the Romanes, who in great number besought and importuned the Rhodians, not to suffer a cittie, so neere a neighbour and linked in bloud unto them, for to perish and come to ruine, especially having no way offended: alleadging, that the onely cause of their banishment was their loialtie unto the Romanes, and by the same violence of the kings garrison souldiours, were they also held in awe who remained in the citie, by which themselves had been expelled. For all the Iassians in generall were of one mind, most willing and desirous to avoid and shake off the servitude under the king. The Rhodians were moved in compassion with their praiers, and joining unto them king Eumenes also, partly by shewing the consanguinitie and kindred betweene them, and partly by pitying and lamenting the distressed state of the
citie (besieged, as it were, alreadie by the kings garrison) they prevailed so much, that they forbare to assaile it. So they departed from thence, and because  all other parts were peaceable, they sailed along the coast of Asia, untill they arrived(...). Loryma, a port or haven towne even against Rhodes. There in the Principia began first a secret whispering among the Colonels (which afterwards came to the ears of Aemylius himselfe) namely, That the navie was led away farre ynough off from Ephesus, where by right and of dutie hee was to warre; to the end, that the enemie being left at libertie behind their backes, might attempt to do what he lift without controulment, against so many cities and States of the Romane allies, neere unto him. Aemylius was mooved herewith, and calling unto him the Rhodians, demaunded of them, Whether the whole armada might ride conveniently within the haven of Patara? And when they answered No, he tooke that occasion to passe no further, but to give over the voiage, and so brought backe his ships to Samos.
In this same time Seleucus the sonne of Antiochus, after he had kept his armie all winter time in Aeolis, employing it partly in succouring his associates, and partly in sacking and pilling those whom he could not draw into association, intended to invade the confines of king Eumenes his realme, whiles he (together with the Romanes) was busied farre from home, in assailing the maritime parts of Lycia. And first hee approched Elaea in countenance of an enemie, with banner displaied; but afterwards, leaving to besiege the cittie, after spoile made in hostile manner of the territorie, he marched forward to besiege and assault the head citie and capitall strength of all his kingdomePagamo or (...). Pergamus. Attalus at the beginning seemed rather to brave and provoke him unto fight with his strong guards that hee had placed without the cittie, and excursions with his horsemen and light armour, than to stand upon his guard and defence, and to receive the forces of his  enemie: but at length, seeing by these light skirmishes that hee was in no respectable to match Seleucus, hee retired himselfe within his walls, and so the citie began to bee besieged. And much about the same time, Antiochus also being departed from Apamea, first lay encamped at Sardis, and afterwards, not farre from the campe of Selencus, neere to the head or source of the river

(...). Caicus, with a mightie armie composed of diverse and sundrie nations. The greatest shew of terror in this armie was a redoubled regiment of Gaules, to the number of foure thousand, hired for wages, whome with some few other among them, hee sent out to wast and destroy all parts of the territorie about Pergamus. When newes here of came to Samos, Eumenes at the first, being called away by this warre, (begun at home, even at his very dores) made hast with his fleet to Elaea; where finding in readinesse certaine horsemen and footmen both lightly appointed by their sure convoy and safe conduct, hee came to Pergamus before the enemies had knowledge thereof, or enterprised any thing. Where once againe they began to make light skirmishes by way of excursions, for in truth Eumenes lay off, and was not willing to hazard the maine chaunce upon a throw. Few daies after, both the Romane and Rhodian fleet came from Samos and  were arrived at Elaea for to aid the king Eumenes. When Antiochus was advertised that they had landed their forces at Elaea, and that so many armadaes were met together in that one haven, and hearing with all about the same time, that the Consull was alreadie with a power in Macedonie making preparation of all things for his passage over Hellespont: hee supposed now it was high time (before that he were pressed at once both by land and sea) to treat for peace, and therefore hee seized a certaine hill over against Elaea, to fortifie and encampe in. Where, leaving his whole power of Infanterie, he descended into the plaine, under the very walls of Elaea, with all his Cavallerie, to the number of sixe thousand horse. And sending an herauld to Aemylius, hee gave him to understand, that hee was desirous to have a treatie of peace. Aemylius sent for Eumenes from Pergamus, and they both, together with the Rhodians, debated in counsell what to do. The  Rhodians refused not the offer. But Eu
menes said it was neither honourable to parle of peace at that time, ne yet possible to conclude thereof, if they went about it.
For being as wee are (quoth hee) pinned up within our walls and besieged, how can wee receive from another, conditions of peace, saving our credite and honour? and who will hold that for a firme and assured peace, which we shall contract without the presence of the Consull, without the authoritie of the Senate, and without the graunt of the people of Rome? For I demaund of you, when yee have made a peace, whether you will return presently into Italie or no? whether you will withdraw your fleet and armie? or rather wait and expect to know the Consull his mind and advise, the Senats pleasure and ordenance, and the generall assent of the people in that behalfe? It remaineth then after that is done, that you stay still in Asia, and that your forces being brought backe againe into their wintering  harbours, (after they have done with warfare) fall to consume and eat out our allies, by charging them with provision of victuals: and afterwards, if it shall so please the higher powers, and those that are in authoritie so to ordaine, we must begin that war anew, which now we are able (if we slacke not the time, nor stop the forward course wherein we are) before winter come, with the favor and power of the gods, to finish and bring to a finall end. This advise tooke place; ad answere was returned unto Antiuchus, that there could be no treatie of peace before the Consull his comming. Antiochus having thus in vaine fought for peace, when he had first sorraied and wasted the territorie of Elaea, and afterwards of Pergamus, left his sonne Seleucus there, and went himselfe in person toLeudrimus. Adramytteum, pilling and spoiling all the way as he journeyed, in all kind of hostilitie. Now this territorie is a rich country, called, The champaine plaines of Thebe: much renoumed  by the Poet Homer in his poeme; and in no one place besides of all Asia got the kings souldiers a greater bootie and more pillage. Thithe
r arrived also to Adramytteum both Aemythus and Eumenes (having set a compasse by sea) for the defense of the said citie. During this time, they sent for a thousand foote, and a hundred horse out of Achaea to come unto Elaea: all which forces were commaunded by captaine Diophanes. So soone as they were disbarked and landed, there were readie to receive them certeine men sent from Attalus of purpose to meete them, who by night conducted them to Pergamus. They were all old souldiours, and well experienced in feares of warre: and their leader Diophanes had bene brought up and trained under Philepaemenes, the greatest warrior in those days of all the Greekes, who tooke but two dayes for to rest his horse and men, and to take view of the enemies gards, namely, in what places and at what time  they used customably either to come forward, or to retire. The kings souldiours were approched almost to the very foote of the hill, where the citie is situate. By meanes whereof they might forage behind at their will, and there was not one issued out of the citie so much as to launce a dart aloufe against the corps de gard of the enemies. After they were once so neere driven for feare, that they were faine to keepe themselves close within the walls, the kings soldiers without,

began first to contemne, and afterwards to neglect them. Many of them had not their horses  so much as sadled and bridled, and some few were left in armes and in ordinance of battaile: the rest were gone aside and spred over all parts of the champaine: some went to play and tooke themselves to youthfull sports and wanton riot: others fell to feeding, pampering their bellies, and making good cheere under couvert shade, and many were laid along asleepe. Diophanes beheld all the manner hereof aloft from an high turret of the citie Pergamus, and presently gave commaundement to his souldiers to take armes and to be readie at the gate. Himselfe went to Attalus, and told him, that he purposed to assaile the enemies corps de gard. Attalus (although he were very loth) gave him leave; for he saw full well, that he was so fight with one hundred horse against three hundred: and one thousand foote against four thousand. Being out of the gate, he sat him downe not far from the enemies corps deard, waiting when some good opportunitie  and occasion would offer it selfe. Both they within Pergamus of one side, deemed this to be sollie rather than hardinese; and also the enemies on the other side making towards them for a while, and perceiving them not to stirre, altered nothing of their usuall negligence, and that which more was, made a mockery and skorne of their small number. Diophanes kept his men still a good time, as if he had brought them forth only for a shew, to see and to be seene: but after he perceived once the enemies to be disbanded out of their ranks and raunges, he commaunded the footmen to make all the hast they could after, whiles himselfe leading the way first among his horsemen; ran with his whole troupe upon the spurre as hard as ever he could, and setting up a shout and cry alowd on all hands, as well with foote as horse, charged sodainly upon the enemies gards, ere they were ware of them. Man and horse both were greatly skared:
and the  horses especially having broken their collers and halters where with they stood tied, made foule worke and much trouble among their owne partie. Some few of the horses kept their standing still unaffrighted, and even those they had much ado to saddle, to bridle, and to mount upon; with so great a terrour came the Achaeans, and with much more than so small a number could be thought to make. And as for the footmen in order arranged and well provided, they fell vpon those that were negligently dispersed abroad, ere they looked for them, and in manner halfe asleepe. Great execution and butcherie was committed upon them all the fields over, and they fled amaine. Diophanes having followed the chase as they ran away in skattering wise, so farre as he might well with safetie of himselfe, returned to the guard and defence of the citie, having won great honor to the nation of the Achaeans by this exploit: for not only the men, but women also  beheld this service, and looked on him from the walls of Pergamus. The next day after, the kings Corps de gards were better ordered and kept closer together, yea and retired halfe a mile farther from the citie, where they encamped themselves. The Achaeans likewise much about the same time advanced to the very same place. Many houres together they looked one upon another who would begin first, expecting every minute when the charge should be given. But after the sonne was neere going downe, and that it was time to returne into the camp, they of the kings part began to ruffle their ensignes and guidons together, and set forward with their bands, ordred in manner of a march for the way, more like than marshalled for to fight a battaile. Diophanes sat still so long as they were within fight: but then he charged upon their rereward, with as great violence and furie, as the day before, and put them againe into so great affright and trouble, that  they gave them leave to wound them on their backs, an
d not one would stay to make head and resist, but trembling for feare, and hardly keeping the order of a march, they were beaten into their camp. This boldness of the Achaeans forced Seleucus to dislodge and remove out of the territorie of Pergamus.
Antiochus after he heard say that the Romanes and Eumenes were come to the defence of Adramytteum, medled no more with the towne itselfe, but after he had laid the fields wast, departed from thence, and forced Peraea, a Colonie of the Mitylenaeans. As for Cotton and Corylenus, Aphrodisias and Pryene, they were won at the first assault, and so he returned to Sardis by Tire. Thiatira. Seleucus remaining still upon the sea coasts, as he affrighted some, so he defended others. The Romane fleete together with Eumenes and the Rhodians sailed first toMirylin. Mitylene, and back againe from thence, returned to Elaea from whence she came. So they held on their course to Phocaea and sel with an island called Bacchius, situate above the citie of the Phocaeans: and after they had pilled and rifled by way of hostilitie the temples, which heretofore they had foreborne, and taken away the images (for the island was magnificently adorned and beautified

 therewith) they crossed over to the citie it selfe, which they assaulted in divers quarters, according as they had divided their forces into three parts: but seeing that it might not be woon with bare skaling and strength of armes, without planting engins of batterie and other fabricks; and besides, that three thousand armed men sent from Antiochus for defense, were entred into the citie, presently they gave over the siege: and the fleete retired to the Ilands, having done no other exploit, but only pilled the territorie about the citie.
This done, it was thought good that Eumenes should have licence to depart into his owne kingdome, that he might provide for the Consull and the armie, all necessaries toward the passage over Hellespontus: also that the Romane and Rhodian fleets should returne to Samos, and there remaine in gard, and have an eye unto Polyxenidas, least he removed from Ephesus and  made some attempt that way. So, the king returned to Elea, the Romanes and Rhodians to Samos, where M. Aemylius the Pretor his brother deparred this life. The Rhodians, after his funerall obsequies performed, sailed to Rhodes with thirteene ships of their owne, one quinquereme galeace of Cous, and one other of Gnidos, there to lye in rode, readie to make head against the fleete, which as the bruit blazed, was aflote and comming out of Syria. Two dayes before that Eudamus losed from Samos with the Armada, thirteene ships sent from Rhodes under the conduct of Admirall Pamphilidas to encounter the said Syriak fleete, taking with them foure other ships, which were for the gard of Caria, delivered from siege Daedala, and other petie forts which the kings souldiers assailed. Then it was advised that Endamus should incontinently set forward on his voyage. And to that fleete which he had under his charge, he adjoyned also foure open  ships. Being departed, he made saile in all hast that he possibly could, and arrived at the port called Megiste: where he overtooke those that were gone before; from whence they came in one band and traine jointlie together unto Phaselis, and then they judged it the best way, in that place to attend the comming of the enemie. This Phaselis standeth upon the confines betweene Lycia and Pamphylia. It lieth farre within the sea, and is the first land that sheweth itselfe, to them that saile from Cilicia to Rhodes; and from thence a man may ken and discover ships under sayle a farre off: for which cause especially, this was chosen for a sit and
convenient place, wherein they might encounter the enemies fleete. But by reason the aire was unholsome, and the season of the yeere unhealthfull (for it was midsommer) and the smels and stinking savours such, as they had not bene acquainted with; many contagious diseases and maladies  which they foresaw not, began to spread commonly abroad, and especially among the mariners: for feare of which plague and mortalitie, they departed from thence, and passed beyond the gulph of Pamphylium: and being arrived in the river Eurymedon, they received advertisement from the Aspendians, that the enemies were already before Sida. Those of the kings side had sailed but slowly in regard of the adverse season of the winds named(...). Etesiae, which keepe their set and certein time, like as those do which they callWesterne winds in the spring, or March-winds. Favonij. Now of the Rhodians there were 32 quadtireme Gallies, and 4 other triremes besides. The kings fleet consisted of 37, and those of greater burden and wastie: among which were three mightie Galleaces ofHepteres. 7 banks of ores on a side, and four of(...). 6, besides 10 ordinary trireme gallies. There were others also that knew by a sentinell or watch-towre standing on a certein high place, how the enemies were at hand. The next  morning by breake of day both these fleets set forth of the haven, as if they would have fought that very day. And after that the Rhodians had passed the cape, which from Sida hangeth over into the sea, then presently were they discovered of the enemies, and the enemies likewise descried by them. The left-wing of the kings fleet, flanked with them maine sea, was commaunded by Anniball: and Apolionius one of his gallants and courtiers led the right: so as now they had managed their ships broad in a front-ranke. The Rhodians advanced forward ordred in length, and casting their battaile into files. In the vaward the Admirall ship of Eudamus was formost; Caryeitus governed the reregard; and Pamphilidas had the conduct of the middle ward. Eudamus seeing the enemies battaile arraunged and redy for conflict, put forth into the open sea, commanding those that followed after in order to keepe their array, and so directly to affront the enemie: which  at the first caused some trouble, for he was not so farre advanced into the deepe, that all the ships could be set in array along the landside: and besides, himselfe making too much hast, with five ships only encountred Anniball, for the rest followed not after him, because they were bidden to raunge afront. Now the reereward had no roume left them toward the land: and thus whiles they hastily were jumbled together, the sight by that time was begun in the right wing

against Anniball. But at one instant the Rhodians cast off all feare, as well in regard of the goodnes  of their ships, as of their owne experience and usuall practise in service at sea. For their ships with great quicknesse and agilitie making saile into the maine sea, made roume for every one that came after along the land side: and withall, if any one hapned to run upon a ship of the enemies with her piked beake head, either it rent the prow, or wiped away the ores, or passing cleere through, betweene the ranks and files turned againe and charged upon the poupe. But the thing which terrified the enemie most was this, That a great galeace of the kings which had seven bankes of ores on a side, was bouged and tooke a leake with one onely knocke, that it received by a Rhodian ship farre lesse: whereupon the right wing of the enemie doubtlesse enclined to flye away. But Anniball pressed Eudamus very much in the open sea, most of all with multitude of ships: for otherwise in all respects Eudamus had the ods and better hand of him by  farre: and certeinly he had compassed and enclosed Eudamus round, but that a flag was put out of the admirall, (by which signall the dispersed ships are woont to rally themselves togither): whereupon all those that had gotten the better of the enemy in the right wing, made hast to joyn in one for to succour their fellowes. Then Anniball also and the ships about him, tooke their flight: but the Rhodians were not able to make way after them and to mainteine the chase, by reason that their rowers many of them were sicke, and therefore the sooner weary. Whereupon they cast ancre in the maine sea, and stayed to eat and take some refection for to strengthen their bodies. And in this while Eudamus espyed and beheld the enemies how they haled and towed by ropes at the taile of the open ships (that went only with ores) certaine other which were lame, maimed, sore brused and cracked: and might see 20 others not much sounder than they, to leave  the rest and depart: wherupon causing an Oyez and silence to be made from an high turret in the fore-castle of the admirall, Arise my hearts (saith hee) and see a pleasant sight yonder and a goodly spectacle. So they all arose at once and beheld how the enemies were afraid, and what poore shift they made in hast to flie, and with one voice they all in a manner cryed out to follow after and pursue them. Now Eudamus his owne ship was shaken in many places and sore brused; whereupon he commaunded Pamphilidas and Chariclitus to make way after them, so farre forth as they thought they might without danger. And for a good time they held them in chace: but seeing Anniball approching neere the shore, and fearing least the wind would locke them within the enemies coast, they returned toward Eudamus, and drew along with them the great galleare which they tooke, and which at the first encounter was peirced, and with much adoe trained  it to Phaselis. From thence they retired themselves to Rhodes, not so joyous for this victorie, as blaming one another that they had not either sunke or taken the whole fleete of the enemies, having so good meanes as they had to doe it. Anniball daunted with this one infortunate battell, durst not even then passe along the river of Lycia, but desired to joyne unto the old fleet of the kings as soone as possibly hee could. To impeach him for effecting that, the Rhodians set out Chariclitus and twenty war ships with piked stems, toward Patara and the port of Megiste; and commaunded Eudmus to returne unto the Romanes to Samos with seven of the tallest ships in all that fleet whereof he had the commaund: to the end, that hee might induce the Romanes with his counsell and advise, yea and with all the countenance and authoritie that he had, force them to lay siege unto Patara and to assault it. The Romanes tooke great joy and contentment, first at the news and report of this victory, and afterwards at the returne of the Rhodians. And it seemed, if that one city stood not in their way to stay them, and that they were once rid of that care, they would without any let and empeachment, make all the sea coasts sure enough for any daunger and domage from those quarters. But because Antiochus was departed from Sardis, the Romanes held them backe, and would not suffer them to abandon the guard and defence of Aeolis and Ionia, for feare least the cities upon the sea side might be surprised. And so they sent Pamphilidas with four covered ships, to the fleet that lay about Patara.
Antiochus gathered together not only the garrisons and aids of all the cities that were about him, but also addressed his embassadours with letters to Prusias the king of Birthynia, wherein he gave out hard words of the Romanes for their passage into Asia: namely, That their comming  only was for this, to demolish, put downe, and overthrew all kingdoms, and to set up the only Romane Empire, that none els might stand in the whole world. That Philip and Nabu already were subdued and deposed, and now himselfe was to make the third, against whome they were come. Neither would they make an end there but goe on still, like a continuall fire that burneth forward,

 and take all afore them, and ever as they vanquished one, proceed to another that is next. And no doubt, they would make a bridge of him to passe onward into Bithynia, now that Eumenus hath gently taken upon his necke the yoke of voluntary servitude. Prusias was somewhat touched with these letters, but when there came others written from Scipio the Consull and his brother Africanus especially, he was wholly averted from enterteining any such suspition. For Africanus besides the continuall custome that the people of Rome had, to advaunce and amplifie the majesty of KK. their allies and consederates, with all kind of honour; alledged for his part, the domesticall examples of his owne house and family: inducing Prusias thereby to enter into a desire to-win his love and friendship. For he discoursed and said, That those princes and pettie KK. in Spaine, whome he had received into his protection, he left behind him when hee went away,  mightie monarkes: also, that he not only had placed and established Masanissa in his fathers realme and throne, but setled him in the kingdome also of Syphax, who before had chased and expelled him: so as now he was not only the richest potentate and most wealthy king of all Affricke, but also for majestie and puissant forces a paragon, equall to any other king in the whole world. As for Philip and Nabis, enemies they were and vanquished by T. Quintius, howbeit they remained kings afterwards within their owne realmes. And Philip verify the yeere that is past, had his tribute forgiven him and his sonne an hostage delivered unto him: yea and some cities without the dominion of Macedonie, have received him as their king; and the Romane Generals have winked thereat and beene contented. And surely Nabis had beene likewise graced and honoured, but for his owne peevish folly first, and the faiterous falshood afterwards of the Aetolians,  which was his utter undoing and overthrow. But the chief thing of all that most confirmed the mind of King Prusias, was the comming of Livius vnto him in embassage from Rome, he, who aforetime in qualitie of Pretour, had been Admirall of the navie. Who shewed and declared unto him, how the hope of victory was much more assured to the Romanes than to king Antiochus; and withall, how the Romanes would be the faster and surer friend of the twaine, yea and make more conscience of keeping amitie.
Antiochus being put besides all hope of the association with Prusias, departed to Ephesus from Sardis, to visite and see the fleet, which for certaine moneths had been rigged and in readinesse: and this he did the rather, because he saw that hee could not hold out with the Romane armie and the two Scipioes the commaunders thereof, than for that his sea-service in itselfe at any  time before sped well, or could assure him now of great and certaine successe. Yet some little dram he had of good hope for the present, in that his intelligence was, that a great part of the Rhodian fleet was about Patara, and king Eumenes also with all his own ships departed into Hellespontus, to meet with the Consull. Besides this, in some measure his spirit was puffed up with the remembrance, how the Rhodian Armada had beene defeated at Samos by a cautelous plot and practice contrived before hand. Having laid these conceits for a ground, he sent Polyxenidas away with the navie, to hazard the fortune of a battell in some fort or other (it made no matter how:) whiles himselfe in person led his whole armie to Notium (a towne of the Colophonians, seated upon the sea, and distant about two miles from the auncient citie Colophon.) The citie it selfe he had a good mind to conquer and bring in subjection unto him: for, being so neer unto Ephesus  as it was, there could not any thing bee done either by sea or land, but it was within the eie of the Colophonians, and by their meanes notified streightwaies to the Romanes. Now hee made full account that they would remoove their fleet from Samos to succour that a associate citie of theirs, and so Polyxenidas might thereby take his time and good opportunitie to execute some notable exploit. Wherupon he went in hand to plant Fabrickes against Colophon, and having raised his rampiers, and cast trenches on both sides alike, even to the every sea, he approached with mantellets and terraces, as well the one part as the other, close unto the walls, and under the(...). roufworkes, plaied upon them with the push and peise of the ram. The Colophians much troubled and affrighted with these daungers and distresses, sent their Oratours to Samos unto L. Aemylius, to crave in humble manner the aid and succour of the Pretour and people of Rome. Aemylius  was much discontented and offended in his heart, that he had made so long abode at Samos and performed no service. Nothing lesse thought he than that Polyxenidas, whom twise alreadie in vain he had chalenged and bidden battel, would now offer to fight. He reputed it also for a disgrace and shamefull indignitie unto him, that Eumenes his fleet assisted the Consull to wast over the legions into Asia, and himselfe was assigned and enjoined to succour and aid the citie of Colophon

besieged, the issue whereof would be so doubtfull and uncertaine. Eudamus the Rhodian, who was the man than had deteined and kept him still at Samos, when hee was desirous to passe over into Hellespont, yea, and all the rest were instant with him, shewing and declaring how much better it was, either to deliver his allies from siege, or to defeat the fleet againe, which had beene once vanquished, and so to put the enemie quite besides the possession of the sea; than with the abandoning of his confederates, and betraying Asia both sea and land into the hands of Antiochus, to depart into Hellespont (where Eumenes with his fleet was sufficient to hold him play) and to quit that part of the warre which was committed to his charge. Well, they losed from Samos to provide victuals, for that all their owne provision was spent, and shaped themselves to crosse over unto Chios. That was the garner and storehouse of the Romanes, and the very place unto which all the ships of burden, and the hulkes sent out of Italie, used to set saile and direct their  course. So they set a compasse about, toward the coast of the Island that lay farthest off from the citie, opposite to the Northeast, in regard of Chios and Erythraea. And as they were about to passe over thither, the Pretour was certified by letters, that great store of corne was come out of Italie to Chios: that the ships which were charged with wine, were kept backe by contrarie and crossewinds. Likewise, reported it was, that the Teians had furnished king Antiochus his fleet with victuals plenteously and liberally, and had promised also unto him five thousand vessels of wine. Whereupon he shifted saile suddainely in the middest of his direct course, and made head for Teios, intending either with their good wils to serve himselfe of the provision prepared for the enemie, or else to hold them for no better than enemies. Having directed the prows of their ships toward the land, they might deserie as it were, a fifteene ships neer unto Myonesus. Which  the Pretour supposing at the first to bee of the kings fleet, resolved to make way after them: but afterwards it appeared, they were brigantines or pinnaces, and certaine small barkes of rovers and men of warre. These rovers having harried and spoiled all the maritime coasts of the Chians, were upon their returne with great store of prises and pillage: but when they discovered a fleet in the deepe sea a farre off, they made all the saile they could, and fled. Yare of fleerage they were and good of saile, by reason that their vessels were more light, and made of purpose to tidway, and besides neerer they were to land. And therefore they had recovered Myonesus, before the fleet could come any thing neere unto them. The Pretor thinking verily to force them out of the haven, made after without direction of a skillfull pilot, and knowledge of the place. Now this Myonesus is a promontorie or cape betweene Teos and Samos, a very mountaine made in fashion  of a steeple, broad ynough at the foot, but rising narrower full, and runneth up to the top sharpe pointed. On the maine or land side it hath one advenue by a streight and narrow path. From the sea it is founded upon rockes, beaten and eaten with the continuall surging waves of the sea, insomuch, as in some places the cliffes that hang over, bear more into the sea than the vessels that he under in the harbour, take up of the sea. The Pretor with his ships durst approach neer unto those crags, for feare of being within the shot of the pirates, who were perched upon the top of those steepe rockes, and so they spent that day and lay off. At the last, a little before night, they gave over that vaine enterprise without effect, and the morrow after arrived at Teios; and having lodged their ships within the harbour, which themselves call Geraisticus (and it lyeth out at the backeside of the cittie) the Pretour set ashore, and sent out his souldiours to forray the territorie  about the citie. The Teians seeing how their lands were spoiled even under their very noses, addressed certaine Oratours to the Romane Admirall, arraied all in white, after the manner of humble suppliants. And as they would have seemed to excuse their cittie, for having done or said anything against the Romanes rending to hostilitie; hee both charged them directly, that they had releeved the fleet of his enemies with victuals, and also told them what quantitie of wine moreover, they had promised to Polyxenidas. But and if they could be content to doe the like by the Romane fleet, he would recall his souldiours from pillage, otherwise hee would repute them for his enemies. The embassadours aforesaid made relation of this heavie answere. Whereupon the magistrates of the cittie assembled the people together, for to consult and conclude about this matter what they were best to doe. Thither as it happened, was Polyxenidas arrived with the  kings armada; who having losed from Colophon, when hee heard that the Romanes were departed from Samos, that they had chased the Pirates as far as Myonesus, and were now wasting and harrying the lands of the Teians, also that their ships ankered in the rode Geraisticus, himselfe also cast anker over against Myonesus, hard by an Island which the sailers and marriners call Macris, in

 a secret bay hard by, escouting and espying from this neere harbour, what the enemies did and intended. And at the first in good hope he was to discomfite and defeat the Romane fleet, like as hee had before time the Rhodian armada neere unto Samos, by seizing the mouth of the haven, and empeaching their issue forth. For this bay was in all respects like unto the other, lying just betweene two capes, which meet so neere, and in manner enclose the mouth thereof, that hardly two ships at once can goe forth together. And to this purpose Polyxenidas intended in the night season to take possession, and make himselfe sure of the said streights, there to place ten gallies under either cape, which standing there at the vauntage, should from both points flanke the broad sides of his enemies ships in their going forth; and withall out of his other vessels to disbarke and land armed souldiours, like as he had done at Panormus, and so at once to assaile them both by  sea and land, and make an end of them for all. Which designement of his no doubt had taken effect, but that the Romanes, after that the Teians had promised them to doe whatsoever they should commaund, thought it more commodious for the receiving of their provision of victuals, to passe with their ships unto the other harbour which was before the cittie, to the open sea. Some say that Eudamus the Rhodian, shewed the inconvenience and discommoditie of the other harbour, by occasion that two gallies fortuned in that streight to bee so entangled, that they brake one anothers oares with justeling together. And among other motives the Pretour was induced to chaunge the harbour, because from the land side there, hee should lie within daunger, considering that Antiochus himselfe was not encamped farre off. Thus the fleet being brought about close to the cittie side, the souldiours and marriners (without the  knowledge of any commaunders) were disbarked, for to dispose and dispense the victuals and wine especially, to every ship. But about noon-tide a certaine peasant of the countrey chaunced to bee brought before the Pretour, who have intelligence, That there was a fleet of ships which two dayes already rode at anker under the island Macris; and that but a while agoe, certain vessels of them were seene to weigh anker, as if they would hoise up saile and bee gone. The Pretour mooved at this sodaine occurrent, commaunded the trumpets to sound the alarme, and to give knowledge and warning, that in case any were stragling abroad in the fields, they should retire. The Colonels he sent into the citie to gather the souldiors togither and the mariners, that they might repaire to ship-board. This alarme caused as great a trouble and confusion, as usually is seene in a sodaine skarefire, or when a citie is surprised by the enemies. Here was skudding  into the city to recall their fellowes; there was running out of the citie to recover their shippes; not knowing who commaunded, by reason of the dissonant noise of men and sound of trumpet: howbeit as hap was, at length they ran all toward the ships, but in such a hurlyburly and disorder, that they scarcely knew their own vessels; or if they did, they could hardly for the croud and prease, get thither and embarke themselves. Neither had this affright passed cleere without daunger both by sea and land, but that Aemylius gave direction to every one what to do, and put out of the haven first himselfe with the Admirall ship into the open sea, and there received every vessel as they followed one after another in their order, and raunged them all affront: and if Eudamus also with the Rhodian fleet had not staied at the shore to see good order, that the soldiers might be set aboard without hurrying in fearefull hast, and every ship goe foorth as it was  fitted and made ready. By this meanes both the foremost of the vaward were arraunged in the fight of the Pretor, and the Rhodians also kept their order in the reregard in such sort, as they put themselves into the open sea in as good array, as if they had seene the kings fleet under saile. But they were betweene the two promontories, Myonesus and Corycus, before they descried the enemie. The kings armada came forward in long files, two and two in a ranke, who displaied and spred themselves also affront towards the wing in such wise, that they might be able to compasse and enclose the right wing of the enemie. Which Eudamus the arriere-admirall perceiving, and seeing withall that the Romans could not possibly make head alike and extend themselves as broad as the enemie, and were at the point already in the right wing to be environed, made hast with his omne vessels (for the Rhodian barkes were of all other in the whole fleet swifrest by  farre) and after he had fronted equally and matched wing for wing, he made head with his owne ship against the very admirall of the enemies, wherein Polyxenidas himselfe was abourd. By this time the battell began between both the maine fleets, all at once from every part. Of the Romans side there sought fourescore in all, where of two and twentie were Rhodians. The enemies armada consisted of fourescore and nine, all ships of the greatest wastie and making, and had among

them three galeaces of fixe banks of ores on a side, and two of seven. For goodnes and strength  of ships, as also for valiancie of souldiours, the Romanes farre surpassed the Rhodians. But for agilitie and nimblenes of their vessels, for skilfull knowledge of pilots, and expert cunning and redinesse of mariners, the Rhodians were as much beyond them. And those above all the rest that caried fire before them in their noses, troubled and skared the enemies most: and that stratageme and devise which had bene their only help and meanes of safetie, when they were surprised and beset at Panormus, was now the thing that stood them in best steed to win the victorie. For the kings ships fearing the fire that threatned their very faces, turned aside, because they would not run afront with their proes: so as, they neither could themselves smite and hurt the enemies with their brasen pikes in the beake head, ne yet avoid them, but expose their own broad sides open to receive all pushes and violence from them. If any one fortuned to encounter and  run upon them, she was sure to be paid and sped with fire that was flung and cast into her: and more running there was to quench the same, than otherwise to fight. Howbeit, the resolute valour of the Romane souldiours (which ever in warre prevaileth most) was it that did the deede. For after the Romanes by fine force had broken and cloven the maine battailon of the enemie in the very middest, they turned about againe, and presented themselves behind, and plaid upon the backs of the kings ships whiles they fought afront and made head against the Rhodians: and thus at one instant the battailon in the mids, and the ships in the left wing that served king Antiochus, were beset round about, and sunke to the botome of the sea. The right wing as yet entier and sound, was more terrified at the losse and overthrow of their fellowes, than for any proper danger of their owne. Howbeit, after they saw the other inserted, and the Admirall her  selfe with Polyxenidas in her, to abandon her companions and to halfe up sailes, they likewise in hast set up all their cloth and small trinquet sailes (for a good forewind they had for Ephesus) and fled as fast away as they could. Two and fortie ships they lost in this fight: of which thirteene were bourded and taken for the use of the Romanes, the rest were either consumed with fire, or devoured of the sea. Two Romane ships were shattered and broken to fitters, and some other hurt, bruised and cracked. One Rhodian chaunced to be taken by a notable and memorable adventure. For having with her piked beake head stricken a Sidonian ship, with the violence of the blow she shooke out her owne anker, which by one of the floukes tooke fast hold as if it had bene a grapling hooke by the pro of the other ship. The Rhodians much troubled herewith, gave over rowing streight, as willing and desirous to be loose and parted from the enemie: and whiles they were busie thereabout, the gable which the anker drew with it caught among the ores of her owne ship, and swoopt them cleane away, and so left one side of it naked, whereby the ship being much weakened and enseebled, was taken by the other that was smitten and tied fast unto her. Much after this manner was the battaile fought at sea neere Myonesus. Whereupon Antiochus was sore affrighted: for being thus dispossed of the sea, he distrusted himselfe that he should not be able to hold and defend the places farther off: and therefore commaunded the garison to retire from Lysimachia, for feare it should be surprised there by the Romanes. But this was but a bad peece of counsell, as the sequell and issue proved afterwards. For it had bene an easie matter not only to defend Lysimachia against the first assault of the Romanes, but also to hold out the siege all winter: yea and by drawing out the time on length, to bring the very assailants themselves lying in leaguer, to extreme necessitie and want of all things: during which space they might have taken some occasion and opportunitie, to find a meane and make way for peace. Neither did he only quit Lysimachia and leave it for the enemies after this unfortunate battaile, but also raised his siege before Colophon and dislodged, yea and retired himselfe to Sardis: from whence he sent into Cappadocia to Ariarates for aid, and to all other places where he could, to gather more forces: and now was he set upon no deseign els, but to geve battaile, and to hazard all upon the fortune of the field.
After this Navall victorie, Regillus Aemylius sailed directly to Ephesus, where he embattailed his ships in array even before the haven, and when by this bravado he had at last wrong again from the enemies a plaine and evident confession that they had abandoned the sea unto him, he set saile for Chius, unto which he had intended to shape his course from Samos before the late battaile upon the sea. There he repaired and calked his ships which were shaken and cracked in the foresaid fight: which done, he sent L. Aemylius Scaurus with thirtie saile toward Hellespontus to transport the armie. And when he had rewarded the Rhodian ships with part of the

 pillage, and honored them with the navall spoiles, he gave them the renvoie, and sent them home. But the Rhodians lustily out-sailed Scaurus, and prevented his ships to set over the forces of the Consull: and after they had performed that service also, then they returned to Rhodes.
The Romane Armada sailed from Chios to Phocaea. This citie is seated farre within the gulfe of the sea, builded so, as that it lieth out in length. The wall conteineth in compasse the space of two miles and an halfe: and from both sides it groweth narrow still, and meeteth in the mids, resembling the forme of a wedge orIn (...). coin, which the inhabitants themselves call Lampter, in which place the citie is a mile broad and a quarter with the vantage. From which canton or corner there is a banke of firme land running a mile on end into the sea like a tongue, which devideth the haven just in the mids, marked out (as it were) just by a certeine line.  Where it joyneth to the narrow streights it hath two most sure harbours of both sides, and those lying two contrarie wayes. That which looketh toward the South, is called according as it is in deed, Naustathmos [namely, a ship-rode, or harbour] for it is able to receive a great number of ships: the other haven is neere unto the very Lampter aforesaid. When the Romane sleete was once possessed of both these most sure and safe harbours, the Pretour thought good before he set in hand either to skale the walls, or to raise any fabricks and plant engins against the citie, to send certein of purpose to sound the minds and affections of the principall citizens and the magistrates within. But after he perceived they were obstinately bent, and would not come on, he began to lay batterie against it in two severall quarters. The one part was not much peopled, and had but few dwelling houses in it; and the temples of their gods tooke up a good space thereof;  and there began he first to approch with the ramme, and therewith to batter the walls, and shake the turrets: and by that time that the multitude ran thither in great numbers, and presented themselves readie to defend, the ramme was jurring also at the other part: So as now the wals were laid along in both places: and upon the fall therof whiles some of the Roman souldiers presently gave the assault at the very breach, mounting and marching upon the ruines of the stones that were falne: others also assaid to gaine the top of the upright wals with skaling ladders. But the townesmen withstood them so stiffely, and with such resolution, that it was wel seene they reposed more hope of defense in armes and valor, than in the strength of their wals. Whereupon the Pretor seeing in what danger his souldiers stood, and fearing to expose and sacrifice them ere they were aware to the fury of these people so enraged like desperate and mad persons, commaunded  to sound the retreat. And notwithstanding the assault ceased and was given over, yet betooke not the townesmen themselves to rest and repose, but ran from all parts every one, to raise countermures, fill up the breaches, and repaire the ruines where the wall was downe. As they were wholly employed about this businesse, Q. Antonius sent from the Pretour, came toward them: who, after hee had reprooved and rebuked their wilfull obstinacie, and made remonstrance unto them, that the Romanes had more care and regard than they themselves of the citie, that by continuall assaults and batteries it should not utterly be destroyed: and how if they would be reclaimed and forgoe their outragious folly, he would make them this offer, That they should yeeld under the same condition and in those very termes, as afore-time they had submitted to C. Livius when they came under his protection: At the hearing  of that, they demaunded and had five dayes space to consider of the matter: during which time they made meanes to receive some aid from Antiochus; but after their embassadors whom they dispatched to the king, had made relation. That there was no succour to be expected from him; then they set open their gates, having articled and capitulated beforehand, that no outrage by way of hostilitie should be exercised and committed upon them. As the Rom. entred into the city with banners displayed, the Pretour declared with a loud voice, That his will and pleasure was they should be spared, for as much as they had yeelded. Whereat the souldiours on all hands set up a great cry, That it was an intollerable shame that the Phocaeans (who were never true and loyall confederates, but alwayes dogged and malicious enemies) should goe away so scotfree, and not suffer for their sinnes. At which word (as if the Pretour had given them a signall  of ransacking) they ran into all parts of the citie to rifle and spoile. Aemylius at first stayed them what he could and reclaimed them againe, saying, That it was not the manner to sacke cities rendred by composition, but such as were forced and woon by assault; and even those also were at the disposition of the Generall and not of the souldiours. But seeing that they in their angrie mood of revenge, and covetous desire of goods, were of more power than the respective reverence

of his person, his qualitie and commaundement; hee sent out beadles and trumpetters  throughout the city, charging all persons of free condition whatsoever, to repaire before him into the market place, to the end, that no vilany and outrage might be done upon their bodies. And so the Pretor did his best to perform his word and promise, in whatsoever lay in his power: for he restored unto them their city, their lands, and their own laws. And for that the winter approched, he made choise of the two harbors of Phocaea to bestow his ships therfor the winter time.
Neere about that time, the Consull having passed beyond the borders of the Adrians and Maronites, received newes, that the kings navie was defeated at Myonesus, and Lysunachia disfurnished of the garrison: and this latter tidings was more acceptable and pleasing unto him, than the other of the navall victory; and especially, when they came thither: where in very truth the city (plenteously stored with all sort of victuals, as if they had been provided of purpose against  the comming of the army) received them courteously; whereas they made no other account, but to endure extremity of want and painfull travell in besieging thereof. There they abode some few daies as it were in campe, untill such time as their carriages and sickely persons of their traine might reach unto them; such as they had left behind in all the forts and castles of Thrace, wearyed with long journey and enfebled with divers infirmities. When all were come and well refreshed and recovered, they put themselves againe in their journey, and matching through Chersonesus, they came to Hellespont: where, finding all things in readines for their transporting (such was the industrious care and diligence of king Eumenes) they passed over without trouble and molestation into the peaceable coasts of their allies and friends, without empeachment of any person, notwithstanding some ships arrived in one place, and some in  another. And this was the thing that much contented the Romanes and mightily encouraged them, to see they had so free passage into Asia, which they made full reckoning would have ben a matter of great difficultie and trouble. After this, they encamped and made their abode a certaine time neere Hellespont, by occasion of those daies which happened then to be, wherein the Salij used to daunce with their scutchions called Ancilia; during which time they made scruple of conscience to take any journey [untill those Ancilia were bestowed againe in the temple of Mars.] By reason of which daies, P. Scipio also withdrew himselfe apart from the armie upon a more strict regard of conscience and religion, which touched him neerer than other, because he was himselfe one of the Salij, and was the cause that the army stayed behind and came not forward to overtake the campe.
And even then there happened to come unto the camp from Antiochus, one Heraclides a Bizantine, having in charge to treat as touching a peace: and good hope he conceived to obtein the same with ease, by reason of the long abode and stay of the Romanes in that one place: of whome hee had looked for no other, but that as soone as they had set foote in Asia, they would have marched apace straightwaies against the kings campe. Howbeit this course he tooke, not to goe directly unto the Consull before he had spoken and conferred with Scipio, (and in deed such direction and charge he had from the king himselfe) in whome he had reposed his greatest hope: for besides his magnanimitie and noble courage, as also the satietie of glory and honour, whereof already hee had his full, (great inducements unto the king that hee would bee easily wrought and made most pliable to hearken after peace) all the world knew full well how soberly  he had carried himselfe in his victories, first in Spaine and afterwards in Africke: and more than all this, a sonne of his was captive in the said kings hands: But where, when, and by what chance he was taken prisoner, writers agree not no more than in many things els. Some say, that in the beginning of the warre, he was beset and enclosed round within the kings ships, at what time as hee sailed from Chalcis to Oreum. Others write, that after the Romane army was passed over into Asia, hee was sent out in espiall with a troupe of Fregellane horsemen to view and discover the kings campe: and when the kings Cavallerie made out to charge upon them, hee made hast to retire, and in that hurrie his horse fell with him, and so hee and two other men of armes with him, was surprised, taken, and brought to the king. But this one thing is for certeine knowne, that if there had beene sure and firme peace betweene the king and the Romanes, nay if there had beene familiar acquaintance and hospitalitie betweene him and the Scipioes, this young gentleman could not possibly have had more friendly entertainment, not beene more kindly intreated, liberally used, yea and honorably regarded than he was. For these causes the Embassadour attended the comming of Scipio; and so soone as he was arrived, presented

 himselfe unto the Consull, requesting that hee might deliver his message and be heard. Whereupon in a frequent assembly he had audience given him, and thus hee spake: Whereas (quoth he) there have beene divers and sundry embaslages passed to and fro as touching peace, and no good as yet done; I lay this for a ground and assure my selfe now to speed, because the sonner embassadours hither to have effected and obteined nothing: for in all those treaties and disputations the question was about Smyrna, Lampsacus, Alexandria, Troas, and Lysimachia, which is in Europe. Of which cities, the king my master hath already quit Lysimachia, to the end you should not say, that he hath any one city at all within Europe: and as for those other in Asia, he is ready to surrender them also; yea and all the rest whatsoever, which the Romans would recover out of the kings hands and dominions, in regard they had somtime sided and taken part  with him. And for the charges which the Romanes have defraied about this warre, the king will be willing to disburse and make good the one moitie unto them againe. And thus much spake he concerning the articles and conditions of the peace. The rest of his speech behind, was bestowed in advertising and putting them in mind of the alternative revolution of this world and the affaires thereof; that as they should use their owne good fortune and prosperity with measure and moderation, so they ought not to presse down others in their adversity; but hold themselves contented within the bounds and limits of Europe, and that was a dominion sufficient (a man would thinke) and exceeding great: considering this, that it is an easier matter to win one thing after another by way of conquest, than to hold and keepe them all togither when they are upon. To conclude, if the Romans were minded to dismember any part from Asia, so they would  make an end once, and limit out the same within certaine precincts without any further doubt and difference, the king for the love of peace and concord, would suffer the Romanes in their unmeasurable desire and appetite, to surmount and outgoe his temperance and moderation. But those matters which the Embassadour supposed were of great importance and effectuall to obtaine peace, the Romanes made a pish at it, and lightly regarded: for they judged it but meet and reason, that the king should discharge all the expences they had been at in this warre, considering through his default it first arose: also that he ought to withdraw his garrisons not only out of Ionia and Aeolis: but also, like as all Greece hath beene made free and delivered, so the Greeke cities likewise in Asia ought to be enfranchised and set at liberty: which possibly might not be unlesse Antiochus were disseized of the possession of all Asia on this side the mountaine  Taurus. The Embassadour perceiving well, that there was no reason to be had in the assembly, assayed privatly to sound and to win the heart and good will of Scipio, according as hee had in charge from the king. And first this way he went to worke and said, That the king was minded to send him his sonne againe freely without ransome: then (ignorant as hee was both of Scipio his nature and the manner of Romanes) hee promised him a mighty masse of gold, yea and to be made equall companion in the government of the whole kingdome (the kings name and royall style onely reserved) in case he would be an instrument and meanes to effectuate peace. To these motives and offers Scipio returned this answere, That you neither know the Romanes all in generall, nor my selfe in perticular unto whom you were sent, I lesse marvell, seeing you are altogether ignorant of the state of him who hath sent you hither. For if yee had meant to have  sought for peace at our hands, as of men who were in care for the doubtfull event and issue of the warre, yee should have held and kept Lysimachia still, for to have empeached our entrance into Chersonnesus, or else ye should have made head against us in Hellespontus, and staied our passage into Asia: but now seeing yee have graunted passage into Asia, and suffered your selves not onely to be bridled and curbed, but also to bee yoked, and like beasts to beare and draw too; since I say there is no remedie but ye must endure to be under our subjection, what equall and indifferent meanes of treatie is there left for you? Now, as concerning my sonne, I will accept it as a great present, and beseeming the munificence and liberalitie of a king, in case hee send him to me againe. As for the other matters, I pray God I be never driven in regard of mine estate, to have that need: for surely I carrie a mind that will never find the misse and want thereof. And for  these great offers that the king maketh unto mee, hee shall find me thankfull unto him, if it please him for any private benefit unto mee done, to require at my hands a private favour and pleasure againe: but as touching the State and publicke weale, he shall pardon me; I will neither receive ought from him, not bestow any thing upon him. And all that I can doe for him at this present, is to give him good and faithfull counsel. Goe your waies therefore and tell him from me, That

his best course is to abstaine from war, and not to refuse any condition of peace whatsoever. But  all this nothing moved the king, who made reckoning that any hazard and fortune of war would bee good and safe for him, since that there were lawes imposed upon him alreadie, as if hee had been quite vanquished and overcome. Whereupon, without any more parle of peace for this time, hee bent his whole mind and emploied his studie about provision and preparation for warre.
The Consull having given order for the execution of all his plots and designes, dislodged from thence, and marched first to Dardanum, and after to Rhoeteum: the inhabitants of both which citties came forth to meet him upon the way in great multitudes. From thence hee went forward to Ilium, and encamped in a plaine under the very walls: then hee entred into the towne, and ascended up into the castle, where he offered sacrifice unto Minerva, the patronesse of that  cittie. The Ilians entertained them with all shew of honour, as well in deed as in word, acknowledging that the Romanes were descended from them, and the Romanes againe were as joious and glad to see the place of their first originall and beginning. From thence they removed, and the sixt day after arrived at the head or spring of the river Caicus. Thither also Eumenes the king (who at first assaied to bring his fleet backe from Hellespontus, to winter before Elaea, and afterwards, when he could not for certaine daies double the point of Lectos, by reason of the contrarie winds, went a land) because he would not faile but bee present at the beginning of these great affaires, made hast the next way with a small power to the campe of the Romanes. From the campe he was sent backe to Pergamus, to give order for purveiance and provision of victuals: and after he had delivered out corne to those whom the Consull had appointed to receive it, he returned  againe to the same leaguer. The Consull his purpose and intent was to be provided aforehand of victuals sufficient for many daies, and together in one traine to go against the enemie, before the winter surprised them.
Now the kings campe lay about Thyatira: where Antiochus hearing that P. Scipio was carried sick to Elaea, sent certain embassadors of purpose, to present and deliver his son againe unto him. At which present of his, he tooke not only great contentment in his spirit, as a father might doe for receiving his deere son, but much easement also and comfort to his sicke bodie. After he had satisfied himselfe at length with much embracing of his son, Yee shall (saith he) recommend me unto the king your maister, and tell him from me, that I thanke him most heartily, and that I have no good thing at this time to send to him again, but only this, That I advise him to take heed  that hee enter not into the field to give battell, before hee hath heard for certaine, that I my selfe am returned to the leaguer. Vpon relation hereof, Antiochus albeit hee was in campe seventie thousand foot, and twelve thousand horse and above strong (which puissant power otherwhile animated, and fed him with the hope of good issue of battell) yet mooved with the authoritie of so great a personage as Scipio was, in whome hee reposed his whole refuge against all doubtfull events of the fortune in warre, hee retired backe, and passed over the riuer Phrygius, and pitched his campe about Magnesia neere unto Sypulum. And fearing, least (if he should bee minded to make long stay and abode there) the Romanes would assay to force his defences, he cast a trench, sixe cubites in depth, and twelve in bredth; and this trench hee environned with a double banke and course of strong stakes and pales, and upon the inward circuit and enclosure he opposed a  mure with maine turrets, for the more easie empeachment of the enemie, when hee should passe over the trench. The Consull supposing the king to bee about Thyatira, marched continually, and upon the fift day came downe into the plaines of Hircania. And when hee understood, that the king was dislodged and departed thence, he followed him by the trackes, and on this side the river Phrygius encamped foure miles from the enemie. Where about a thousand horsemen shewed themselves (for the most partPeople of Galatia, now called Gelis. Gallogrecians, some Dacians, with certeine archers on horsebacke of other nations entermingled among them) who in great hast having passed ouer the river, charged upon the corps de guard of the Romanes. At the first they put the Romanes manes to some trouble, finding them out of order and array: but as the skirmish grew hoter and continued longer, and the number of the Romanes soone encreased, (by reason their camp  was so neere to yeeld them succours) they of the kings side being now wearied and not able to make their part good against so many of them, began to retire: and certain of them before they could take the river, were overtaken by those that followed the chase, and killed outright. For two daies after they stirred of no hand, for neither the one nor the other went over the river. The

 third day after the Romanes all at once passed over, and encamped about a mile and an halfe from the enemies. But as they were pitching their tents, and busied about fortifications and desences, three thousand chosen horsemen and foot together from the kings campe, came upon them with a great trouble and affray. The number of them that were in guard, was lesse a good deale; howbeit of themselves alone, without calling to helpe and aid the souldiours from their worke about the fortification and defence of the campe, they not onely at first received the charge with equall valour, but also afterwards, as the fight encreased, put the enemies to flight, when they had killed some hundred of them, and taken prisoners almost as many. For the space of foure daies next ensuing, both armies stood embattelled on either side before their campe. And upon the fist day the Romanes advaunced forth into the middle of the plaine. Antiochus  came not forward with his ensignes, insomuch, as the hindmost were not an hundred foot off from the trench. The Consull perceiving that he fell off and would no battell, called a counsell the next day, to bee advised and resolved what hee were best to doe, in case Antiochus would not be fought with all. For considering that the winter approched, the souldiours were either to lie in the field under their tents, or els if they minded for the winter season to retire unto their garison townes, the warre must be put off untill the next summer. Now the Romans never made so small reckoning of any enemie as of him. Whereupon, throughout the whole assembly they called upon the Cos. with one voice to lead forth to a battell out of hand, and take the soldiors whiles they were in this heart, readie if the enemies would not come out into the field, to passe over ditch and rampier, and breake into the campe amongst them; making account, that they  were not to fight with so many thousands of enemies, but rather to make a slaughter and butcherie of so many beasts. Whereupon Cn. Domitius was sent to discover the way, and to view the place where was best entring upon the trench and rampier of the enemies. After he had brought certaine relation of all things, it was thought good the next morrow to approch neer unto their campe: and on the third day the ensignes were displaied forth into the middest of the plaine, and they began to raunge the armie in battell array. Antiochus likewise supposed it was not expedient to lie off and hast any longer, for feare least in refusing still to fight, hee should either abate the courage of his owne men, or encrease the hope of his enemies, and therefore came abroad with all his forces, and advaunced so farre forward from his campe, that it appeared well he meant to fight. The Romane armie stood embattelled in one manner of forme, as well for men, as munition  and armour: for of Romanes there were two legions, and of Latine associats as many, and every legion consisted of five thousand foure hundred. The Romanes put themselves in the main battell, and the Latines kept both the points. The Hastati were placed with their ensignes formost in the vaward. After them the Principes in the middest, and the Triarij in the reregard. Without this complete battell thus marshalled, the Consull set to the right point the auxiliarie souldiors of Eumenes, mingled together with the targatiers of the Achaeans, to the number almost of three thousand, whom he raunged equally afront, and beyond them more outward he opposed about three thousand men of armes; where of eight hundred were sent from Eumenes, the rest were the Cavallerie of the Romanes. Without all these in the utmost place, he put the Trallians and Candiotes, who in all made up the number of five hundred. As for the left wing, it seemed to need no  such succours, by reason it was flanked with the river and high steepe bankes, howbeit in that side there were planted foure troupes of horsemen. Thus you see all the forces that the Romanes had besides two thousand Thracians and Macedonians medled and blended together, who followed as voluntaries, and were left for the guard of the campe, and sixteene Elephants, which they bestowed in the arreregard for the defence of the Triarij. For, over and besides that they were not like to hold out against the kings Elephants, which were in number fiftie and foure, you must consider that those of Africke are not able to match them of India, say they were in number equall: either because in bignesse the Indians exceede the other (as in truth they are much greater by ods) or surpasse them in courage and stomacke. But the kings armie was composed of divers nations, different as well in armes as in souldiours. Hee  had of Macedonians sixteene thousand footemen, heavily armed after their manner, called Phalangitae; these made the maine battaile, and in the front stood divided in tenne squadrons, parted and severed one from the other by two Elephants placed betweene. Withinforth behind the forefront, the battaile was displaied in two and thirtie rankes of souldiours. This was the strength of the kings armie, and as in other respects, so especially in regard

of the Elephants surmounting aloft over all the souldiours, represented to the eye a feareful  and terrible sight. For besides that they were high and loftie of themselves, their crested headstalls with plumes upon them, their turret upon their backs, and in every turrets foure men standing in glittering armour, besides the maister and governor himselfe, made the apparence and shew far greater. On the right wing, he placed close unto the Phalangites, a thousand and five hundred horsemen of the Gallogreeks: unto whom he adjoined three thousand launces in complet armour, mounted upon bard horses, and those men of armes they themselves called Cataphracti. To these were added another wing of a thousand horsemen, which they named Agema. Medes they were, elect and chosen men, together with more horsemen of the same region, mingled of many nations one with another. Close unto them in the arrieregard was set a troupe of sixteene Elephants. On which side also in a wing somewhat farther drawne out stood  the king his owne cohort, bearing the name of Argyraspides, by occasion of the silvered shields which they bare. After them followed 1200 Dacians,(...). archers on horseback. Then, three thousand footemen lightly armed, and composed partly of Candiots, and partly of Tralleans, in number almost equall, and 2500 Mysians attended upon the archers. And the utmost side and taile of that wing was guarded with foure thousand Cyrtean slingers and Elymean archers sorted together. On the left wing likewise there stood fast unto the Phalangites aforesaid 1500 horsemen Gallograecians: and two thousand Cappadocians armed after the same manner, sent from king Ariarathes. Then the Auxiliaries of all sorts 2700; besides three hundred launces in complet harnesse upon barbed horses armed at all pieces, and 1000 other horsemen. As for the Cornet of the kings, it was more lightly armed, as wel themselves as their horses: but their setting  out and furniture otherwise, all one. And these were Syrians for the most part, with Phrygians and Lydians together. Before this cavallerie went the chariots of foure wheeles, and drawen by as many horses, armed with sharp and trenchant hookes like fith blades, and the camels called by them for their swiftnes Dromedaries. Vpon these were mounted the Arabian archers, who also were armed with keene swords foure cubits long, that sitting as they did so aloft, they might notwithstanding reach their enemie. Then after these were set another multitude equall to that in the right wing, whereof the formost were certeine horsemen called Tarentines, and after them 2500 Gallograecian horse. Likewise of Neocretians a thousand: and of Carians and Cilicians one with another 1500 armed alike. As many Trallians: and three thousand targuatiers. These were Pisidians, Pamphylians and Lycians: and last of all the succors in the  arrieregard of Cirteans and Elymeans, in like number as they that were placed in the right wing, with sixteene Elephants also distant a prety way asunder. The king himself in person had the conduct of the right point of the battaile, and ordeined Seleucus his sonne and Antipater his brothers sonne to commaund the left. The maine battaile in the mids was committed to the leading and governance of three captaines, to wit, Minio, Zeusis, and Philip the maister of the Elephants. There was a certeine mist arose in the morning, and as it waxed farther day gathered aloft into thick clouds, and made the weather darke: besides by the South wind it resolved into a small drisling raine, which wet and drenched all. This did little harme to the Romanes: but contrariwise, was much hurtfull to the kings side. For, albeit the aire was dim and darke, yet by reason that the Roman battailons tooke up no great compasse of ground, they could for all the aire  was overcast, discerne from one end to the other: and the moisture that fell, dulled nothing at all (to speake of) either the swords or javelins of them that were heavily armed: whereas the kings armie being embattailed so broad, had much ado, and hardly could see from the middle of the maine battaile to the wings of each hand, and much lesse discerne from one skirt and flanke of the battailon to the other. Moreover, the dropping weather slugged their bowes, softned their slings and loups of their darts. Their sithed chariots also, wherewith Antiochus made full account to breake the arrayes of his enemies, turned to the disorder and fright of themselves. Now these chariots aforesaid were in this manner armed for the most part: certeine sharpe. pikes they had about the spire-pole, bearing forward from the spring-tree, ten cubits in length, like unto hornes, with which pointed pikes they would pierce through whatsoever  they encountered. Also at each end of the said spring-tree there were two blades stood out, the one of just and even heigth with it, the other lower and bearing downeward to the ground: the former was devised to cut through whatsoever came neere the side therof, the other to reach and teare them that were fallen to the earth, or came under the chariot. Semblably

 at both ends of the axeltree without the nave of the wheele there were two such like hookes fastned and bended divers wayes. These chariots thus armed the king had placed in the front of the battaile as we said before, because if they had bene set either in the midle or the reregard, they should have bene driven through their owne battailons. Which Eumenes perceiving, one that knew well enough the manner of that kind of service, and how dangerous it was, in case a man rather frighted the horses than charged them directly by ordinary warlike force: hee commaunded the Candiot archers and slingers, with some other horsemen that launced darts, to runne forth not thick in troupes, but skattring as farre scsunder as they could, and at once from all parts to discharge their shot upon them. This forerunning tempest (as it were) so madded the horses partly by galling, wounding, and pelting them with darts, arrowes, and stones,  discharged from all sides at them, and partly with the strange and uncouth noyse which they made, that sodainely as if they had bene unbridled and without their geeres, they flang out every way, and ran at randon: which violence of theirs the light armed souldiers, the nimble slingers, and swift running Candiots avoided easily with a trice. And the horsemen withall following the chase, redoubled the fright and hurrey amongst the horses, yea and the dromedarie camels too; which likewise were unruly and set a madding: and this hurlyburley, the manifold cryes from the multitude all about, helped well forward. Thus were the chariots chased in the middle of the plaine betweene both armies: and when these vaine buggs were once rid out of the way, then the alarme and signall was geven on both parts, and they charged one another in battaile wise. But as foolish an occurrent as that was, it caused anon a discom^iture  and overthrow indeede. For the auxiliaries and aids behind-forth which were placed next unto them, terrified with the feare and affright of the chariots, fled, and left all naked and disfurnished even to the bard horses. In such sort, that when the arriergard was put in disarray, the Romane Cavallerie entred upon the foresaid horse, and charged them so hotely, that part of them was not able to endure the first shock and encounter: some were put to flight, others were borne downe with the poise and waight of their harnesse and weapons. And presently thereupon the whole left wing of the battaile began to recule. And after that those succours were disbanded and in disaray which were betweene the Cavallerie and the heavie armed sootemen called Phalangitae, the disorder and feare went as farre as to the mids of the maine battaile: where so soone as the ranks and files were broken and shuffled together, by  reason of the entercourse of their owne fellowes among them, they had no use at all of their long pikes, which the Macedonians call Sariffae. Then the Romane legions advaunced their ensignes, and launced their darts against those disordred ranks hudled together. The very Elephants that were placed betweene, nothing troubled and affrighted the Romane souldiours, as who had bene used in the Affricane warres, both to avoid the furious rage of those beasts, and also either with their javelins to flanck and hurt them overthwart, or else if they could come neere unto them, to hough them and cut their ham-strings with their swords. By this time now was the front of the maine battaile defaited and beaten downe: and the arrieregard behind environed and cut in peeces: when as the Romanes withall, might perceive their owne fellowes flying from the other part, and heare the crye of those that were affrighted,  even almost as farre as to their campe. For Antiochus keeping the right wing, seeing in the left point of the Romanes no other defense (by reason that they trusted upon the river) but onely foure troupes of horsemen, and those also by drawing themselves close to their fellowes, to leave the banke side voyd and naked, charged that point with his Auxiliaries and launces upon bard horses, and not onely made head and pressed them afront, but from the river also set a compasse and enclosed them; and flanked that wing so long, untill the horsemen were first discom^ited, and then the sootemen next unto them, were put to flight, so as they ranne amaine toward their campe. M. Aemylius a colonell, and sonne to M. Lepidus, who a few yeeres after was created the High-Priest, had the charge of the campe: he with his whole guard came foorth, and where as he saw them to flee, there he opposed himselfe, and  first commaunded them to stand, and afterwards to returne to battaile, checking and rebuking them for their beastly feare, and shamefull running away. Moreover, hee proceeded to minatorie words, saying, That in case they would not be ruled by his direction, they should runne headlong like blind beetles upon their owne mischiefe: and in the end, he gave a signe to his owne company, for to lay upon the foremost of them that thus fled, and caused

the multitude that followed, with dint of sword and drawing blood of them, to turne their face  againe upon the enemies. Thus the greater feare overcame the lesse: for seeing daunger before and behind, first they staid their flight, and afterwards returned to the battell. Aemylius also with his owne regiment (which for the guard of the campe had 2000 tall and valiant men in it) withstood the king tight stoutly as hee followed hote in chase^ upon those that fled. Moreover, Attalus (brother of king Eumenes) in the right point of the battaile, who at the first charge had discomsited the lef^ wing of the enemies, perceiving that his fellowes fled in their left point, and hearing a great sturre about the campe, came to the rescue in good time with 200 horsemen.
Antioschus, when he saw them turne head againe whose backes ere-while were toward him, and begin to fight afresh, and perceived withall a number comming against him; both out of the camp and also from the battel, turned his horse head and took himselfe to flight. By this means the Romans  obtained the victory of both the wings, and passed directly to the rifling of the kings camp over the dead bodies, which in the main battell most of all wer massacred and lay by heaps: where the strength and flowre of the hardiest men ranged close togither and the weight besides of their heavie armor, would not give them leave to flie away. The horsmen of Eumenes were the first of all others that pursued the enemies: after them, the rest of the Cavallery followed the chase all over the fields, and ever as they overtooke any of the hinmost, killed them out-right. But that which troubled and plagued them in their flight more than all besides; was their chariots, elephants and camels, intermingled among them as they fled; forsomuch as being once disbanded and put out of their rankes, they tumbled one upon another like blind men, and were brused and crushed under the beasts feet which came running upon them. Great execution also there was  committed in the campe, yea and more in manner than had beene in the medley: for the first that fled, and those that fought in the vaward, tooke their way most of them to the campe, and upon assured confidence of this multitude, the garrison within fought more valiantly, and held out longer in the defence of the hold. The Romans being thus stayed in the gates, and kept out of the rampier which they thought verily to have forced and won at their first assault, when they were once at length broken through and gotten in, made the more bloody carnage amongst them, for very anger and despight that they had kept them foorth so long. It is said, that there were slaine that day about fiftie thousand footmen and 4000 horsmen, 1400 taken pisoners, together with fifteene elephants with their governours. A number of the Romanes were hurt and wounded, but there dyed not iu the field above 300 footmen and 24 horsemen: and of the regiment  of king Eumenes not past five and twentie. And for that day verily, the conquerours after they had ransacked only the tents and pavillions of their enemies, returned to their owne camp with great plentie of pillage: but the next morrow they fell to spoiling the bodies of the dead and gathered their prisoners togither. And upon this victory, there came embassadours from Thyatira and Magnesia unto Sypilus, for to surrender and deliver up their cities.
Antiochus, who fled accompanied with some few, having gathered unto him many more in the way, who rallied themselves unto him, arrived at Sardis about midnight with a small power of armed men; and hearing that his sonne Selencus and some other of his friends were gone before to Apamea, himselfe also at the fourth watch departed thence with his wife and daughter toward Apamea; after hee had committed the charge of guarding the citie Sardis unto Zeno, and appointed Timon governour of Lydia. But the inhabitants of the said city and the garrison souldiours within the castle, despised these governors, and by generall consent addressed embassadors unto the Consull.
Much about the same time also, there arrived embassadors from Tralles, and Magnesia (which standeth upon the river Maeander) and likewise from Ephesus, to yeeld up their cities. For Polyxenidas (advertised of the issue of this battaile) had abandoned Ephesus; and having sailed with the fleet as farre as Patara in Lycia, for feare of the Rhodian ships which rid in guard within the harbour of Megiste, disbarked and put himselfe a shore, and with a small company marched by land into Syria. The cities of Asia were surrendred into the hands and protection of the Consull, and submitted to the people of Rome. By this time now was the Consull possessed of  Sardis, and thither repaired unto him Scipio from Elaea, so soone as ever hee could endure the travell of journey.
At the same time there came an herald from Antiochus unto the Consull, who by the mediation of Scipio, made request and obteined thus much, That the king might send his oratours

 and embassadours unto him. And after few daies Zeusis (who had beene governour of Lydia) together with Antipater (Antiochus his nephew, or brothers sonne) arrived. Who first dealt with king Eumenes and communed with him, whome (by reason of old jarres and quarels) they supposed verily to be the greatest enemy unto peace, and that he would never abide to heare therof: but him they found more reasonable and enclining to peaceable tearmes, than either the king their master or themselves hoped and looked for. So by the means of Scipio and him togither, they had accesse unto the Consull; who at their earnest petition, graunted them a day of audience in a frequent assembly, there to declare their commission and what they had in charge. Then (quoth Zeusis) we are not so much to speake and deliver ought of our owneselves, as to aske and be advised of you (Romanes) what course to take and by what meanes of satisfaction we might  expiate and satisfie the trespasse of the king our master, and withall obteine grace and pardon at your hands who are the victours? Your manner alwayes hath beene of a magnanimous and hautie spirit, to forgive kings and nations by you vanquished: How much more then is it decent and beseeming you to doe the like; yea, and with a greater mind and more generous and bountifull heart, in this victory and conquest, which hath made you LL. of the whole world? For now it behooveth you to lay downe all debate and quarrell with mortall men here upon earth, and rather like the immortall gods in heaven, to provide for the good and safety of mankind, and them to pardon and forgive. Now was it agreed upon before the comming of the Embassadours, what answere to make unto them; and likewise thought good it was that Africanus should deliver the same, who spake by report in this wise: Wee Romanes, of all those things  which are in the power of the immortall gods, have that measure which they vouchsafed to geve us: as for heart and courage which dependeth upon out owne will and mind, wee have borne (and ever will) the same without chaunge and alteration in all fortunes: neither hath prosperitie raysed and lift it up aloft, nor adversitie debased and put it downe. For proofe hereof, I might produce your friend Anniball as witnesse, to say nothing of others, but that I can report mee to your owne selves. For after wee had passed over Hellespont, even before wee saw the kings campe and armie, when the hazard of warre was indifferent, when the issue doubtfull and uncertaine, looke what conditions of peace wee then offered on even hand, and whiles we were equall one unto the other, and stood upon tearmes of advauntage, the same and no other wee present unto you at this time, now that wee are conquerours. Forbeare  to meddle within Europe: depart wholly out of Asia, so much as in on this side Taurus. Moreover in regard of the expenses defraied in this warre, yee shall pay fifteene thousand Talents of silver, according to the computation of Euboea: five hundred in hand, two thousand and five hundred at the assurance and making of the peace, by the Senat and people of Rome; and a thousand talents yeerely for twelve yeeres next ensuing. Also yee shall make paiment unto Euments of foure hundred talents, and the remnant behind of the corne and graine which was due unto his father. And when wee have contracted and concluded these covenants, to the end that we may rest assured that ye will performe the same, we demaund for a gage and sufficient pawne that yee deliver into our hands twentie hostages, such as wee shall like well of and chuse. And for as much as wee can never bee persuaded that the people of Rome shall enjoy long peace  there, where Anniball is, we demaund above all things to have him in our custodie. Also you shall deliver into our hands Thoas the Aetolian, the principall authour and firebrand of the war with the Aetolians, who caused you to take armes against us, upon assurance that he gave you of them; and likewise armed them upon the trust they had in you. Item, together with him you shall deliver Mnasimachus the Acarnanian, togither with Philo and Eubulidas the Chalcidians. The king shall now contract peace in worse estate than he was, by reason that he maketh it later than hee might have done. But in case he hold off still and delay, know he well thus much, That the roiall majesty and port of kings is with more difficultie abated and taken down from the highest pitch and degree unto the midst; than from that mean estate, cast downe headlong to the lowest. Now these embassadours were sent from the king with this charge, to accept of any articles of peace  whatsoever. And therefore it was decreed that embassadors should be directly sent to Rome. The Consull divided his armie into garisons for to winter, some in Magnesia upon the river Maeander, others in Tralleis and Ephesus. After few daies the hostages abovesaid, were brought to Ephesus from the king, and embassadours also came who were to goe to Rome. Eumenes likewise went to Rome at the same time that the kings embassadours: and there followed embassages moreover

over of all the States of Asia.
Whiles the affaires of Asia passed thus in these tearmes, there were two pro-consuls returned  out of their severall provinces, both in manner at once, upon hope to obtaine triumph, to wit, Q. Minutius out of Liguria, and M. Acilius out of Aetolia. When the exploits were heard, as well of the one as the other; Minutius was flatly denied triumph, but Acilius had it graunted with great consent of all men: who rode into the cittie triumphant over king Antiochus and the Aetolians. In which triumph there were carried before him two hundred and thirtie ensignes, three thousand pound weight of massie silver in bullion; of coine in Atticke Terradrachmes one hundred and thirteene thousand; in Cistophores two hundred and eight and fortie thousand. In plate many vessels engraved and chased, of great weight. Hee carried also in pompe the implements of the kings house all of silver, with rich and sumptuous apparrell. Also crownes of gold five and fortie  presented unto him by cities associate: besides all sorts of rich spoiles; and moreover hee led divers noblemen prisoners, and last of all sixe and thirtie captaines, as well Aetolians as those who served under the king. As for Democritus, a great commaunder of the Aetolians, who some few daies before had broken prison and escaped by night, he was by his keepers that made fresh suit after him, overtaken upon the banke of Tybris: but before he could be attached by them, he fell upon his owne sword, and ran himselfe through. Onely there wanted those that should have followed after his charriot; otherwise the triumph had beene magnificent and stately, both for the pompous shew, and also for the honour and renoume of exploits atchieved. But the joy of this triumph was blemished with heavie tidings out of Spaine, of a losse and overthrow received of the Portugales, in the countrey of the Vascetanes, neere the towne Lyco, under the conduct of  L. Aemylius: where sixe thousand and one hundred of the Romane armie were left dead in the place, and the rest discomfited and beaten backe into their campe; which they had much ado to defend and hold, and were forced to retire in manner of flight, and by long journies recovered the peaceable quarters of their friends. And this was the newes out of Spaine.
From out of Fraunce the embassadours of the Placentines and Cremonians, were brought by the Pretour L. Aurunculeius into the Senat: where they made much mone and complaint for default and want of inhabitants, whereof some were devoured by the edge of the sword in wars, others consumed by maladie and sickenesse, yea, and certaine of them departed out of their colonies for wearinesse they had of the Gaules their neere neighbours. Whereupon the Senate ordained C. La^lius the Consull to enroll, if hee thought so good, sixe thousand families, for to bee  distributed among those Colonies aforesaid: and L. Aurunculcius the Pretour to create three Commissaries called Triumvirs, for the conducting of the coloners and inhabitants aforesaid. And created there were, M. Attilius Serranus, L. Valerius Flaccus the sonne of Publius, and L. Valerius Tappus the sonne of Caius.
Not long after, against the time of the Consuls election which approched neere, C. Laelius the Consull returned out of Fraunce to Rome, and he not onely by vertue of the act of the Senate made in his absence, enrolled certaine Coloners to supplie the want in Placentia and Cremona, but also proposed a bill, and according to it the LL. of the Senat ordained, That two new Colonies should bee conducted into the land that appertained to the Boians. And at the very same time were letters brought from L. Aemylius the Pretour, as touching the battell at seasought  neere to Myonesus: which letters also gave intelligence, that L. Scipio the Consull had transported his armie into Asia. For joy of the said navall victorie, there was ordained a solemne procession for one day: and in regard that the Romane armie was then first on foot in Affricke, the said procession continued another day with supplication to the gods, that this voiage might turne to the prosperitie and joy of the Commonweale. And the Consull was enjoined at each procession and supplication, to sacrifice twentie head of greater beasts. After this ensued the solemne assembly for the chusing of Consuls, which was holden with great strife and contention. For M. Aemylias Lepidus stood to be Consull, a man growne into an ill name, and hardly spoken of among the people, in that hee had left his government and charge in Sicilie for this occasion and businesse onely, without making suite unto the Senate and craving leave so to do. Together  with him were competitours in election, M. Fulvius Nobilsor, Cn. Manlius Volso, and M. Valerius Messala. But Fulvius was chosen alone, because the rest had not sufficient voices of the Centuries, and he the morrow after nominated Cn. Manlius for his colleague, and gave the repulse unto Lepidus; for Messala kept silence and held his tongue. Which done, the Pretours were elected

 namely, the two Quinti Fabij, the one surnamed Labeo, the other Pictor (who had been consecrated that yeere for the Flamin Quirinall) M. Sempronius Tuditanus, Sp. Posthumius Albinus, Lucius Plautius Hypseus, and L. Baebius Dives.
During the time that M. Fulvius Nobilior and Cn. Manlius Volso were Consuls, Valerius Antias writeth, That there was a rise rumour raised at Rome, and held for certaine, that L. Scipio the Consull, together with P. Africanus, were called forth to a parley with king Antiochus, as touching the enlargement and deliverie of young Scipio the sonne of Africanus, and by that meanes were both of them arrested and taken prisoners: also that when these cheefe commaunders were under arrest, the kings armie incontinently advaunced against the Romane campe, the same was surprised and forced, and the whole power of the Romanes utterly defeated. By occasion  whereof, it went currant also, that the Aetolians began to looke aloft, refused to obey, and shooke off their alleageance: also that their princes and cheefe States were gone into Macedonie, Dardanie, and Thrace, to levie and wage auxiliarie forces: moreover, that A. Terentius Varro, and Marcu^ Claudius Lepidus were sent out of Aetolia, from A. Cornelius the Propretour, for to report these newes at Rome. Last of all, to make up the tale, he addeth and saith, that the Aetolian embassadors among other things, being examined in the Senate about this matter, and demaunded of whom they heard and understood that the Romane Generals were taken prisoners in Asia by king Antiochus, and the whole armie overthrowne? answered directly, That they had advertisement thereof by their owne embassadours, who had beene with the Consull. But because I find no other authour besides him that maketh mention of this rumour, I dare not, for any thing that I can  say of my selfe, report it for a-certaine truth, ne yet omit it as a meere fable or lowd lie.
The Aetolian Embassadours were permitted to come into the Senat house; and being induced (in regard of their owne cause and present condition) to confesse a truth, and as humble suppliants to crave pardon and forgivenes either for their fault, or mesprision and errour; began with a bedroll of their favours and good turnes done unto the people of Rome, yea and in manner to upbraid the Romans with the valour which they shewed in the warre against Philip. But with their arrogant and insolent language they offended the eares of the Senatours: and by ripping up old matters done and past (time out of mind and utterly forgotten) they handled their owne cause so, and brought it to this passe, that the LL. of the Senat began to call (...) mind much more harme and mischiefe contrived and practised by that nation, than kindnesses and courtesies  received at their hands; insomuch as the Aetolians having need of their mercie, incurred their heavie displeasure, and provoked them to anger and hatred. Being asked this question by one of the Senators, Whether they would referre and submit themselves to the censure and judgement of the people of Rome? and likewise of another, If they could be content to hold them for their friends or enemies whome the Romans so accounted? they answered not a word: and thereupon immediatly were commaunded out of the Court: and presently all the Senat began to crie out with one voice, That the Aetolians were all still for king Antiochus, depending wholly and only upon that hope, and therefore they ought to war against them as undoubted enemies, and to take downe and tame these proud and fellonious hearts of their owne. Over and besides all this, another thing there was that incited and kindled the stomacks of the LL. against them, because  at the very same instant when they seemed to require peace at the Romanes hands, they warred against Dolopia and Athamania. So there passed a decree of the Senat, (and the same was moved by M. Acilius, who had vanquished and subdued Antiochus and the Aetolians) That they should void that very day out of the citty of Rome; and within fifteene dayes next ensuing, out of all Italy. Au. Terentius Varro was sent to safe-conduct them on the way: and this warning they tooke with them, That if ever after there came any Embassadour from the Aetolians, without the warrant, license, and permission of the chiefe Generall who governed that province, or not accompanied with a Romane Legate, they should bee taken and reputed all of them for no better than enemies. In this manner were the Aetolians dismissed and sent away.
After this the Consuls proposed unto the Senat, as touching the government of the provinces.  And thought good it was, that they themselves should cast lots for Aestolia and Asia. Vnto him whose lot it should be to governe Asia, was appointed that armie which L. Scipio had. And for to furnish it fully out and make up the decaied bands, hee was allowed to have foure thousand footmen of Romanes with two hundred horsemen: of allies that were Latines, eight thousand foot, and foure thousand men of armes, and with these forces he was to make war against Antiochus.

The other Consull had assigned unto him that armie which was in Aetolia: and libertie he had  for supplie of that broken armie, to levie the same number of citizens and allies that his companion in government had enrolled. To the same Consull was graunted a commission likewise to set in order, furnish, and take with him those ships which the former yeere were prepared and rigged, and not only to make warre with the Aetolians, but also to saile over into the Isle Cephalenia. And withall, the said Consull had in charge to returne home to Rome for the election of Magistrates, if he might so do conveniently with the good of the Common-weale. For besides the annuall Magistrates (who were to be chosen one under another) it was agreed upon, that Censors also should be created. But in case his affaires deteined him, that he might not returne in person, then he was to give advertisement, and signifie so much to the Senate, that he could not possibly be present at the time of the foresaid Election. So Aetolia fell by lot to M. Fulvius, and Asia to Cn. Manlius. Then the Pretours fell to draw lots for their provinces. Sp. Posthumius Albinus had the jurisdiction over citizens and forreiners both: M. Sempronius Tuditanus governed Sicilie: and Q. Fabius Pictor the Quirinall Flamin, Sardinia: Q. Fabius Labeo was admirall of the navie at sea: and L. Plautius Hypseus was allotted to the rule of high Spaine, and L. Baebius Dives of the lower. For Sicilie one legion was appointed, together with that fleete which was alreadie in that province. Also there was order given that the new Pretour should impose two tenthes of corne upon the Sicilians, and send the one into Asia, and the other into Aetolia. The like imposition was laid and exacted upon the Sardinians, and the said corne to be conveighed into the same armies that the Sicilian corne was. A supplie was graunted unto L. Baebius for Spaine of a thousand Rom. footmen, and fiftie horse: besides sixe thousand Latine  foote, and two hundred horsemen. Vnto Plautius Hypseus for the higher Spaine were allowed a thousand Romane footmen: with two thousand Latine allies, and two hundred horse. Besides these supplements, both the provinces of Spaine were allowed each of them one legion. The magistrates and governours of the former yeere continued still in place of commaund for one other yeere, to wit, C. Lelius with his armie, and P. Iunius also the Propretor in Hetruria with those forces which were in the province. M. Tuccius likewise in the Brutians countrie and Apulia.
But before the Pretours went forth into their provinces, there happened a variance betweene P. Licinius the Arch-Pontisie or chiefe Prelate, and Qu. Fabius Pictor the Quirinall Flamin, like unto that which sometime fell out betweene L. Metellus and Posthumius Albinus. For at what time as Posthumius the Consull was upon his departure and journey to his fleete in Sicilie, together with C. Luctatius his colleague, Metellus the Archbishop for the time being, kept him back upon occasion of certeine sacrifices to be celebrated: semblably, when as Fabius the Pretour would have gone into Sardinia, P. Licinius the high priest deteined him. Much strife and hard hold there was hereabout, as well in the Senate house, as before the people. Inhibitions passed to and fro. Cautions and pledges were distrained: fines they imposed one upon anothers head: the Tribunes were called unto on both sides for to interpose their authoritie, and they appealed both unto the people. In fine, religion, and the regard of holy rites tooke place, and caried it cleare, and the Flamin was enjoined to obey the chiefe priest: and by order and expresse commaundement from the people, all fines were taken off and forgiven. And when the Pretour for very anger and spite that he was debarred from his province, would have surrendred  and resigned up his government, the LL. of the Senat impeached and terrified him by their absolute authoritie, and ordeined that he should minister justice, and exercise civill jurisdiction betweene aliens. After that the musters were ended within few dayes (for many souldiours were not to be levied and enrolled) both Consuls and Pretours tooke their journey into their provinces. After this, there arose a bruit concerning the occurrents and affaires in Asia, blowen and spread abroad I wot not how, nor from what head and author it proceeded: but after few dayes, there came certeine messengers with letters from the Generals of the Romane armie, sent of purpose to the citie, which caused not so great joy presently ensuing upon the fresh feare aforesaid (for why, they were no more afraid of Aetolia by them already conquered) as dashed quite the same and opinion that went of Antiochus, whom in the beginning of this warre they supposed would  have bene a dangerous enemie unto them, as well in regard of his owne puissance, as for that he had the direction and conduct of Anniball in the warre: howbeit, they thought good to alter nothing, either as touching the sending of the Consull into Asia, or diminishing his forces, for feare they should have warre with the French.
 Not long after M. Aurelius Cotta, a lieutenant of Scipio, came to Rome with the embassadors of king Antiochus, and likewise king Eumenes and the Rhodians. Cotta reported and declared first in the Senat, and afterwards in a full assembly of the people (by order and commaundement from the LL. of the Counsell) what affaires had passed in Spaine. Whereupon ordeined it was, That there should be holden a solemne procession for 3 daies together: and order was given, that 40 head of greater cattaile should be killed for sacrifice. This done, the Senat assembled for to give audience to king Eumenes, first above all other matters: who briefly in few words having rendred thanks to the LL. of the Senat, for that they had delivered him and his brother from siege, and protected his realme against the wrongs and outrages offred by Antiochus: also having testified his joy by way of gratulation for their prosperous and fortunat affaires archieved both by land and  sea: namely, in that they had discomfited and put to flight K. Antiochus, and driven him out of his campe that he could not keepe the field; and withall disseized and dispossessed him first of Europe, and afterwards of all that part of Asia which lieth on this side the mountain Taurus: he concluded and knit up all with this, That as touching his owne demerits and employments about their affaires, he had leisser they tooke knowledge by their owne generals, captaines and lieutenants, than from his mouth. They all approved wel of this speech of his, and willed him to speak boldly without bashful modestie in that case, What he thought in equitie and reason the Senat and people of Rome was to yeeld unto him by way of just recompense: assuring him that the Senat would do it more willingly and liberally (if possibly they could) according to the worth of his desert. The king answered thus again, That in case any other had made him that offer, and given him the  choise of his own rewards, he would gladly have used the counsaile of that right honorable court of the Roman Senat (so he might have the meanes and libertie to aske their advise) to the end that he would not be thought, either to exceede measure in covetous desire, or passe the bounds of modestie in craving a recompense. But now considering they are themselves to give that reward, much more reason it is that their munificence and bountie to him and his brethren should be referred to their own arbitrement and discretion. The LL. of the Senat were nothing moved at this language of his, but urged him stil to speake himself in his own cause. And after a certeine time that they had strived a-vie, the LL. in courtesie and kindnes, the king in modestie and shamefastnes, yelding one unto the other reciprocally, in such amiable and mutuall manner as hardly can be expressed, Eumenes departed out of the temple. The Senat persisted neverthelesse in their resolution,  saying it was very absurd and undecent that the king should be ignorant upon what hopes he was come, and what he purposed to make suite and petition for: and himself must needs of all others know best what was meetest and most expedient for his own kingdome: yea, and was far better acquainted with the state and affaires of Asia than the Senate was. And therefore no remedie, but he must be called again, and compelled to declare and deliver what his will, desire and mind was to have. Hereupon the king was brought back into the temple by the Pretour, and urged to speake. Then at last, My LL. (quoth he) I would have persisted still in silence,The Oration of king (...) in the Senate of (...). but that I knew that anon ye wil call the embassage of the Rhodians in place; and that after audience given unto them, I must neither will nor choose but make some speech of necessity: and verily with so much more difficultie shall I speake, because their demaunds will be such, as if they would seeme  not only to require nothing prejudiciall and hurtfull unto me, but also (which more is) matters little or nothing pertinent to themselves. For plead they will and maintaine the cause of the cities in Greece, saying, They ought to be set free and at liberty: which being once obteined, who can make doubt, but ready they will be to withdraw from our obeisance, not only the cities which shall be freed, but also those which have beene homagers and tributaries unto us of old time? yea and will keepe them as subjects in very deed and wholly at their devotion, whome beeing thus bound and obliged to them by so great a benefit, they call by the name of Associates, and would make the world beleeve they repute for no other? Yet forsooth (I wet well) in affecting and aspiring to this so great power and puissance, they will carry it so cleanly and make semblant, as though this in no wise touched and concerned them: but that it is befitting you alone,  correspondent and answerable to other former deeds of yours. But be yee well advised, and let not their glosing words deceive you; take you heed (I say) that yee goe not with an uneven hand nor beare your selves equally, whiles ye depresse and abase too much some of your allies, in promoting and advancing others beyond all measure; and aboue all, beware that they who haue lift up their speare and borne armes against you, be not more kindly intreated and in better

condition, than your loving friends and faithfull consederates. For mine owne part, in all other  things I would gladly be thought of every man, rather to keepe within my compasse; yea and yeeld somewhat of my right whatsoever it is, than to strive too much in the maintenance and holding thereof: but in the question of your friendship, of my affection and love towards you, and of the honour which shall come from you, I cannot endure with patience that any one should out-goe and surmount my selfe. This I account the greatest inheritance left unto me by my father, the first (of all those that inhabit in Greece and Asia) who was entertained in your amitie, and continued in the same alwaies most fast, most constant and sure even to his dying day: who not onely shewed sound affection and loyall heart unto you, but also was in person emploied in all your warres which yee made in Greece, as well on land as at sea; assisted and aided you with all kind of provisions, in such sort, as none of all your allies besides was any way comparable  or came neere unto him. And finally, as he earnestly exhorted the Boeotians to accept of your society, he sunk down, swouned in the very assembly, and not long after yeelded up his spirit and dyed. His footsteps have I troden, and followed his good example. For affection verily and studious desire to honour you, I could not have more than he had (for I suppose it was impossible to surpasse him therein:) but in kind pleasures, effectuall services, offices, courtesies, and favours, to surmount and goe beyond him; the goodnes of fortune, the occasion of times, king Antiochus and the warre in Asia, have ministred ample and sufficient matter unto me. Antiochus (king of Asia and part of Europe) gave me his daughter in marriage, and with her endowed me with the repossession of those cities which had revolted from us. Hee fed me moreover with great hopes of encreasing my dominion in time to come, if I would have sided with  him against you. I will not glory and vaunt of this, that I have done nothing to offend and displease you: I will rather rehearse those pleasures and services which are beseeming the auncient amity and friendship betweene our house and you. In forces as well for land as sea, I have friended and helped your Generals in such wise, as I forbid all your allies besides to doe the like: furnished them I have with victuals on the land, with provisions at sea. In all the battailes and conflicts by ships (which were many and in sundry places) I was present in person. I underwent all travailes, I adventured all perils, and no where favoured my selfe and thought much of my paines: nay, that which is the greatest calamitie and misery that followeth wars, I was besieged, and endured it: enclosed I was and shut up within Pergamus, to the utter hazard of my life and of my realme and royall dignity. And after I was delivered from that daunger and the siege raised, albeit Antiochus of one side and Seleucus on another, lay encamped about the principall fortresse of my kingdome, I quit mine owne affaires and laid all aside, to come with my whole fleet into Hellespont, and there to meet with L. Scipio your Consull, and to aid him in transporting and wasting his armie into Asia. And when your forces were passed over, I never afterwards departed from him: there was not a Romane souldiour more resiant ordinarily in your campe than my selfe and my brethren. No expeditions, no rodes, no exploit of horse service was there without me. In battaile have I stood on foot and guarded that quarter which the Consull hath appointed me to keepe. I will not say (my LL.) what one person there is that hath done so good service for you in this last warre as I my selfe, and who is any way comparable unto me: nay, I dare make comparison with all slates and princes whatsoever, whome you esteeme and honour  so highly? Masanissa before he was your friend, was your professed enemie: hee came not to you with his aids in the time of his upright fortune, and whiles his kingdome flourished in good estate; but when he was banished, driven out of his kingdome, and turned out of all, he fled into your campe, accompanied onely with a small troupe and cornet of horsemen: Yet neverthelesse, because he stood fast to you and bare himselfe in all loyaltie, and shewed his prowesse in your behalfe against Syphax and the Carthaginians in Affricke, you not onely restored him to his fathers kingdome, and placed him again in the royall throne, but you laid unto his dominion the richest part of the realme of Syphax, and made him the most puissant and greatest prince of all the kings in Affricke. What reward then, nay what honour are we worthy to have at your hands; wee (I say) who never were enemies, but ever friends? My father, my selfe, my brethren, have borne armes in your quarrell by land, by sea, not only in Asia but farre from our own home and native soile, in Peloponnesus, in Baeotia, in Aetolia, during the warres with Philip, with Antiochus, with the Aetolians. What recompence demaund you then? may some man say. Forasmuch as (my LL.) you will have it so, and it is your pleasure that I should speake my mind, good

 reason it is that I obey. This shall stand for all; if you have dispossessed Antiochus of all on this side Taurus, with this intent, to hold those lands your owne selves; none better than you, and whome I would wish rather to bee my neighbours and to confine upon mee: neither can I bethinke me, of any meanes in the world more important to the safetie and strength of my kingdome. But in case your purpose be to depart and to retire your forces from thence, I dare bee bold to say, That of your allies, (and put them all togither) there is not one more worthy than my selfe to have and hold that which you have woon by conquest. But an honourable deed it is and magnificent, to set free and deliver cities out of thraldome and servitude. True, and I my selfe am of the same opinion; provided alwayes, that they have attempted nought by way of hostilitie against you. But in case they have taken part and sided with Antiochus; how much more  standeth it with your wisdom, nay with equity and reason, to be respective of your allies who have so well deserved at your hands, than to regard your enemies. This oration of the king much pleased the LL. of the Senat, and soone it was seen by their countenance that they would deale bounteously and liberally with him, yea and gratifie him in what they might. Then audience was given to a briefe embassage of the Smyrneans, who by occasion that some of the Rhodians were absent, came betweene and delivered their message. Highly were these Smyrneans commended, in that they chose rather to endure all extremities, than to yeeld themselves unto king Antiochus. Then the Rhodians entred in place: and the chiefe man of their embassie, after he had declared the first occasion and beginning of the amitie which they had with the people of Rome, and shewed withall the good deserts and services which the Rhodians had performed  in the warres, first against Philip and then against Antiochus, went on and spake as followeth. Right honourable,The oration of (...). there is nothing more difficult and troublesome unto us in all the businesse that we have in hand than this one thing, that there is some variance and matter to be debated betweene us and Eumenes, the only K. of all others, with whom especially every one of us in private, and (that which toucheth us more) our city in publicke, doth entertaine the bond of friendship and mutuall hospitalitie. Howbeit no repugnancie is it in our affections (my LL.) but even the course of this world and nature it selfe (the mightiest thing of all) which disjoyneth us and causeth difference: this maketh us (being men free born) to defend and maintein the freedom also of others: this is it, that mooveth KK. to be desirous for to have all in servitude and subjection under them, and at their commaund. But howsoever it is, our modestie and the reverent  regard we have of the kings person hurreth us more, than either the debating of our cause with him is otherwise difficult unto us, or the deciding thereof like to be intricate and troublesome unto you. For in case it were so, that you could not honour and reward a king, your allie and friend, for his good service done in this warre (for recompence whereof yee now sit in consultation) by no other meanes, unlesse yee deliver free citties into his hands, to serve in bondage; then were it hard for you to resolve; for feare least either yee should send away a prince (your friend and confederate) without guerdon and honour; or seeme to chaunge that laudable enterprise of yours which you have begun, to staine and blemish your glory now (which you have acquired by the warre against Philip) with reducing so many citties and states into servitude. But your happie fortune easeth you right well of this difficultie and necessitie, that you need not  feare either to empaire your credite and favour with your friends, or to endammage your reputation and honour among men. For (the gods be thanked therefore) you have atchieved a victory, no lesse rich than glorious, and sufficient (if I may so say) to discharge all your debts, and set you cleare with all the world. For Lycaonia, Phrygia both the great and the lesse, whole Pisidia, Chersonesus, and in breeese, all the confines of Europe are under your dominion. Of all which provinces, if you lay but one by (which you will your selves) for king Eumenes, you shall mightily enlarge and amplifie his kingdome: but, give him all, you will make him egall to the greatest princes and monarchs that are. You see then by this, that you may recompence and enrich your allies out of the conquests gotten by warre, and nathelesse hold on your good custome that you have begun, remembring alwaies what title you pretended first in your warre with Philip, and now  lately with Antiochus: considering withall, what you did then after Philip was vanquished, and what is required and expected at your hands, now: not so much because you have used it alreadie, as for that it was meet and decent you should so doe. Many causes there hee (and those colourably just and lawfull) to enter into arms: one pretendeth this, another that; some in right of lands and territories, others of villages; some lay claime to towns and cities, others chalenge the

possession of ports and havens, and one tract or other of the sea coasts. As for you, before you  enjoied these things, you desired them not: since then yee have now compassed the whole earth, and are LL. of the world, you cannot possibly cover the same any more. Warred you have and fought for honour and glorie, in the sight of all the nations of the earth, who now this long time behold and regard your name and empire, no lesse than they doe the gods immortall. And I wot not well, whether those things which we hardly come by, be not with more difficultie holden and kept afterwards, than they were purchased. You undertooke to deliver and rid out of the servitude and oppression of kings, and to maintaine in libertie, a most auncient and noble State, renoumed for their worthie and famous acts, and right commendable for their singular learning and knowledge in all sciences. For your honour it is, having once received all this nation into your safegard and protection, to defend and preserve the same for ever. And thinke not, that those cities onely  are more Greeke which are built and seated upon the auncient soile of Greece, than their colonies which have beene drawne from them, and in times past went from thence into Asia: for the chaunge of aire and place hath wrought no alteration, either in the nature and complexion, or the manners and fashions of the people. As for us, endevoured we have to doe better and better, and each citie hath entred into an honest contention and religious emulation to outgo and surmount their forefathers and first founders in all good arts and commendable vertues. There be many of you who have been in Greece, many have visited the cities of Asia, and setting aside this onely, That we are farther distant and remote from you; there is no difference and ods betweene us and them. The Massilians, whom (if possible it had beene, that an inbred temperature might be altered and overcome with the strength and nature, as it were, of the soile) so many wild, barbarous, and untamed nations, environning them round about, would have made cruell and savage long before this day; wee heare say and understand to bee in that request and estimation (by good right, and their desert) among you, as if they dwelt in the very middest and heart of Greece: for not onely they retaine still the very naturall language of their own, they keepe them to their old fashion of apparell and attire, and carrie the same port in their gesture and countenance, but also above all things they have kept and observed their customes, their manners, their lawes and naturall disposition pure and entire, notwithstanding the frequent commerce with those, in the middest of whom they converse and inhabite. Well, the mountaine Taurus at this day is the limit of your empire and siegnorie one way: and therefore whatsoever lieth betweene you and that bound, you must not thinke it remote, but looke how farre your armes have reached, so farre let  your lawes and jurisdiction extend. Let Barbarians, who know no other lawes than lords hests, have their kings, since they take such pleasure in them, and much good may they do their hearts: as for the Greekes, they must doe as they may, and are not (wee confesse) in so good case as you, howbeit they carrie with them as brave a mind as your selves: and the day hath been, when they were monarchs, when they conquered by their owne sword a mightie dominion, and held the same when they had it. Now they are content with that empire where it now is, nay, they wish it may remaine and continue there for evermore, where it is settled at this present. They shall bee well apaied, and thinke they are well, to maintaine their libertie by your force of armes, since they have no meanes of their owne to defend the same. But (will some man say) there be certaine cities that held a side and banded with Antiochus: answere again, So were others before that took part  with Philip, so there were that combined with Pyrrhus, as for example the Tarentines: and to say nothing of other States, which I could name and rehearse, even Carthage it selfe enjoieth freedome, and is governed by her owne lawes. Consider then my LL. what a precedent therein yee have set downe to your owne selves, and how yee ought to confirme and uphold so good an example. You must resolve to denie that unto the covetous desire of Eumenes, which you would not graunt to your owne ire against the Carthaginians, which they had most justly deserved. And as for us Rhodians, with what valour and loialtie wee have served and aided you, as well in this warre, as in all others which yee have had in those parts and quarters, wee report us to your owne selves, and leave it to your judgement. And now in time of peace, wee here present unto you that counsell, which if you will accept and approove, all the world will beleeve and  say, That you have borne your selves more honourable in the usage, than in the atchievance of your victorie. This Oration seemed to fit well the greatnesse and majestie of the Romanes. When the Rhodians had done, the embassadours of Antiochus were called in. Who after the usuall and stale manner of those that crave pardon, confessed the king was in fault, and humbly

 besought the LL. of the Senate to have more regard of their own accustomed gracious clemencie, than remember the kings trespasse, who had paied sufficiently for it alreadie: and finally, that they would ratifie and confirme by their authoritie, the peace graunted by L. Scipio their L. Generall, according to those conditions, which by him were capitulated and set downe. So both the Senate thought good to admit of that peace, and also within few daies after the people gave their assent and established the same. And this accord was solemnely confirmed in the Capitoll, with the kings Procurator or agent, to wit, Antipater, the cheefe of the embassage, who also was Antiochus his brothers sonne. This done, the other embassages of Asia had audience, and were all dispatched with this one answere, That the Senate would send ten deputies or commissioners, according to the auncient custome of their auncestours, to heare, decide, and compose all  the affaires of Asia. But the finall conclusion of all should be this, That whatsoever pertained to the dominion of Antiochus on this side the mountaine Taurus, should be assigned to king Eumenes, excepting the countries of Lycia and Caria, so farre as the river Maeander, all which must lie to the signorie of the Rhodians. As touching the other cities of Asia, which had been tributaries to Attalus, those also were to pay tribute to Eumenes: but such as were sometime homagers to Antiochus, those should bee enfranchised and remaine free. The ten Commissioners whome they appointed were these, to wit, Q. Minutius Rufus, L. Furius Purpureo, Q. Minutius Thernius, App. Claudius Nero, Cn. Cornelius Merula, M. Iuntus Brutus, L. Aurunculeius, L. Aemylius Paulus, P. Cornelius Lentulus, and P. Aelius Tubero. These men had plenarie power and full commission to take order and determine as they thought good, in all the occurrents that were presented in  these affaires. But they had direction from the Senate, as touching the principall points: Imprimis, That all Lycaonia and Phrygia, both the more and the lesse, that Mysia, with the kings chases and forrests, that the cities of Lydia and Ionia, except those that were free at the day of the battell fought with Antiochus, and expressely by name Magnesia neer Sipylus, together with Caria, which is called Hydrela, and all the territorie of Hydrela lying toward Phrygia; moreover, Telmessus and the forts of the Telmessians, reserving only that territorie which belonged to Ptolomeus the Telmessian: that all these countries, I say, and cities above written, should bee given and graunted to king Eumenes. Item, That the Rhodians should bee ense offed in Lycia, without the foresaid Telmessus, the sorts and territorie, appertaining sometime to Ptolomeus Telmessius: which parcels, I say, were reserved as well from Eumenes, as the Rhodians. Item, To the Rhodians  was graunted that part of Caria, which lieth beyond the river Maeander, neere unto the isle Rhodes, together with the townes, villages, fortresses, and lands bounding upon Pisidia; except those townes which were free the day before the battell with king Antiochus in Asia. The Rhodians, when they had given thankes to the Senate for these gratuities, were in hand with them for the citie Soli in Cilicia: they alleadged, that they likewise as well as themselves, were descended from Argos; by occasion of which confraternitie and neere alliance, they loved together as brethren by nature in regard whereof, they made petition, that over and besides other donation, they would doe them this extraordinarie favour, as to exempt that cittie also from the servitude and subjection of king Antiochus. Then were the embassadours of king Antiochus called for, and treated with all about this matter, but to no effect. For Antipater stood stoutly upon this  point, and pleaded hard, That the accord was past alreadie, and might not be revoked or altered: and that against the tenour of the articles and covenants therein comprised, it was not the citie Soli, but all Cilicia that the Rhodians demaunded; and never would they rest till they were gotten over the mountaine Taurus. Then were the Rhodians called back againe into the Senate, unto whom the LL. of the Senat, after they had made relation how earnest the kings embassador was with them upon the point, added thus much more over and said, That it the Rhodians deemed in very deed that the matter concerned the honor of their citie and State, the Senat would worke all possible meanes to cause the kings embassadors to relent, how stiffe and obstinate soever they stood. For this courtesie, the Rhodians thanked them much more hartily than for all the rest before, and said withall, that they would yeeld and give place to the arrogant spirit of Antiochus, rather  than seeme to give any cause or occasion of troubling the peace. And so as touching the citie Soli, there was no alteration made.
Whiles these matters were thus debated and passed, the embassadors of the Massilians brought intelligence, that L. Baebius the Pretour, being in his journey towards his province of Spaine, was entrapped and enclosed by the Ligurians, and many of his traine killed outright in

the place, that himselfe mortally wounded fled without his lictours and sergeants into Massilia, and within three dayes left this life. The Senate upon this advertisement ordeined P. Iunius Brutus the Propretour in Hetruria, to go in person into the farther Spaine, and governe the same as his owne province: but first to leave Hetruria and the armie there unto one of his Lieutenants whom he pleased to make choise of. This decree of the Senat, together with letters from Spurtus Posthumius the Pretour of the citie, was sent into Hetruria: and so P. Iunius departed as Propretour into Spaine. In which province L. Aemylius Paulus (who afterwards wan a right glorious victorie of king Persius) having the former yeere fought unfortunately, now a little before the arrivall of this successor gave battaile to the Lusitanians with an armie rallied and assembled in half, in which the enemies were put to the worse and driven to flie. One thousand eight hundred of them well armed were left dead in the field, three thousand three hundred taken prisoners, and their camp forced and ransaked. The bruit that went of this victorie set all matters of Spaine in greater quietnes.
The same yeere, upon the29 December. third day before the Calends of Ianuarie, L. Valerius Flaccus, M. Attilius Serranus, and L. Valerius Tappo, the three Triumvirs, by order from the Senate, planted a Latine Colonie at Bolonia; and three thousand people were thither sent to dwell. Every gentleman by calling that served on horseback had 70 acres of ground set out unto him, and the rest of the coloners fiftie apeece. The land divided thus among them had bene conquered from the Boians in Gaule: and those Gaules first had dispossessed the Tuskanes of the same.
This yeere there were many men of marke and name that sued to be Censors: and this competition as if it had not bene of sufficient importance it selfe to move matter of debate, was the occasion of a contention and variance much greater. The competitours were these, T. Quintius Flamininus, P. Cornel. Scipio, the sonne of Cneus: L. Valerius Flaccus, M. Porcius Cato, M. Claudius Marcellu, and M. Acilius Glabrio, even he who had vanquished Antiochus and the Aetolians at Thermopylae. To this man last rehersed the peoples favour and affection most inclined, by reason of many congiaries and largesses which he had given amongst them in publick, by meanes whereof many a man was obliged and bound unto him. The rest, being so many and nobly descended withall, tooke it to the heart, and could not endure that such a person as hee newly risen and come up, and a gentleman of the first head, should be preferred before them: whereupon P. Sempronius Gracchus, and C. Sempronius Rutilius, two Tribunes of the comminaltie, commensed action against him to answere at a day, laying to his charge, that there remained a  surplusage of the kings monie and other pillage gotten in the camp of Antiochus, over and above all that which he either caried and shewed in triumph, or brought in accompt into the citie chamber. Many and sundrie depositions there were to prove this endirement, as well of lieutenants as of colonels. But M. Cato above all other witnesses was most noted: whose great authoritie acquired in the whole course of his life (which he had passed hetherto in all upright conversation and constant gravitie) was much empaired and discredited now, with his white robe that he bare on his back. He being produced as a witnes, deposed and gave evidence, that he had seene certeine plate as well gold as silver, among the rest of the pillage found in the kings camp, which he never could set eye on in all the triumph abovesaid. In the end, Gl
abrio because he would bring some displeasure particularly, and most of all upon Cato, said he would give over his suite  for the Censourship, since that there was another competitour as newly come up as himselfe, (whereat the Nobles indeed tooke indignation inwardly, although they said nothing) who pursued the cause so against him, even with incredible and inestimable perjurie. Well, a fine was set upon his head of a hundred thousand asses. And twise was the matter traversed, whether the mulct should be taken off or paid. But when the third day was come, and the partie in trouble (Acilius) had quite surceased to sue for the dignitie, the people would not give their voyces as touching the paiment of the fine aforesaid, and the Tribunes also themselves let fall their action. So T. Quintius Flamininus, and M. Claudius Marcellus were created Censors.
About the same time the Senate fate without the citie in the temple of Apollo, in regard of L. Aemylius Regillus, who had vanquished the Admirall of king Antiochus in a battaile at sea;  where he had audience given. And when he had declared what exploits he had done, namely, against how puissant Armadaes of the enemies he had fought, and how many ships of theirs he had either sunke or taken; the LL. of the Counsell with one generall consent and accord, graunted unto him a navall triumph. And hee triumphed upon the Calends of February.

 In which triumph, there were borne in shew fiftie crownes save one, of beaten gold: but nothing that store of coine as such a royall triumph required, onely there were caried in pompe 34700 Attick tetradrachmes, and 132300 cistophores. After this (by decree of the Senate) there were processions celebrated in considerations that L. Aemylius Paulus had brought his affaires in Spaine to happie issue.
Not long after L. Scipio came also into the citie, who because he would not be inferiour to his brother in the honorable addition of his name, caused himselfe to be surnamed Asiaticus. He discoursed before the Senate, and in the publick audience of the people, as touching his worthie acts. Divers there were who construed the thing thus and said, That the warre was greater in name than difficult unto him in the managing: for with fighting one onely memorable  battaile, the matter was atchieved and ended, but the glorie indeed of that victorie was begun unto him and prepared for his hand at Thermopylae. But if a man should judge hereof aright, and according to a truth, the battaile at Thermopylae may rather be accoumpted an exploit against the Aetolians than king Antiochus. For what great forces I pray you had king Antiochus there in field of his owne? But in the last battaile smitten in Asia, the whole power and puissance that he had in all Asia, stood there to be seene, yea and all the aids and succours which he could levie out of the nations as farre as to the utmost parts of the East. Great cause therefore they had both to render much praise and thanksgeving to the immortall gods, in as ample manner as possibly they could devise (for vouchsafing unto them so brave a victorie as it was, and the same with such ease and expedition) and also to graunt a  triumph to the Generall. He triumphed upon the last of Februarie, even the very day that maketh the leape yeere. This triumph of his was much greater than that other of his brothers, in regard of the magnificent pomp and shew represented to the eye: but if one call to mind the substance of the things themselves, and compare the dangers, the conflicts and difficulties of the one warre with the other; there is no more equalitie betweene them, than if a man should in comparison of captaine with captaine, set Antiochus to match with Anniball. He shewed in triumph two hundreth th
irtie foure field ensignes and standerds: hee caried before him the portraicts of two hundreth thirtie foure townes and cities: a hundreth thirtie four teeth of yvorie: two hundreth thirtie foure crownes of gold: 237300 pounds weight of silver: 234000 Attick tetradrachmes: 331070 cistophores: 140000 Philip-peeces of gold: of silver plate,  and that was all graven and chased, a thousand foure hundred twentie foure pound weight: of golden plate as much as weighed 1024 pound. Moreover there were led before his chariot thirtie two great commaunders; either gouernors of provinces under the king, or attendant in his court. Every souldier serving on foot, had given unto him 15 shil. 7 d. ob. 25 deniers: every centurion had double so much; and the gentlemen or knights triple. After the triumph done, the souldiours had their pay double in money, yea and the portion of corne likewise was doubled. He had moreover geven them alreadie a double proportion in Asia, presently upon the end of the battaile. A yeere it was almost after his Consulship expired ere he triumphed.
And much about one and the same time, both Cn. Manlius the Consull entred into Asia, and Q. Fabius Labeo the Pretour repaired to the fleet. Moreover the Consull had worke enough and  wanted not matter of warre within Fraunce. The seas were quiet after that Antiochus was defeated and subdued: Fabius therefore studied which way to take, and how to employ himselfe and his forces at sea, because he would not be thought and reputed idle in his province: so hee resolved at length to put over with his fleet into Crete. Now they of Cydon warred at that time against the Gortynians and the Guosians: and the voice went that there was a great number of Romanes and Italians, captives, living in slaverie and bondage in every quarter of that yland. Hee loosed therefore from Ephesus and set saile for Candie, and so soone as he was arrived and set a land, hee sent his messengers about to the cities, willing them to abandon their armour and surcease from warre, and to search and seeke up throughout all their cities and territories those captives and prisoners aforesaid, and to bring them to him: and moreover, to send their  embassadours or agents, with whome hee would treat concerning the affaires that in common touched as well the Candiots as the Romanes. The ylanders made small regard of these his messages: and unlesse it were the Gortynians, there was not one that delivered the captives. Valerius Antias hath recorded, That out of the whole yland there were rendered to the number of foure thousand; because the inhabitants were frighted with threats of warre. And that this was

the cause why Fabius although he performed no other exploit, obteined of the Senat a navall  triumph. From Crete, Fabius returned to Ephesus; from whence hee set forth three ships to the coast of Thracia, and commaunded that the garrisons of Antiochus should quit Aenus and Marona, to the end, that those cities likewise might be set free and enfranchised.


THE XXXVIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the eight and thirtith Booke.
Marcus Fulvius the Consull besieged the Ambracians in Epirus, and received them upon composuion  to mercie. He subdued Cephalenia, vanquished and brought under his subicction the Aetolians, and made peace with them. The Consull Cn. Manlius his colleague, overcame the Gallogreekes, the Tolistobogians, the Tectosages, and the Trocmians, who were passed overinto Asia under the conduct of Brennus: the only people that within the mountaine Taurus yeelded not obedience to the Romanes. Their first beginning and rising is set down: also the time when as they seized first of those places which they hold. Here is recounted also the example of the rare valour and chastitie of a woman, who being the wise of a certaine king of the Gallogreekes, chaunced to be taken prisoner: and when a Centurion had faced and abused her body, shee killed him with her owne hands. The Censors held a sissing of the citie: in which by computation were numbred 258328 pols of Romane citizens. Amitie was contracted with Ariarathes king of Cappadocia. Cn. Manlius triumphed over the Gallogreekes, not withstanding the contradiction of those ten Commissioners, by whose advise and assistance he had articled and engrossed the accord and alliances with Antiochus, and pleaded his owne cause (...) in the Senate against them. Scipio africanus was indicted as some say, by Quintus Petilius Acteus a Tribune of the Commoners: as others, by Navius, For that he had defrauded the citie chamber of some part of the pillage which (...) from Antiochus. When the day was come that he should make his answere, hee was called up to the publicke pulpit and place of audience, and with a loud voice said unto the people: My masters, you that are citizens of Rome, This very (...) h^^^ I w^m Carthage: and with that hee ascended up into the Capitoll, and the people accompanied him thither: and (...) thence, because hee would avoid these hard and iniurious courses of the Tribunes, and be no more tormented
with (...), he retired himselfe to Lito^um, as it were into voluntary exile: and whether be ended his dayes there or at Rome, it is not well known: for his ^^mbe and monument was to be scene in both places. L. Scipio Asiaticus (the brother of A^^^^^us) was accused of the same crime of embezeling the publicke treasure and robbing the common-weale, and thereof  condemned: but as he was led to prison, and should have beene laid up in bonds and yrons, Tib. Sempronius Grachus a Tribune of the Commons (who before-time had beene an adversarie and enemie unto the Scipioes) interposed himselfe and rescued him: and for that pleasure done, he tooke to wife the daughter of Africanus. When the Pretour sent the treasurers of the citie to seize upon all his goods for the use of the citie, so fare off they were from finding any remnant or to^^^ of the kings riches and money, that they could not meet with as much as would satisfie the fine wherein hee was condemned. And when his kinsfolke and friends had contributed and raised an infinite masse of money for him, he would not receive the same: and as much onely was redeemed and bought againe, as might serve for his necessities to find and maintaine him.

DVring the time of the warres in Asia, the affaires also in Aetolia were in small rest and quietnes: which troubles arose first from the Athamanians, who after that Aminander was dispossessed of his kingdome, were held in obedience  by garrisons under the captaines of king Philip; and they bare themselves so proud, insolent, and outragious in their government, that the Athamanians found a great misse of Aminander, and were desirous of him againe. Now remained hee at that time as a banished person in Aetolia; and upon letters received from

 his own nation (conteining the state wherein Arhamania then stood) he conceived some hope to recover his crown again: wherupon he sent the messengers back to Argithea (the chiefe city of Athamania) unto the principall men of the countrey, with this credence, That if he might be assured of the affection and love of the people, he would procure the aid of the Aetolians and come into Athamania, accompanied with the elect personages (and those are the counsel of that nation) and Nicander the Pretor. When he understood and perceived that they were prest and redy to doe him all service, he advertised them estsoones upon what day he would enter with his armie into Athamania. At the first there were but foure persons that conspired against the Macedonian garrison, and these tooke every one sixe more unto them for to be assistant in the execution of their complot. But afterwards, trusting but little in this small number of their adherents  and complices (who indeed wer fitter tokeep counsell and conceale a matter secretly, than to performe any action valiantly) they adjoyned unto them the like number unto the other: so as now they were two and fiftie in all; and they devided themselves into foure companies. One crew of them went to Heraclea; another to Tetraphylia, where as the kings treasure was usually kept; a third sort tooke their way to Theudoria; and the fourth to Argithea. But they all agreed upon this course; to hold themselves quiet and peaceable at their first comming, and to converse in the market place of these cities, as if they were come about some particular negotiation of their own: and upon a certain day appointed, to set to it at once, and raise the whole multitude for to expell the Macedonian garisons out of their fortresses. Now when the day was come and Aminander ready upon the frontiers with his forces of a thousand Aetolians, the garrisons  of the Macedonians were at one instant chased out of those foure citie
s aforesaid, like as it was complotted beforehand: and letters were dispatched from all parts into other cities, advising them to deliver and free themselves from the tyrannie of Philip, and to restore Aminander into his lawfull kingdome and throne of his father. Thus the Macedonians were expelled in every quarter: only the town Theium made resistance and held out some few daies against the siege, by occasion that Zeno (captaine of the garrison there) had intercepted the letters, and they that sided with Philip were possessed of the castle. But in the end surrendred it was likewise unto Aminander, and all Athamania reduced unto his obedience, excepting only the fort of Athenaeum, situate upon the marches of Macedonie.
Philip advertised of the revolt of Athamania, accompanied with a power of sixe thousand  fighting men, put himselfe in his journey, and with exceeding expedition, marched as farre as Gomphi. Where he left the greater part of his forces, (for they had not been able to endure so long a journey) and with two thousand came to Athenaeum, the onely place held by his garrison to his use. And from thence, after hee had founded the next neighbours, and soone found that there was nothing but hostilitie among them, he retired to Gomphi, and jointly with all his forces together returned into Athamania. Then hee sent Zeno before with a thousand footmen, and gave him in charge to seize upon Aethopia, a place that directly for his purpose commandeth Argithea: and seeing that his men were possessed thereof, himselfe sat him downe, and pitched his tents about a certaine temple dedicated to the name of Iupiter. There hee was forced by reason of the foule and stormie weather to stay one whole day, and the morrow after hee went  forward with his armie to Argithea. As they marched, behold they discovered the Athamanians, running from divers parts to the hil top, which stood over the way along. They had no sooner espied them, but the formost ensignes made stay, and all that regiment of the vaward was surprised with feare and fright. Every man began for his part to cast many doubts, and think with himselfe what should become of them, in case their companies were entered once into the vallies, so checked by those rockes abovesaid. This tumult and trouble caused the king perforce to call backe those in the foreward, and to retire the same way that hee came, notwithstanding hee was very desirous (if they would have seconded him) to have made quickspeed, and gotten through those streights. The Athamanians at first followed after them aloose quietly ynough: but when they had once joined with the Aetolians, leaving them behind to come upon the taile of the e
nemie,  they spread themselves all about, and flanked them on the sides: some of them also got afore their head by the next waies which they were acquainted with, and beset the passages; insomuch, as the Macedonians were so greatly troubled, that forced they were (more like men that fled in disarray, than marched in good order) to leave much of their armour, and many of their men behind, to passe over the river; and there the chase ended. From thence the Macedonians returned

safely to Gomphi, and so forth into Macedonie.
The Athamanians and Aetolians assembled from all parts to Ethopia for to surprise and defeat  Zeno and that regiment of a thousand Macedonians which was with him. But the Macedonians reposing no great trust in that place, retired from Ethopia, to an hill much higher and steeper on all sides, and therefore lesse accessible. The Athamanians having found out diverse avenues unto it, enforced them to forgoe that hold also. And when they were dispersed among the blind rockes, and to them unknowne, and could not readily find the way out, some of them were taken prisoners, and others slaine. Many for feare tumbled down headlong from the pitch of the cliffes, and brake their neckes, and very few escaped with Zeno to the king. The next day after they obtained truce, untill they had committed their dead to earth.
Aminander having thus repossessed his realme, sent embassadours to Rome unto the Senate;  likewise unto the Scipioes in Asia (who after the great battell with Antiochus, sojourned in Ephesus.) He craved peace and pardon, he excused himselfe in that he had recovered his fathers kingdome, by the meanes and helpe of the Aetolians, and withall laid great fault and blame upon king Philip. As for the Aetolians, they departed out of Athamania, and made an expedition against the Amphilochians, and by consent of the greater part, reduced the whole nation under their puissance and subjection. Having thus regained Amphilochia (for in times past it appertained to their siegnorie) upon the same hope they passed over into Aperantia, which yeelded also for a great part thereof, and came under their obedience. As for the Dolopians, they never belonged to the Aetolians, but unto Philip. And at the first they assembled together in arms, but understanding once thatthe Amphilochians tooke part with the Aetolians, that Philip was fled  out of Athamania, and that his garrison there was put to the sword, they revolted likewise from Philip, and turned to the Aetolians. Who making now full account that they were sure ynough on al sides from the Macedonians, by reason of so many nations which environned them about, they tooke knowledge (by the common bruit) of the defeature of Antiochus by the Romanes in Asia: and not long after their owne embassadours returned from Rome without hope of peace, relating withall, that Fulvius the Consull had passed the seas alreadie with an armie. Vpon these newes, they were much troubled and afraid: and in this perplexitie, they induced and procured first the Rhodian and then the Athenian embassages, to the end, that by the credite and countenance of these two States, their praiers lately rejected, might have more easie accesse to the Senate: and with them they sent to Rome once againe the principall per
sonages of their nation, to trie their last hope of obtaining peace; and never forecast to prevent warre, before the enemie was come welneere within their sight. Now had M. Fulvius transported his forces to Apollonia, and devised with the princes and States of the Epirotes, where to begin warre. The Epirotes advised him to assaile Ambracia, which as then was united to the Aetolians. And why? it either the Aetolians should come to the defence of the place, they had a goodly large and open plaine all about to bid them battell; or if they refused the field, and would not fight, they should find no great difficultie to assault and force the towne. For not onely there was at hand store ynough of umber and other matter to raise mounts, mantelets, and other fabrickes; but also Arethon a river navigable, very commodious to transport all necessaries unto them, runneth under the walls of the citie; and besides, the summer was a fit season for warre-service. With these reasons they persuaded  the Consull to conduct his armie through Epirus. But when the Consull was come before Ambracia, hee found it was no easie peece of worke to besiege and assault the towne. This Ambracia is situate under a stonie and craggie hill, which the inhabitants call Perranthae. The citie it selfe looketh into the West, what way as the wall reacheth toward the fields and the river: the sort and castle thereof standeth upon the hil, and regardeth the East. The river Arethon running out of Acarnania, dischargeth it selfe into an arme of the sea, which beareth the name of the citie neere adjoining, and is called Ambracia. This towne, besides that it is well guarded with the river of one side, and defended with hils on the other, is fortified also with a strong wall, in circuit somwhat more than three mile about. Fulvius encamped strongly on the fields side, in two holds of a prettie distance asunder, and raised one skonce upon an high ground, opposite against the 
fortresse of the towne. All these places he determined to enclose within the compasse of a trench and rampier, to the end, that they who were shut up within the towne, might have no egresse, and that from without forth there should bee no ingresse, for any aid and succour whatsoever. The Aetolians were assembled alreadie at Stratus by an edict from the Pretor Nicander, incontinently

 upon the rumour that ran of the siege of Ambracia, intending fully at first to march from thence with all their forces. But afterwards, when they perceived that a great part of the citie was streightly beleaguered alreadie, and blocked with trench and rampier; and withall, that the Epirotes were encamped upon a plaine on the other side of the river, they were of advise to devide their forces in two parts. Eupolemus accompanied with a regiment of a thousand men lightly appointed, passed through the fortifications of the enemies, before they were joined and united together, and entered Ambracia. Nicander with the rest of the forces purposed at the first, by night to assaile the campe of the Epirotes, considering that the Romanes could not easily succour them, by reason of the river running betweene. But afterwards upon better advise, supposing this to be a daungerous enterprise (for feare least the Romans should discover their march, and so  intercept them that they might not retire againe in safetie) he altered his mind, and turned to the spoiling and wasting of Acarnania. Now when the Consull had made an end of all his fabrickes devised for to invest and enclose the citie, and finished his engines wherewith he meant to shake the wall, hee approached neere and gave assault in five places at once. Three batteries hee planted in equall distance asunder, and where the easiest advenue and accesse was from the plaine, full upon that place of the citie which they call Pyrrhaeum: one overagainst the temple of Aesculipius; and another opposite to the castle. With rams hee shooke the walls, with long poles and hookes he fetcht off and plucked downe the battlements of the walls. The oppidanes at the first were afraid to see these strange engines, and quaked to heare so terrible a noise of their walls battered: but afterwards, seeing that the wals stood uprightly beyond their expectation, they plucked  up their hearts again, and with
swipes weighed up either great counterpoises and weights of lead, or huge stones, then with a swinge they let them fall againe upon the rams of the enemies, or els tumbled mightie big logs of timber aloft, and so either brake them apeeces, or bare them downe. And as for their hookes aforesaid, they caught hold of them with yron floucks like anchors, and so drew them over the walls to the other side with a witnesse, and brake both them and their poles. Moreover they sallied out in the night upon the watch that attended their engines, issued forth of themselves in the day time, assailed the corps de guard, and put them in great teare. As things stood in these tearmes before Ambracia, the Aetolians by this time were returned to Stratus from their rodes which they made into Acarnania. And then Nicander the Pretour conceiving some hope to levie the siege by some audacious and hardie adventure, devised  that one Nicodamus should put himselfe within the towne of Ambracia with five hundred Aetolians; and appointed one certain night, and an houre also of the same night, when both they from out of the towne should assaile the fabrickes and engines of the enemie planted against Pyrrhaeum, and also himselfe charge upon the campe of the Romanes at the same time, and put them in fright: supposing by this twofold alarme (especially in the night which maketh every thing more fearefull) there might be some notable act and memorable exploit done. And Nicodamus verily for his part, in the dead time of the night, having passed unseene and not descried by some of the sentinels, and by resolute force broken through the rest of the watches, passed over an arme of the river and recovered the citie, and in some measure by this meanes hartened the besieged inhabitants to adventure any thing, and put them in better hope to accomplish all. And  when the night appointed was come, all on a sodaine he set upon the engines, as it was before accorded betweene them
. The adventure of this enterprise was much more than the effect, because there were no forces without to joyne with him; were it that the Pretour of the Aetolians was afraid to be too bould, or that he thought it was a better peece of service to aid the Amphilochians newly recovered, whom Perseus king Philip his sonne, sent from his father to reconquer Dolopia and Amphilochia, assailed with great force and violence. The Romanes had planted their ordenance and artillerie, as is abovesaid, in three places against Pyrrhaeum, which the Aetolians charged all at one time, but not with like preparation of means, nor with the same violence. For some came with burning and flaming firebrands, others caried tow and hurds with pitch, and faggots of drie stickes, and other like matter easie to be kindled, in such sort as all their companies  shone againe with a light fire. Many of the warders they killed at the first onset, but when the alarme and tumult was heard within the campe, and the signall given by the Consull, they took armes, and ran apace out of all the gates for to rescue and defend them. In one quarter the Aetolians did their deed, and fought with fire and sword: but in the other two places after they had given the attempt, rather than began any skirmish, they retired and went their wayes. The

heate of the medly inclined wholly to one quarter, where the two captaines Eupolemus and Nicodamus, encouraged their men as they fought from two divers parts, and intertained them with an assured hope, that Nicander according to agreement would be there and charge upon the back of the enemies. This for a good while maintained the courages of the souldiours: but perceiving there was no signe appeared of their countrymen, and that they kept not touch with them, and seeing withall how the number of the enemies encreased, and themselves disappointed and destitute, they flaked their fight, and were not so eagre upon the enemie, and in the end gave over: and having much ado to retire in safetie, were chased into the citie, after they had burnt some of the Romane engines, and slaine a few more of their enemies than there died of themselves. And surely if the service had bene followed in execution according as it was complotted and agreed, those devised engins no doubt mighthave benedestroyed, if not wholly, yet in ^ne part at leastwise, and that with great murder and carnage of the enemies. The Ambracians, bracians, together with those Aetolians which were within the citie, not only gave over that nights enterprise, but ever after shewed more coldnes to hazard themselves againe, as if they had bene betrayed by their owne fellowes. Not a man would fallie forth upon the ward and watch of the enemies, but they all from their walls and turrets stood upon their guard only, and with the vantage of the place defended themselves in safetie.
Perseus advertised that the Aetolians approached Amphilochia, quit the siege of the citie which he was about to assault: and after he had only haried and wasted the territorie about it, retired from those quarters and returned into Macedonie. The Aetolians likewise were enforced to depart from thence, by reason that their sea coasts were spoiled and overrun: for Pleuratus the king of the Illyrians, was entred into the river of Corinth with a fleete of 60 barks, and with the help of the Achaean ships that lay in the rode of Patrae, invested the maritine tract of Aetolia. Against whom were sent a thousand Aetolians, who waited upon this fleete at every tu^ne as they doubled any reaches, and with the vantage of the short wayes and next advenues by the land, were readie to welcome them on the bankes and make head against them.
The Romanes lying still in siege before Ambracia, by battring and shaking the walls in many places, had dismanteled a great part of the citie, and laid it open: howbeit, they could not enter within it. For at every breach where the wall was broken downe, they were readie to make a new countermure, and the souldiours standing upon the very ruines, served in steed of a bulwarke. The Consull seeing he could not prevaile by open force, determined to undermine  and make a secret way in the ground into the citie; but first he covered the place where they wrought, with mantilets. For a good while the pioners were not perceived by the enemies, notwithstanding they wrought both night and day, not only digging under the earth, but also casting up the mould as they went. But an huge heape of earth bearing up aloft from the rest, was discovered, and gave them within the towne to understand, what the enemies were about: and seating least they had wrought so farre alreadie as under their walls, and that they were at the point to make a way into the towne, they within began likewise to strike another trench just against the place covered with mantilets aforesaid: and when they had digged to that depth as the botome might be of the enemies mine, they made no words within, but in great silence laid their care too in divers places close to the earth, herkening if haply they might heare any noise  of the pioners: and when they once had gotten an eare of them, they countermined directly against them. And long they were not about it: for anon they came as farre as to the void holow ground whereas the foundation of the wall stood upon staies and props, which the enemies had set to beare it up. Now when their works were met together, and that there was a continued passage out of this trench into the mine, the pioners first fell to it and skuffled with their spades, shovels and mattocks, and such other tooles that they had used to worke withall: but soone after,
armed souldiours entred and encountred within the vault, and closely skirmished under ground. But within a while that manner of dealing grew more cold and slack by reason that they stopped up the mine betweene when they list, one while with sacks and hairecloth, otherwhiles with dotes and such trash as they could come by in hast and stood next hand. One  new invention above the rest was devised against those within the mine, and the same but a slight matter, and made without any great trouble, and this it was, The townesmen tooke a great tunne or dryfat with a hole bored in the botome, of that capacitie, as might receive a pretie pipe like a faucet within it; and withall they made a pipe indeed of yron to fit it, and an yron lid likewise

 to cover the other end or mouth thereof, but the same had many holes in divers places of it. Now this vessell they stuffed full of downe and soft fethers, and then set it with the head forward against the very mine. From the lid or cover aforesaid there stood proking out long sharp pikes, which the Macedonians call Sariffae, for to keepe off the enemies. Within the fethers they put a cole or sparke of fire, and then with a paire of smithes bellowes (the nose whereof went into the pipe aforesaid) they blowed the cole and set it on a smuddering fire within the fethers. By which meanes there arose not only a mightie deale of smoke, but also it caried with it a stinking savour, by reason of the fethers burning within; and so filled all the mine underneath, that skarce durst any man abide within for feare of being choked.
During these affaires about Ambracia, Phaneas and Demoteles two embassadors sent from  the Aetolians by a generall decree of the whole nation, came with a full and plenarie commission unto the Consull. For their Pretour (seeing of the one side Ambracia besieged, and on the other side the sea coast endammaged with the enemies ships, and in a third quarter the Amphilochians and all Dolopia piteously wasted by the Macedonians; and that the Aetolians were not able to oppose themselves and make head at once against three warres in divers parts) had assembled a generall Diet for to consult with the chiefe of the Aetolians what was to be done in this case.
All their opinions jumped in this one point, To seeke for peace (if it were possible) under equal and indifferent conditions: if not, yet in as tollerable termes as they might. In confidence and assurance (say they) of Antiochus, the warre began: and now that Antiochus is vanquished both by land and sea, yea and hunted as it were out of the compasse of the world  into an angle beyond Taurus, what hope remaineth to mainteine and wage the warre any longer? and therefore Phaneas and Demoteles were to deale, as in such a case and time, as they thought best, according to their wisedome and fidelitie, and the common good of the Aetolians: for what other counsel remaineth, what course else can they take, or what choise beside hath fortune left them? With this so large and free commission I say, were these Embassadors sent: who besought the Consull to spare their citie, to have mercie and pitie of their nation sometime linked in amitie unto them, and forced through very calamitie and miserie (for loth they were to speake of any injuries and wrongs offred) to fall into such follies: neither have the Aetolians in this late warre of Antiochus deserved to suffer more harme than they were worthy to receive good for their service in the former warre against Philip: and as they were not largely rewarded  and recompensed then, so they ought not to be punished and chastised extremely now. The Consull made answere againe, That the Aetolians had made a suing for peace many a time, but sincerely and truly at no time: and since they had sollicited and drawne Antiochus to warre, let them hardly follow his example in craving peace. Like as he therefore hath not quit and rendred some few cities which were in question about their libertie and freedome, but parted with a rich and wealthie kingdome, even all Asia, betweene this and the mountaine Taurus: so unlesse the Aetolians will simply lay all armes aside, and come to treate for peace unarmed, hee would never give them audience. And to be short, if they will peace have, they must deliver up their armour and all their horses first, yea and make payment of a thousand talents of silver, and the one moitie thereof to pay downeright upon the naile before hand. Over and besides this  braunch, I will annex unto the accord and covenant, That they shall hold for their friends and enemies, those whom the people of Rome reputeth to be theirs, and none other. To this answere the Embassadors said never a word, both for that they were very hard and grievous impositions, and also because they knew the natures and minds of their countrymen and neighbors at home, how untractable they were and not to be removed if they once tooke a pitch: whereupon they returned unto them, without doing anything at all, to know the advise once againe of the Pretour and the principall States, what to resolve upon in every respect, whiles all stood whole and upright. But they were welcomed with
outcryes, and well shent for their labour, in that they had not dispatched and made an end, and so were sent away, and commaunded to bring back with them one peace or other. As they went againe toward Ambracia,  they were forlayed and surprized in an ambush laid for them neere the high way side by the Acamanians (with whom at that time they warred) and were had to Tyrrheum and there imprisoned. And by this occasion the peace was delayed.
Whiles the embassadors of Athens and Rhodes (who were come already to intreat for them) remained with the Consull, Aminander also (the king of the Athamanes) presented himselfe under

safe-conduct in the Romane campe, and tooke more care for the citie ofAmbrachia, or A^^a. Ambracia (where  he had sojourned the greater part of his exile) than in the behalfe of the Aetolians. By them, the Consull was certified of the hard hap of the Aetolian Embassadors; and then he gave commandement, that they should be brought from Tyrrheum. When they were come, they began to treat of peace, Aminander in the meane while laboured what he could in that enterprise which he especially had undertaken, namely, to induce the Ambracians to submit unto the Romans: but when he saw he did but small good, for all his parling with the principall persons of the city from their walls: at length by the Consull his permission he entred into the towne; where, partly by good counsell, and partly by prayer and entreatie, hee persuaded them in the end, to put themselves into the Romanes hands. Now as touching the Aetolians, they found much favour by the meanes of C. Valerius the sonne of that Levinus, who first contracted amity with that nation;  and was besides halfe brother unto the Consull by the same mother. And the Ambracians after capitulation made, that the Aetolians who came to aid them might goe forth without harme, set open their gates. Then articled it was with the Aetolians: Imprinus, To pay 500 Euboike talents of silver; two hundred presently, and the other 300 at fixe paiments yeerely by even portions. Item, To render all Romane captives and fugitive traitors and rennegates that they had, into the hands of the Romanes. Item, To chalenge jurisdiction over no city, which since the time that T. Quintius passed over into Greece, was either forced by the Romans or entred voluntarily into amity and society with them: provided alwaies, that the yle Cephalenia be not comprised within this capitulation. These articles, albeit they were somewhat easier than they looked for, yet the Aetolians requested, that they might ac
quaint their counsell withall: and  permitted they were so to doe. Some small variance and debate distracted and held them awhile as touching those cities, which having beene in times past within their seignorie and jurisdiction, they hardly could abide to be dismembred (as it were) from their body. But in the end, there was not one but agreed to accept of the peace. The Ambracians gave unto the Consull for a present, a coronet of beaten gold weighing 150 pound. Their statues of brasse and marble, their painted tables (wherewith Ambracia was better stored and adorned, than all the other cities of that region, because it was the royall seat of king Pyrrhus where he kept his court and resiance) were all taken downe and carried away: nought else was touched, nor any hurt done besides.
The Consull dislodged then, and remooved from Ambracia into the higher and more inland parts of Aetolia, and encamped before the city called Argos Amphilochium, two and twentie   myles distant from Ambracia: and thither at length repaired the Aetolian embassadors unto him, who marveiled much at them, why they stayed so long. When hee understood by them that the generall counsell of the Aetolians had approoved of the peace, hee willed them to goe directly to Rome unto the Senat: and permitted also the Athenians and Rhodians (their mediators and advocates) to go with them and as orators to speake in their behalfe; and moreover he graunted, that his halfe brother C. Valerius should accompany them: which order when he had taken, himselfe crossed over the water to Cephalenia.
When they were arrived at Rome, they found both the cares and the hearts of the chiefe Senators wholly possessed beforehand, with many complaints and imputations that Philip had enformed against them: for hee by meanes of his embassadours and letters (complaining that  the Aetolians had unjustly taken from him the Dolapians, the Amphilochians, and Athamania; and that his garisons, yea and last of all his sonne Perseus, were driven out of Amphilochia) had wholly averred the Senat from giving any eare at all to their requests and prayers: howbeit the Rhodians and Athenians had audience given them with patience and silence.
The Athenian Embassador Leon (by report) mooved and persuaded the Senat with his eloquent tongue: and by a familiar parable and similitude, hee compared the people of Aetolia to the nature of the sea: For like as it, being of itselfe calme, is troubled and made rough by the winds: even so (saith hee) the people of that nation, all the while they entertained friendship with the Romanes, and perfourmed their faithfull promise unto them, so long were in their right kind, and continued peaceable and quiet; but after that Thoas and Dicaearchus began to blow from out of Asia, as  after that, Menetas and Damocritus blustred and puffed from the parts of Europe, then arose a storme and tempest, with the ghusts whereof driven they were to Antiochus, and cast (as a man would say) upon a rocke. Well, the Aetolians after they had beene much tossed a long time from post to pillar, in fine effected, that these articles of peace ensuing, were freely agreed upon. Imprimis,

 The nation of Aetolia shall maintaine faithfully and truly the empire and seignorie of the people of Rome. Item, They shall suffer to passe through their countrey and confines no armie that shall bee conducted against their allies and friends; nor assist them with any aid or maintenance whatsoever. Item, They shall repute the enemies of the Romanes for their enemies, and wage warre against them. Item, They shall deliver unto the Romanes and their confederates, all rennegates, all fugitives and prisoners that are among them, excepting such as having beene once taken and returned home, chaunced to be caught againe the second time: or those, who being Romane enemies, were taken prisoners by them, at what time as the Aetolians served in garrison under the Romanes. As for the rest, as many as are forth-comming and may be found, shall be delivered (without fraud or covin) within 100 dayes next ensuing, to the magistrate  of Corcyra: but those that appeare not within that time, shall bee likewise rendred whensoever their fortune is to be met withall. Item, They shall yeeled fortie hostages, such as the Romane Consull in his discretion will approove and like well of: provided, that none of these pledges be under twelve yeeres of age, not above fortie. Neither shall there be taken for hostage any Pretour or captaine over horsemen, not publicke Notarie or Secretarie to the state, not yet any one hath lien in hostage before-time. Provided also, that Cephalenia shall be exempt from the articles of this accord. Item, As touching the summe of money which they are to pay, and the manner and tearmes of the paiment, there shall be nothing changed of that which hath beene concluded with the Consull: yet, if they had rather pay the same summe in gold than in silver, they may so doe; provided then, that they keepe the rate and proportion,  of one for ten, to wit, that one golden peece of coine goe for ten times so much in weight of silve
r, and no more. Item, What cities, what lands and territories, what persons soever, which having at any time heretofore held tenor of the Aetolians, were by the Consuls T. Quintius and Ca. Domitius, or any time since their Consulship, either subdued and conquered by force of armes, or otherwise of themselves came under the obeisance of the people of Rome, the Aetolians shall make to claime not chalenge unto them. Finally, the Aeniades with their citie and territorie, shall appertaine to the Acarnanians. Vnder these conditions above-said, the accord was concluded with the Aetolians.
Not only in the same sommer, but also much about those very daies wherein these affaires were managed by M. Fulvius in Aetolia, Cn. Manlius the other Consull maintained warre in otherwise named, Galatia. Gallogrecia, whereof at this present I will begin to write. This Consull in the beginning of the spring came to Ephesus; where, after he had received the armie of L. Scipio and taken a revieu and survey thereof, he made an oration to his souldiours; wherein, first he praised their valour and vertue, in that with one battell they had finished the warre against Antiochus: then hee exhorted them to enter into a new warre with those Gaules who had succoured king Antiochus with aid; and were beside of nature so untamed, that unlesse their puissance were abated and their courage taken downe, to little or no purpose it was that Antiochus was remooved beyond the mountaines of Taurus. Last of all, some discoursehe made of his owne person, which was nothing prolixe and long, implying neither vaine untruthes not excessive reports. The souldiors gave audience to the Consull with great joy and a generall applause, making this account, that  since king Antiochus was vanquished, the Gaules alone (who were one part of his forces) would be of no puissance to withstand them. But the Consull supposed that it was much out of his way, that Eunienes should be absent (for then he was at Rome) who knew the countries, was acquainted with the nature of the people, and whome it imported and concerned very much, that the power of the Gaules should be enseebled and abated. And therefore he sent for Attalus his brother, from Pergamus, and exhorted him to enter into action with him and take arms. And when Attalus had made promise to aid him both in his person and with all the power that he could make, he sent him into his country to levie soldiors. After some few dayes, when the Consullwas departed from Ephesus, Attalus
(accompanied with a regiment of a thousand foot and two hundred horse) met him at Magnesia; and had given order to his brother Athenaeus, to follow  after with the rest of the forces; having committed the guard and government of Pergamus and the kingdome to those, whom he knew to be fast and faithfull to his brother and himselfe. The Consull, after he had praised and commended the young gentleman, marched forward with his whole power as farre asMadi^. Maeander, and there encamped, because it was not possible to passe the river at any fourd, and therefore boats and barges were to bee gotten together, for to

serrie and transport the armie. When they were set over the river, they went to Hiera Come, where there was a magnificent and stately temple of Apollo, and an Oracle in it. And by report the priests and prophets there, deliver the responds and answeres of the Oracle in verses, and those not rudely composed without rhithme and meeter. From hence they removed, and at two daies end arrived at the river Harpasus: and thither were embassadors come from the Alabandians, requesting the Consull either by vertue of his authoritie, or by force of armes to compell one of their fortresses which lately had revolved from them and rebelled, to return against to their former obedience. And hither Atheneus also, brother to Eumenes and Attalus, was come together with Leusus the Candiot, and Corragus the Macedonian, bringing with them 1000 foot, and 300 horse, of divers nations mingled together. The Consul sent one of his martiall Tribunes or Colonels with a mean companie, to summon thecastle or fortresse abovesaid, and after it was forced and recovered, he delivered it into the hands of the Alabandians. Himselfe kept one his direct way, and turned on no side, untill he came to Antiochia upon the river Maeander, where hee encamped. This river Maeander ariseth from Celaenae, where the first head and source thereof is to be seen. Now this Celaenae had ben in times past the capitall citie of al Phrygia. But in processe of time this old Celaenae was abandoned by the inhabitants, and not farre from it they peopled a new citie called Apamea, bearing the name of Apamea the sister of king Seleucus. The river Marsyas likewise springing not far from the foresaid sources of Maeander, dischargeth it selfe therinto. And as the common same goeth, at this Celaenae it was, where Marsyas the musician gave defiance to Apollo, and challenged him to play upon the flute. This Maeander above named, issuing out of an high hil at Celaenae, runneth thr
ough the mids of the citie, and first keeping his course along the country of the Carians, and afterwards of the Ionians, falleth at the last into an arm of the sea, between Priene and Miletus.
Whiles the Consull lay encamped about Antiochia, Seleucus the sonne of Antiochus, presented himself unto him with corn for his armie, according to the covenant contracted with Scipio. Some small variance and difference there was as touching the aid demanded of Antiochus: for Seleucus pleaded that Antiochus had capitulated only to find corn for the Roman soldiors. But this debate was soone at an end by reason of the stiffe resolution of the Consull, who sent a Colonell to warn and charge the soldiors to accept no corn, before the aid-soldiors of Antiochus were received. From thence he marched toThe same that (...). Gordiu-tichos (a citie so called) and so forward the third day to Tabae. This citie is seated upon the frontiers of the Pisidians, in that coast which boundeth upon the Pamphylian sea. This quarter was able to yeeld lustie men for war, when it had not ben any  way endammaged, but remained entire and whole. For proofe whereof, even then also there issued out of the citie a corner of horsmen, who charged upon the Romans as they marched, and at the first onset troubled them not a little. But afterwards, seeing themselves neither for number, not yet for prowes comparable unto them, they were driven back into the town, and craved pardon for their trespasse, readie to surrender their citie into the Cos. his hands. The Consull imposed upon them a pairment of 25 talents of silver, and 10000 medimnes of wheat, and upon that composition their surrender was accepted. Three daies after, the Romans came to Chaus the river, and from thence to the citie Eriza, which at the first assault they woon. After this the armie marched as far as to a castle called Thabusion standing over the riverHijul, Nigro. Diul, Incolis. Indus, so called of a certain Indian, whom an elephant threw and cast into it. Now they were not far from Cibyra, and yet no embassage appeared  from the tyrant of that countrey a
nd State, Moagetes, a disloiall and trecherous man in all his dealings, and besides, extreame hard and unreasonable. Whereupon the Col. sent out before, C. Helvius, with 4000 foot and 500 horse, to sound his disposition and mind. As these companies entred into his frontiers, there encountered them his embassadours, giving them to understand that the tyrant their maister was readie to do whatsoever they would command: only his request was unto Helvius to passe peaceably through his country, and to restrain his soldiors from wasting and spoiling the territories, and fifteen talents they brought with them for to make a crown of gold. Helvius promised to save his lands for being spoiled and wasted, but he willed the embassadors to goe to the Consull. Now when they had related the same unto him, he made them answere in these tearmes, We cannot gather by any signe or token (quoth he) that the tyrant beareth  good will and affection to us Romanes: and againe, if hee be such a one as the world taketh him for, we are to thinke rather of his chastisement, than of admitting him into our amitie. The embassadors sore troubled at this word, requested him for that present no more, but to take the crowne of gold, and to permit that the tyrant himselfe might have accesse into his presence for

 to parle with him and cleare himselfe. The morrow after, by permission of the Consull came the tyrant into the campe, bearing no port of a prince. For a private person and meane man of small wealth would have gone in better apparell, and caried a greater traine about him than he^ either went he so meanely, but he spake as lowly, hacking and hewing his words, as if hee had not been able to speake them out. He complained of his owne barenesse and want, and likewise of the povertie of the cities under his seignorie (for besides Cybira, he held in possession Sylium, and that which is called Alimne) Yet he promised to see what he could doe, if haply by undoing himselfe, and spoiling his subjects, he might make up five and twentie talents. Mary he mistrusted greatly that he should never effect so much. Are you thereabout? (quoth the Consull) Now verily I can no longer endure this paltering and mockerie. Was it not ynough, that in your absence you bashed  not to delude and disappoint us by your embassadours, but you must persist still in the same impudencie now that you bee heare your selfe in person? And would you make us beleeve indeed, that the disbursing of five and twentie talents will begger you and your whole kingdome? Come on sir, I say; Bring me hether within these three daies, and lay me downe in readie mony five hundred talents, or looke for no other favour, but your territorie to bee wasted, and your cittie besieged. Greatly affrighted was he at these minatorie words, howbeit hee continued still obstinately, counterseiting and pretending his needinesse and povertie, and after much base hucking, and rising by little and little, one while hasting and wrangling, another while praying and entreating, (and that with whining and putting finger in the eie) he was fetcht over at length, and came off to pay a good hundred talents of silver, and to deliver 10000 medimnes of come besides. And all  this was exacted of him to be performed in
sixe daies. From Cibyra the Consull conducted the armie through the countrey of the Sindensians, and after he had passed over the river Calau^is, he there pitched downe his tents. The morow after they marched by the lake or meere Caralitis, and set them downe and rested upon the river Maeander. As they advaunced from thence toward L^gon the next citie, the inhabitants fled for feare: whereupon, the towne void of people, but replenished with abundance of all things was ransacked and risled. This done, they arrived at the head of spring of the river Lycus, and the next day marched toward the river Cobulatus. The Termessians at the same time having forced and woon the cittie of the Lyrians, were now upon the point to assault the castle. They who were within besieged, seeing no other hope of succour, sent their embassadours to the Consull, beseeching his helpe, and making pittifull more,  how they with their wives and children were shut up within the fortresse, and looked every hour for death, either by famin or the sword. This fell out as the Cos.wished, namely, to have so good an occasion presented unto him, of turning his way into Pamphylia. At his first comming hee delivered the Lyrians from the siege. To Termesius he graunted peace, upon composition that he should receive first 30 talents. In like sort he dealt by the Aspendians and other States of Pamphylia. In his returne from thence, the first day he encamped fast by a river called Taurus, and the next day following, near a town which they call Xyline-Come. From whence he marched and held on his journie continually, untill he came to the citie Cormasa. The next cittie unto it was Darsa, which he found abandoned by the inhabitants for feare, howbeit, full of all kind of goods. As he marched still along the marishes, there met him embassadors from Lysinia, who came to tender  their citie into his hands. After this he entred into the territorie of Sagalassus, a fertile and plenteous quarte
r, for all sorts of corn and fruits. The Pisidians inhabit those parts, who are the best warriors in all that countrey. In regard wherof, as also for that their territorie is fruitfull and well peopled, and their citie strongly situate (as few like unto it) they were growne to be hardie and courageous. The Consull seeing no embassage presented unto him in the entrance of the frontiers, sent out forraiers to fetch in booties. When they perceived once their goods harried and caried away before their faces, their stomacks came downe, and then they sent their embassadors, and upon composition to pay fiftie talents, twentie thousand medimnes of wheare, and as many of barley, they obteined peace. From thence he passed to the fountaines of Obrima, untill he came to a village which they name Aporidos-Come, and there he encamped. Thirter repaired  the next day Seleucus from Apamea. And the same day, after he had sent away unto Apamea his sick folke and other baggage and pelse that he had (good for nothing) he tooke guides of Seleucus for the way, and entred into the plaines of Metropolis, and the next morrow marched as farre as Diniae in Phrygia. After this, he entred into Synada, where he found all the townes about abandoned for feare, and left desert. With the bootie and pillage whereof his armie was

so heavily charged, that hardly he could march five miles aday; and so he came at length to  Bendos, named The old. From thence he passed to Anabura, and the next day to the source of Alander, and the third day pitched downe his tents neere Abassus. There he lay encamped many dayes together, because he was now arrived into the countrie of the Tolistobogians.
The Gaules in times past being a mightie people in number, were induced to take a voiage either for want of land to inhabit, or for hope of bootie and prises: and supposing withall, that they could not passe through any nation whatsoever, comparable to themselves in feates of armes, entred under the conduct of Brennus into the countrey of the Dardanians. Where, they began to mutine among themselves: by occasion whereof it hapned, that to the number of twentie thousand of them, following two of their princes Lomnorius and Lutarius, departed from Brennus, and tooke their way into Thracia: where partly by warring with them that made  resistance, and partly by imposing tribute upon them that craved peace, they came at length as farre as to Bizantium: and after they had held tributarie a good time the coast ofMar di Marmora. Propontis, they possessed themselves also of the good townes and cities of that quarter. After this, they had a mind and desire to invade Asia; for they heard say, being so neere, how fertile and plenteous the soile of that country was. And after they had surprized and woon Lysimachia by a wile, and by force of armes conquered all Chersonesus, they descended to Hellespont. Where seeing how they were devided from Asia but only by the streights, and that it was but a small cut thither, their desire was much more inflamed to passe over. And for this purpose they dispatched certeine curriers to Antipater the governour of that coast, to demaund passage. But by reason that they effected not this so soone as they hoped, there arose another new sedition betweene  the princes themselves. Whereupon Lomnorius accompanied with the greater part, retired to Bizantium from whence he came. But Lutarius tooke from the Macedonians (who under colour of an embassage were sent from Antipater in espiall) two covered ships, and three brigandines. By meanes of these vessels, within few dayes he had set over all his
armie, transporting them one after another day and night continually. Not long after Lomnorius also passed over into Asia from Byzantium, by the aid of Nicomedes king of Birhynia. After this, the Gaules joined againe together in one, and succored Nicomedes in his warres against Zybaea, who held a part of Bithynia, and by their help and assistance especially, Zybaea was vanquished, and all Bithynia became subject to Nicomedes. Then they departed out of Bithynia into Asia. Now of twentie thousand there were not above ten thousand armed. Yet so great a terror they struck  into all nations on this side the mountaine Taurus, that both they to whom they approched not neere, and also they whom they came unto, as well the farthest as the neerest, submitted themselves, and raunged under their obedience. In the end, being three nations of them, to wit, the Tolistobogians, the Trocmians, and the Tectosages, they divided Asia likewise into three parts, and parted them so equally among themselves, that each nation of them possessed a severall tract which paied them tribute. The coast of Hellespontus was given to the Trocmians: the Tolistobogians had for their share Aeolis and Ionia: and unto the Tectosages were allotted the inland parts of the maine continent of Asia. And in one word they demaunded tribute of all Asia on this side Taurus. But they planted and seated themselves about the river Halys. The bruit of their name was so fearefull and terrible, and especially after their issue was multiplied and increased  in great number, that the KK. also of Syria in the end, refused not to be their homagers and give them tribute. The first of al the inhabitants in Asia that denied them homage, was king Attalus the father of Eumenes: and fortune beyond the expectation of all men, favoured his hardie and courageous enterprise: for he vanquished them in battaile. Howbeit, he daunted not their harts so much, but still they upheld and maint
eined their soveraigne seignorie, in such sort, as their puissance continued untill the warre betweene Antiochus and the Romanes. Yea and after that Antiochus was vanquished and chased out of part of his realme, they conceived great hope to hold their owne still; by reason they were so remote from the sea, and therefore thought that the Romane armie would never pierce so farre as to them. The Consull now, for as much as he was to warre with this nation, so terrible to all their neighbours in those quarters, assembled his souldiours to a publike audience, and in this manner made speech unto them.
I am not ignorant, my souldiours, that of all the people which inhabitate Asia, the Gaules are most renowmed for valiance in warre. And why? this fierce and cruell nation having runne over the world in a manner, and warred with all countries, chose them a place of abode, and to

 settle themselves in the mids of a generation, of all other most mild and tractable. Big and tall they are of stature and personage: their hair they weare long in golden-crisped and shining locks: they carie bucklers of huge bignes, and handle swords of exceeding length. Besides, when they enter into battaile, they use to sing, to houp and daunce, and with clattering their rarguets and weapons together after the guise of their country, they make an horrible noiso, And all this is done of purpose by them to terrific their enemies. But such devises as these be, let the Greeks, the Phrygians and Carians be afraid of, who are not used and accustomed to heare and see such things as for the Romanes, acquainted with the Gaules sodaine and tumultuous warres, they can skill well enough of these their toyes and vanities also. Once in deed, and but once, at the first encounter they discomfited the Romanes at the river Allia: but since that time our Auncestors  for the space of two hundred yeeres have made havock of them, killed, put to flight, and driven them like sheepe before them: and ostner, I dare well say, have they triumphed of the Gaules, than of all the world besides. Thus much we know of them by experience, that if a man be able to stand out their first shock and violence (which upon a furious heate of their owne by nature, and in blind choler and anger they spend all at once) all the parts of their bodie run to sweate and become saint: their weapons are readie to fall out of their hands: their bodies are so tender, their courages so feeble (after their cholerick anger is once alayed and passed) that the very heate of the sunne, the dust and the drought is able without drawing sword, to overthrow them and lay them along. Prouse and tryall wee have had of them, not onely legions to legions, but man to man. T. Manlius and M. Valerius have shewed plainely  how farre Romane vertue and prowesse surpasseth the furious rage of Gaules. Why? even Marcus Manlius one man alone, repulsed and beat downe the Gaules as they climbed up by numbers to the Capitoll cliffe. And those auncestours of ours before named, had then to deale, with naturall Gaules in deed, borne and bred in their owne country: where as these here, by this time now are a bastard sort of them and cleane degenerate; mingled they are with others, and in truth, as they be called, so are they Gallo-greeks. And it fareth with them as with plants, fruits, and living beasts, in which we see that the seed is not of that vertue, and so effectuall to keepe and reteine still the owne kind and nature, as the propertie of the soile and the aire where they are nourished, is to change the same. Thus the Macedonians who inhabit Alexandria in Aegypt, who dwell in Seleucia and Babilonia, and other Colonies dispersed over the earth, are growne  out of their owne kind, and in manners become Syrians, Parthians, and Aegyptians. Massiita seated among the Gaules, hath drawne somewhat of the nature of the nations adjoyning and bordering upon them. And what have the Tarentines left in them of that seveare, rough, and hard discipline of the Spartanes? For, what soever is ingendred and bred in the owne proper place, is ever more kindly, and reteineth it owne nature better; but looke what is transplanted into another soyle, doth soone degenerate, and grow into a basterd kind: for nature transformeth her selfe, and changeth into that wherewith she is nourished. Be sure therefore, that like as ye have defeated these Phrygians (for no better they be) overcharged and loden with French armes in the battaile against Antiochus, even so being now conquerours, yee shall subdue and hew them in peeces once already vanquished. And I feare me more that ye shall win  too small glory of them, than I doubt by fighting so little with them that ye shall have your hands too full of war against them. Why, even K. Attalus many a time and often hath discomfited and put them to flight. Neither would I have you to thinke, that savage beasts only newly taken, and keeping at the first their sell and wild nature, after a time that they have beene sed by mans hand, grow to be tame and gentle; but that the fiercenesse and crueltie of man, is likewise of the same nature to be dulced and made tractable. Are ye persuaded that these Gauls resemble their fathers and grandfires in conditions? Their forefathers long since left their native country for fault of ground and land to possesse; and being driven to passe through the most rough and difficult countrey of Illyricum, first came into Paeonia, and afterwardes traveiled all over Thracia, fighting ever as they went with most fierce and cruell nations, untill at length they seized upon  these parts and setled there. After (I say) they had been hardened and made more fell by so many travailes and daungerous adventures, they were received in the end within such a land, as through the aboundance of all good things, might feed and franke them up. All that fiercenes and savage nature of theirs, which they had when they first came thither, is (no doubt) mollified by the goodnes of a most fertile soile, by the sweetnes and pleasure of a most temperat aire, and last of all

by the gentle and debonair nature of the inhabitants their neighbours. And even you also (in  good faith) are to looke unto it; (martiall men although you be, and the very off spring of Mars himselfe) yee are (I say) to take heed and beware of these delights of Asia, and betimes to get you forth from them. So forceable are these forreine pleasures and delicate entisements, to quench and corrupt the vigor of your spirits; so powerfull is the commerce and conversing with strangers; so potent is the contagion (as it were) of their maners and discipline of neighbour inhabitants. Yet this one good turn ye shall have, that as against you they have not that courage which in times past they had; so among the Greekes here, they are of as great name as ever they were in auncient time. So that amongst your allies, you shall win as great honour by your victorie, as if you should have conquered the Gaules, when they were at the height of their valour and prowesse. After the assembly dismissed, and Embassadors sent to Epossognatus (the onely prince  in those parts who persisted in amitie with Eumenes, and had refused to aid Antiochus against the Romanes) the Consull marched forward. The first day hee came to the river Alander, and the morrow to a certaine village which they call Tyscon. Thither repaired unto him the Embassadors of the Oroadians, craving to be accepted as friends; but they were enjoyned to pay two hundred talents: and when they requested leave to make relation and report hereof at home, they were permitted. From thence the Consull led his armie to Plitendum; and after that, hee encamped at Alyattos. Thither returned they who had been sent to Epossognatus, togither with the Embassadors of prince Compulsus, requesting the Romans not to war upon the Tectosages; for that both himselfe and Epossognatus also, would goe in person to them, and persuade the nation to doe whatsoever they should be commaunded. The prince obtained his request; and so  from thence the armie began to march through the land which they callWoodl^^^^.Axylos: and well it mought so be called, for it hath no wood at all in it, nor beareth so much as thorns, or any thing els to burne and maintaine fire: cow-dung is all their burning, for want of other sewell. Whiles the Romanes lay in campe before Cuballum, (a fortresse of Gallograecia) they discovered the Cavallerie of the enemies comming toward them with a great hurrey and tumult: and they charged so fiercely and sodainly upon the corps de guard of the Romans, that they not only troubled and disordered them, but also killed some of them. The alarme beeing given within the campe, the Romane horsemen at once issued forth of all the gates, discomfited the Gaules, and flew certaine of them in the chase. The Consull perceiving now that hee was come into his enemies countrey, marched not from thenceforth without sending out his espials before, and kept  his armie togither in battatle array with great heed and carefulnesse. Thus hee held on his journey continually untill he came to the river Sangarius, where he purposed to make a bridge, because there was no passage over at any fourd. This Sangarius ariseth out of the mountaine Adoreus, and running through Phrygia it joyneth with the river Thymbris neere unto Bithynia, and so growing bigger by receiving a double current, keepeth his course through Bithynia, and dischargeth himselfe into Propontis; a river, not so famous and noble for the greatnes therof, as because it yeeldeth fish abuudantly to all the nations bordering and dwelling therupon. When the bridge was finished and the armie passed over, as they marched along the banke side, the Galli or priests of Cybele (the great mother of the gods) were come from Pessinus, and with streamers, infules, and other ornaments, met them: and in their fanaticall verses (as men bestraught  and out of their wits) seemed to prophesie and foretell, that the goddesse vouch safed the Romanes a faire way to warre and victorie, yea and the conquest and seignorie of that countrey. Hereat the Consull said, That he accepted their words for a presage of good fortune, and thereupon in that very place he pitched his tents. The next day he went as far as Gordium: a towne verily it is none of the greatest, but more frequented and resorted unto for traffique and merchandise, than usually such drie townes are that stand farre within the land. Three seas there be triangle wise, of equall distance all from it. On the coast toward Sinope, it hath Hellespont and the shores of the other tract whereas the Cilicians inhabite by the sea side. Moreover, it bordereth upon the confines of many great nations, who for their mutuall need and commoditie, have commerce of negotiation, and meet togither in that one place. This towne at that time  they found altogither dispeopled, by reason that the inhabitants were fled for feare; but well stored, and full of wares and goods of all sorts. Whiles the Romans lay there encamped, there came Embassadours from Epossognatus, reporting unto them, that hee had made a journey to the princes of the Gaules, but could obtaine no reason at their hands: also, that they were dislodged

 out of the champaine countrey, had quit their villages and lands in great numbers, and togither with their wives and children drave before them and carried with them whatsoever they could, and were retired to the mount Olympus, from whence they purposed to defend themselves by force of armes and the strong situation of the place. The embassadours likewise of the Oroandians, gave more certaine intelligence, to wit, That the whole people in generall of the Tolistobogians had seized the hill Olympus; that the Tectosages severally by themselves had taken another mountaine called Magana; that the Trocmians, had committed their wives and children to the guard of the Tectosages, minding with a maine armie to aid the Tolistobogians. Now at that time the princes of those three States were Orgiago, Combalomarus, and Gaulotus. And the principall reason and meanes that these had to enterprise warre,  was this, That being possessed of the highest hilles of that countrey, and having brought thither provision of all things to serve them for a long space, they supposed to wearie and weare out their enemies in processe of time. For this account they made, that they would never venture to march against them, through so hard, so difficult, and disadvantageous places; and if they assaied so to doc, they might be empeached, repulsed backe and beaten down with a small companie again, if they would sit still in leaguer at the foot of those frosen mountaines and doe nothing, they were never able to endure the cold and the scarcitie which they should find there. And notwithstanding the very altitude and height of the places defended them, yet over and besides they cast a trench, and made other defences round about the tops of the mountains which they held. Also for provision of darts and other shot, it was the least of all their care, supposing  that the rough places would furnish them with sufficient store of stones to fling. The Consull forecasting in his mind that hee should not deale with these enemies close at hand-fight, but a far off when he was to assaile their holds, had made provision aforehand of great store of darts, light velitarie javelines, arrowes, bullets of lead, and small stones that might be levelled and sent out of slings. Thus being well appointed and furnished with such kind of shot, hee led his armie toward the mountaine Olympus, and about five miles off he encamped. The next day hee together with Attalus advanced forward with 500 men of armes to view the nature and standing of the mountain, togither with the situation of the Gaules camp. But the enemies horsmen being double in number to them, issued out of their camp, and put them to flight, slew a few of them in the rout, and hurt many. The third day hee set forward with all his forces to discover the places, and  by reason that there came not one of them out of their defences and fortifications, hee rode round about the mountaine in safetie at his pleasure, and perceived that on the South side, there were certaine little hils, all of cleane earth without stones, and the same rising up with an easie ascent to a certaine place; but to the North were high rocks, and the same in maner steepe upright. And whereas all the rest were inaccessible, three onely waies and advenues hee found, the one directly toward the midst of the mountain (where those litle mounts of earth stood) the other two were difficult, the one lying Southeast, and the other Northwest. After hee had considered and viewed these places that day, hee pitched his campe at the very root and foot of the hill. The morrow after he sacrificed, and finding by the first beasts which hee killed, that the gods were pacified and favourable unto him, hee devided his armie into three battaillons, and so advaunced  against the enemie, and himselfe in person with the greatest part of his forces, mounted up the hill, whereas it yeelded the easiest ascent. Hee commaunded his brother L. Manlius, from the Southwest to get up the hill, as the place would permit with safetie, giving him in charge that if he met with any daungerous places steepe and hard of ascent, that hee should not wrestle with the difficulties of the ground, nor strive against those things, which to force and overcome were unpossible; but rather to traverse the ground, and retire toward him, and so to join with his battaillon. As for C. Helvius, hee willed him with a third part of the forces, to wheele about by little and little, and fetch a compasse at the hill foot, and then from the Northwest to mount up. Likewise the aids of Attalus, he devided into three equall parts, and tooke order that the young prince himselfe in person should keepe with him. The Cavallerie and the elephants hee left in  the next downes beneath the hils, and charged the captaines thereof to have a carefull eie and good regard to marke what was done in every place, yea, and to make hast to rescue and succour wheresoever need should be. The Gaules making full reckoning that on two sides they were sure inough, and the place that way to be inaccessible; because they would stop the other advenue by force of armes on the South side, sent forth about foure thousand armed men to seize upon a

certaine hill within a mile of their campe, which hill commaunded the way, supposing there, as  from a skonce and fortresse to debarre them of passage. Which when the Romanes perceived, they put themselves in readinesse to fight. A pretty space before the ensignes, marched the skirmishers, together with the Candiote archers and slingers from Attalus; likewise the Triballians of Thrace. The ensigns of the footmen followed softly after (as well as they might) against the hill, bearing their targets before them so, as they seemed to cover themselves only to avoid the shot, and meant not to enter into any fight hand to hand. The fight at first was equall, performed with shot a good distance off: for as the Gaules gar the advauntage of the ground, so the Romans had the ods for varietie and store of darts. But as the skirmish continued and encreased, there was no more equalitie seene. For the shields of the Gaules being made long, and not broad ynough for their bodies, and withall flat and plaine without, hardly covered and defended them: and by this time all their shot was spent; and weapon had they none but their very swords, wherof there was no use at all, considering the enemie came not to close fight. The onely helpe they had was with stones, and those too big for their handling and not easie to weld, by reason they were not provided before, but such as in that hast came next to their hand without any choise. Moreover, being not used and exercised to flinging, they had neither the artificiall fleight, nor yet sufficient strength to helpe themselves withall: but contrariwise, from all parts were pelted with bullets of lead, and galled with arrowes and darts at unwares, which they could neither ward nor avoid; and for that with anger and fear together their wits and understandings were blinded, they wist not what to doe, seeing themselves surprised and overtaken in a kind of fight whereunto they were least of al fitted. For as in close conflict hand to hand, where blows are dealt, where raps  are given and taken enterchangeably, choler kindleth courage: even so, when men are wounded aloofe with light darts, and from whence they know not, they wot not upon whom to run, and at whom to make in that blind fit of theirs, but they turne upon their owne fellowes without all reason at a venture, like wild beasts galled with arrowes sticking in their sides. Now, they receive not a wound but it is seene, by reason that they fight naked, and their bodies are faire, slicke, and white, as being never bare but in battell: by which meanes greater store of bloud gushout of the wounds in their fleshly bodies, the gashes appeare greater, and their white skin much more stained with black bloud. But they passe not so much for broad and wide flashes (for otherwhiles when the skin is cut away, and the wound rather broad than deep, they take more pride therin, and think they fight with greater honor.) Mary, if it happen at any time, that an arrow head or a bullet  sticking within the flesh all hidden, put them to paine and torment, notwithstanding the hurt be small in apparence, yet when they seeke to plucke out an arrow, and the head will not follow, then they take on and are starke mad, for shame that so final a prick should plague them so, and be readie to kill them, insomuch as they cast themselves on the ground, and lie wallowing along every where. Others there be of them that ran full upon their enemie, and those were sticked with arrowes and darts from all parts, and when they came neere to hand, were by the skirmishers killed and cut in peeces with their swords. These souldiours use to cover themselves with a shield of three foot long, carrying in their right hand certaine speares to use aloofe, and weare by their side a Spanish sword. Now in case they come to hand fight, they shift their speare out of the right hand into the left, and take them to their swords. By this time there were but few of these Gaules left alive; who  perceiving that the light armed skirmishers of the enemies were too good for them, and seeing withall the ensignes of the legions to approch neere unto them, tooke them to their heeles on all hands, and began to flie amaine toward the campe; which now was full of feare and trouble, as where women and children and a multitude of feeble folke (not fit to beare armes) were thrumbled and jumbled together. The Romanes following the traine of their victorie, seized the hils abandoned by the enemies that were fled. About the same time L. Manlius and C. Helvius, having mounted so farre as they could find way, traversing the sides of the hill, when they were come to an end, where they could see neither way nor path, they turned to that quarter of the hill which onely affourded a way, and both of them began to follow the Consuls battaillon, a prettie distance asunder, as if they had agreed beforehand so to doe: and that which at first  had been simply the best thing to bee done, they were of necessitie forced at last to put in execution. For in such difficulties and places of disadvauntage, succours behind in a rereward, have oftentimes served in right good steed: that if those in the vauntguard should chaunce to bee beaten backe, they in the second place might receive and protect them, and also

 begin freshly a new fight. After that the formost ensignes of the legions, were come to those hils, which the light armour before had seized, the Consul^ commaunded the souldiors to rest them a while and breath themselves, and shewed them withall where the bodies of the Gaules lay dead along all over the mountaines. And if (qd.he) the light armed skirmisher, have made such a riddance of them, what is to bee looked for at the hands of the legionarie soldiors, armed all over in complete harneis? what will they do that carie the hearts of most noble warriors? surely they must needs win the campe, into which the enemie is chased and driven by the light armed souldiours. Howbeit he commaunded the light armour to goe afore, who all the while that the legions rested themselves, spent not the time in vaine, but emploied it in gathering together the darts and javelines that lay about the hils, to the end that they might have sufficient shot. Now the Romans  marched forward and approchedthe campe. The Gaules likewise for their parts, searing least their defences would not be able to defend them, stood armed before their trench and rampier. But afterwards being overcharged with all sorts of darts, they were driven in the turning of an hand within their hold, (for the more they were in number, and the thicker they stood, the lesse lighted any dart in vaine) onely they left strong guards about the gates and entrance into the campe. Moreover, among the multitude which was driven into the hold, there was discharged at randon a mightie number of darts: and that many of them were hurt thereby, appeared by their crie mingled with the shrikes of women and children. Now against them that warded the gates, and took up to the avenues with their guards, the legionarie soldiors in the forefront let flie their javelins. And albeit these were not wounded in their bodies, yet by reason that their shields and bucklers  were pierced through, they were most of them entangled one within another, and stuck fast. Long they could not abide the violence of the Romanes, insomuch as before that the victours could enter into the campe, the Gaules fled forth at all the gates wide open, and ranne they wist not whither like blind men, as wel through places which had no way, as those that were passable. No rocks so steep with downfals, no cliffes so rough with crags, could stand in their way; and nothing feared they affront; their enemies only at their heels affrighted them. And therefore most of them either fell headlong downe a mightie height and brake their necks, or else for very feeblenesse lost their breath, were windlesse, and readie to die. The Consull after he had taken their campe, would not suffer it to be ransacked, but commaunded the souldiers every one to follow the chase hard; and whiles the enemies wer thus affraid, to affright them throughly. Then came  the other regiment with L. Manlius, but the Consull would not suffer them to enter the camp, but sent them forthwith to pursue the enemies. Himself also in person anon after followed, when he had delivered the charge of keeping the prisoners, unto the militarie Tribunes of the armie: for this reckoning and resolution he made, that the warre was at a finall end, if in this tumultuous fright of theirs he might either kill or take prisoners a number of them. The Consull was no sooner departed, but C. Helvius came with his third regiment, but he could not hold his souldiours from the pillage of the camp, insomuch as the bootie and prizes were most unjustly dealt among them who were at no end of the skirmish. The Cavallerie stood all this while still and wist not of the fight, or that their fellowes had gotten the victorie: but afterwards they also espying the Gaules dispersed about the roote of the mountaines, made after them as well as  their horses would mount against the hils: some they slue, and others they tooke prisoners. The just number of those that were slaine can not easily be counted, because they fled farre and neere among the cranks and windings of the mountaines, where they were killed in blind corners. Many of them besides, having engaged themselves to the craggs and rocks that had no way forward, tumbled downe into the valleies of a monstrous depth underneath. Yea and some hapned to be killed in the woods amid the greives and bushes. Claudius who writeth of two battailes sought upon the mount Olympus, reporteth that there died there fortie thousand enemies. But Valerius Antias, who otherwise is wont to overreach and exceede in number, hath recorded not above ten thousand. But without all question the prisoners amounted to fortie thousand full, because they went with a traine of all sorts and ages, more like men dislodging and removing  out of one country unto another, than going to warre. The Consull after he had burned all the armour of his enemies in one heape, commaunded his souldiours to bring foorththe rest of the pillage and spoile into one place, and either sold and made mony of that which was to come into the publicke treasurie of the citie, or els parted it amongst the souldiours indifferently, with great regard, that every one should have a just and even portion. Moreover hee commaunded

them all in open audience, and rewarded every one besides with gifts according to their severall  deserts. But above the rest, and with the generall accord of all, he both praised, and also recompensed Attalus. For surely that yong gentleman shewed not only singular valour and forwardnes in all travailes and dangers, but also a speciall modestie and rare sobrietie.
There remained yet entire and whole the warre with the Tectosages, against whome the Consull made an expedition, and upon the third day arrived at Ancyra, a noble citie in those parts, from whence the enemies were little more than ten miles distant. During the time that he lay there encamped, there hapned a memorable act, performed by a captine Lady. Among many more prisoners, there fortuned to be kept in ward, the wife of prince Orttagon, a woman of surpassing beautie. The Centurion who had her person in safe custodie, was leacherous and covetous withall, as many of these souldiours are. Her he sollicited and tempted first to commit  folly: but seeing her altogether unwilling, and that she abhorred to prostitute herselfe unto him, he did violence upon that bodie of hers, which fortune had made bond and thrall unto him. But afterwards to mollifie and assuage the indignitie of this villanie, he put the woman in good hope, and promised that she should returne home againe to her friends: mary he would not do all for pure love alone and freely without ransome, for he bargained to have a certeine summe of gold besides. And to the end forsooth that no person belonging to him might take knowledge thereof, he permitted her to send one of the prisoners whom she would her selfe as messenger to her friends and kinsfolke, and appointed a place neere unto a river, whether the next night following should repair two and no more (of the said captive ladies friends, with the gold abovesaid) for to receive her at his hands. It fell out so that among the rest of the captives committed  to his guard, there was a bondslave of her own: this messenger at the shutting in of the evening the Centurion conducted without the corps de guard. The morrow night after came accordingly to the place appointed, both the two friends aforesaid of the gentlewoman, and also the centurion himselfe with his prisoner, where they shewed the gold, amounting to the full summe of one Attick talent (according as it was agreed betweene them) and with that the woman spake unto them in her language, and commaunded them to draw their swords, and kill outright the Centurion as he was weighing the gold. Which done, she caused his head to be stricken off, and wrapped it her selfe within her garment, and so caried it home to her husband Ortiagon, who from Olympus had fled and escaped to his owne house. But before that she clipped and embrased her husband, she threw downe the Centurion his head at his feete. And when he wondered  what mans head it was, and what act this might be, far passing a womans deed, she confessed to her husband the injurie that her bodie had suffred, and likewise the revenge for the abuse of her chastitie by force and violence: and (as it is reported) the mainteined the honor of this marronlike act ever after even to her dying day, in all sanctimonie of life and modest cariage of herselfe like a chast dame.
Whiles the camp lay at Ancyra, the Oratours of the Tectosages shewed themselves unto the Consull, requesting him not to dislodge and remove from thence before hee had parled with their lords and princes: saying withall, that they would accept any conditions of peace whatsoever, rather than warre. The time was set downe, even the next morrow, and a place likewise appointed, as just in the mid way (as it could be guessed) between the camp and Ancyra. The  Consull thither came at the houre assigned, accompanied with a guard of five hundred horse: but perceiving no Gaule at all there, he returned into the camp. And thither repaired the same oratours unto him the second time, excusing the default, and saying that their princes could not come in person by occasion of some scruple of conscience that arose the while: howbeit, the chiefe personages besides of the whole nation, should appeare, by whome all matters might be composed as well as with themselves. The Consull made answere, that hee likewise would send Attalus in his steed. So they came to this emparling from both parts. Attalus had three hundred men of armes about him for his guard: and certeine conditions of peace were drawne and propounded: but for as much as they might not grow to any finall conclusion in the absence of their chiefe commaunders, accorded it was that the day following the  Consull and their Princes aforesaid should meet in that place together. Now the drift of the Gauls in making these delaies and trifling off the time, was this, that first they might gaine some convenient space to transport over the river Halys all that ever they had (which they would not hazard with their owne persons, together with their wives and children) and afterwards to lay a

 traine of an ambush for the Consull himselfe, who tooke small regard, and was not provided for to prevent their vilanie intended under the colour of that conference. For that purpose, they chose a thousand horsemen out of all their cavallerie, of especiall valor and approved hardines, for the execution of this treacherous designe. And surely this their fraud had taken effect, if fortune had not defended and mainteined the law of nations, which to breake and violate they had complotted. Certeine souldiers of the Romanes sent out to purvey forage and fewell, were directed to those very quarters whereas the parlie abovesaid should be kept. The Colonels thought it the surer place for them, because they were to have the Consuls guard also opposed for their defense against the enemie: howbeit, they set another Corps de guard of their owne, consisting of 600 horsemen neerer to the camp. Now by reason that Attalus assured the Consull  so certeinely, that their Princes would come, and that the matter might be soone knit up and dispatched, he departed out of the camp with the same guard of horsemen as before, and when he had marched almost five miles forward, and was not far short of the place appointed, he discovered all of a sodaine the Gaules riding full gallop against them in most furious maner as enemies; whereupon he staied the march and made a stand, commaunding the horsemen to make readie their weapons and resolve to fight. The first charge and shock he received right valiantly, and stepped not back one foot: but afterwards as the multitude preased stil upon him, he began to give ground and recule, but so as he brake not the ranks of his troups. But in the end, when they found more danger in longer stay, than commoditie and help in keeping their arraies, they all at once turned their horse heads and fled. When they were disarraied once, the Gaules pursued  hard and killed them: and no doubt a great part of them had died for it, but that the forragers guard of 600 horse aforesaid came in to reskue them. For they hearing a far off the fearesull cry of their fellowes, made readie their armour and horses; and being fresh and in hart, entred upon the fight that was given over by their wearied and discomfited companions: whereupon fortune quickly changed, and the feare turned from the loosers to the winners; for at the first encounter the Gaules were put to flight: and withall, the said foragers and fewellers came running out of the fields, and from all parts made head and affronted the Gaules; in so much as they could neither flie readily nor escape surely, because the Romans with their fresh horses followed them in chase, and they themselves were alreadie tired: few therfore went away with life, and not one was taken prisoner, for the greater part by ods paid derely by the losse of their lives, for violating this their parly  under the colour of truth and fidelitie. The Romanes whiles their stomacks were inflamed with anger, the very next day came against them with the puissance of all their forces. But the Consull emploied two whole daies himselfe in viewing and discovering the situation and nature of the hill, because he would not be ignorant of anything requisit. Vpon the third day, after he had first taken the auspices and presages of the birds, and afterwards killed a sacrifice, he led forth his armie devided into 4 battailons. Two of them were to mount up the mids of the hill, and the other two he set in the sides to flanke the wings of the Gaules, and to march up against them. The Tectosages and Trocmians, who were the whole floure and strength of the enemies, made their maine battaile in the mids, consisting of 50000 men; and because ther was no use of horse among those rough and uneven rocks, the cavallerie alight on foot to the number of 10000, and those they put in  the right wing. The Cappadocians with Ariarates, and the auxiliarie Morzians, who arose to the
number almost of 4000 men, held the left. The Consull (like as before in the mount Olympus) marshalled his light armour for skirmish in the forefront of the vaward, and gave order to have ready at hand as great store of darts and other shot of al sorts as he had before. When they approched one another, all things answered both of the one side and the other, like as in the former conflict; saving that the courage of the victors increased in regard of their fortunat successe, and the harts of the enemies were much abated and daunted. For albeit themselves had not yet beene foiled and vanquished, yet they tooke the overthrow and loste of their countrymen for their owne. And therefore as the beginning of the battaile was sutable, so the issue was semblable. For the Gaules battaile was overspred and covered againe as it were with a cloud of light shot.  And not one of them durst run forth out of his raunge, for feare he should discover his whole body and lay it open to take all that came: and keeping still together as they did, the thicker they stood, the fairer marke they were for the enemies to levell at, and the more wounds they received. The Consull perceiving they were alreadie of themselves troubled, and supposing that if he set forward and presented unto them the ensignes of the legions, they would immediatly all of

them file, received the light armed loose shot, and the rest of the auxiliarie souldiers within his own  ranks and siles, and then advanced his legions. The Gauls affrighted with the fresh remembrance of the late defeature and overthrow of the Tolistobogians, carying also about themselvs the darts sticking in their bodies, weary besides with long standing afoote, and overcharged likewise with many a wound, could not abide so much as the first onset and shout of the Roman legions. Then began they to take their heeles and flie toward their camp, but few of them recovered it, and gat within the rampier and other defences. The greater number fled here and there on both hands, and dispersed themselves into all parts as it tooke them in the head, and as every man in this confused fright caught a way by himselfe. The conquerors followed them still even hard to the very camp, and all the way charged upon their backs, and bear them downe. Which done, they staid and stuck still in the camp for desire of pillage, and there was not one that followed  one foot after. The Gauls in the wingsstood to it longer, by reason that it was later ere they were set upon, but able they were not to abide the first charge and shot of the Romanes darts. The Consull, who could not possibly pluck those out of the camp that were once entred in, for greedines of spoiling and rifling the tents, sent out those immediatly that were in the wings to follow the enemies in chase still forward. These pursued them a certeine space: howbeit in this flight (for in truth it was no fight at all) there were not above eight thousand that left their carkases behind them, all the rest recovered the other side of the river Halys. Many of the Romanes remained that night within the enemies camp; the rest the Consull brought back againe to his owne. The next day he tooke accoumpt and survey of the prisoners and prizes, which was so great as a man would conceive that a nation of all others most gree
die of pilling and spoiling, might  possibly rake and heape together for so many yeeres, as they held all those parts within the mountaine Taurus by force of armes. The Gaules thus skattered in flight, rallied themselves into one place, and being many of them hurt or disarmed, and stripped cleane out of all they had, sent their embassadors unto the Consull to treat for peace. The Consull willed them to give attendance upon him at Ephesus: himselfe made hast to remoove out of those cold quarters, by reason that the mountain Taurus was so neer (for now it was the mids of Autumne) and led back his victorious armie to passe the winter neere the sea side.
Whiles the affaires thus passed in Asia, all was quiet in the rest of the provinces. At Rome the Censors T. Iuintius Flamininus and M. Claudius Marcellus made a new choice of Senators: and P. Scipio Africanus was chosen the president of the Senat now the third time: four  onely were left out and discadded; but not one of them had borne office of State, and had the honour to sit in the Curule chaire. The Censors shewed themselves likewise passing mild in the (...) of the Cavallery and order of knighthood. They put out to framing the foundations and (...)-works upon the Aequimelium in the Capitoll: and likewise they bargained for to pave the street with hard flint or pebble, from the gate Capena to the temple of Mars. The Campaines demaunded of the Senat, in what place they should be assessed and enrolled: and thereupon a decreepassed for their enrolment at Rome. The rivers were out, and great deluges happened that yeer. The Tyber overflowed his bankes twelve times, and drowned Mars field and all the low parts of the cittie.
After that Cn. Manlius the Consull had brought the Gaules warre to an end in Asia, the other  Consull M. Fulvius having utterly subdued the Aerolians, passed over into Cephalenia; and sent to all the cities about the yland certaine messengers, to found them whether they would rather yeeld themselves unto the Romanes, or hazard the fortune of warre? And so forcible was feare among them all, that there was not one person refused to surrender. And being enjoyned (according to the ability of the people who were but bare) to give hostages, the Nesiotes, Craniens, Peleusians, and Sameans delivered twentie apeece. This peace no sooner shone upon the Cephalenians beyond all their expectation, but sodainly one city of the Sameans revolted, and upon what cause it is not knowen: themselves alledged and said, That forasmuch as their cittie was seated in a commodious place, they feared greatly to bee dispossessed and turned out of it by the Romanes. But whether they onely imagined this and put themselves in fright, and so  chaunged their quiet repose for vaine and foolish feare: or whether there had beene question hereof among the Romanes, and upon much canvassing in mens mouthes the rumour of such a matter, ran unto them, it is not certainly knowen. Only thus much; after they had given their hostages, they shut their citie gates upon a sodaine; and desist they would not from their enterprise,

 for all the entreatie and prayers that their owne hostages made, whome the Consull had sent (for the nones) even under their walls, to moove their countreymen and parents to pity and compassion. When as therefore they would make no answere tending unto peace, the Consull began to assault the citie: and all the ordenance of artillerie and engines of battery were under his hand, which had beene brought from the siege of Ambracia. And looke what workes and fabrickes were needfull besides to be made, the souldiours with great diligence and forwardnes performed. So in two places at once they planted rammes against the city and battered the wals. The Samaeans on the other side for their part omitted and neglected nothing, that might either annoy the enemie or impeach the workes. But two things there were principally wherewith they made resistance and withstood their violence: the one was, a countremure within the cittie,  which they ever raised new instead of the old, and full as strong as it that was demolished and broken downe: the other was, their often sodaine sallies, one while upon the fortifications and fabrickes, other whiles upon the corps de guard of the enemies: and for the most part in these skirmishes they had the better hand. But one meane there was devised, and the same of small shew to speake of, to restraine and keepe them in from sallying forth. The Romanes sent toVictiza.Aegium,Paira. or ^^^. Inbactra.Patrae, and Cla^ ensa: all th^^^, (...): of Ac^^a.Dimae, for an hundred flingers. These nations from their childhood used to exercise themselves (after the manner of the countrey) to discharge out of slings into the open sea certaine round stones, which commonly the shore is overspread with among the sands: by reason of which exercise, they have more skill both to sling farther from them, and also to strike more surely and give a smarter rappe and stroke than those of the Baleare Ilands: for
their  sling is not made with one onely cord as the Balearians are, and those of other nations; but it hath three leather thongs hardened and made stiffe with many futures and seames, least if the leathering were soft and gentle, the bullet and stone within should wagge too and fro and roll out in the delivery and hurling of it: but being setled and counterpoised (as it were) it went merrily away, as sent and driven out of the noose of a stone-bow. And so well practised they were in this feate, that they could a great way off levell a bullet through garlands, rings, and hoopes of small compasse, and misse not: nay they would be sure to hit, not onely the head of an enemie, but any part of the face that they aimed at, point blanke, and never faile. These slings (I say) made the Samaeans to plucke in their heads, that they durst not sally out neither so often nor so boldly as they did. Insomuch as from the walls; they requested the Achaeans for a while to goe  aside and repose themselves, and see them how they skirmished with the corps de gard of the Romanes. Four moneths space the Samaeans endured the siege. Now when of that small number which they had, some or other daily dropt away, and wer either killed outright or wounded; and they that remained, were both tyred in bodie, and daunted in courage; the Romanes one night passed over the wall, by the fortresse which they call Cyatis (for the city where it boundeth upon the sea, lyeth toward the West) and entred so farre as the market place. After that the Samaeans perceived, that one part of the citie was taken by the enemies, they fled with their wives and children into a greater fortresse, and the next day yeelded: the towne was ransacked, and they themselves were all sold in ouvert market, to who would give most.
The Consull having set the state of Cephalenia in good order, and put a garrison within Samaea,  passed into Peloponnesus, having beene called and sent for to come thither a long time, principally by the Aegians and Lacedaemonians. Time out of mind, and from the first beginning of the Diets of Achaea, the whole nation used to assemble and meet at Aegium ordinarily, were it for to grace and honour the citie, or because the place was commodious therefore. This auncient custome Philopaemen that yeere began first to infringe, and went about to make a law and ordinance, That in all the cities of Achaea, their Counsels and Diets shall be holden in course and order at their times. And against the comming of the Consull, when the Demiurges of the free cities and states summoned the Diet to be kept at Aegium, Philopaemen (Pretor for that time) came with a countre-summons and proclaimed it to be held at Argos. And when it was evident to be seen, that they all in manner minded thither to resort; the Consull also (albeit in affection  he favoured the Aegians) came to Argos: where, after much debate, seeing the matter growing the other way, he desisted from his dessigne and gave over the cause. After this, the Lacedaemonians averted him from thence, and drew him away to the deciding of their controversies and dissentions. Certaine banished persons they were who most of all disquieted and troubled that state: and many of them had their abiding place in the castles coasting along the frontiers of

the Laconian territorie toward the sea, which was taken wholly from the citie. The Lacedaemonians much discontented and offended hereat, entred one night a certaine borough calledFachi Las, surprised it unawares to the inhabitants, and kept it to their use; to the end, that if need were at any time to send Embassadors to Rome or els whither, they might have some free accesse unto the sea: and withall, be served of a mart-towne for vent, and a place of receit for all forreine merchandise from straungers to their necessarie uses. The townesmen within, as also the exiles aforesaid (there dwelling) were terrified at the first with this sodaine and unexpected occurrence: but afterward (before day-light) when they had once rallied themselves togither, with small adoe and skirmish chased forth the Lacedaemonian: howbeit, the feare spred over all the sea coast, so that in one generall accord, the castles and villages every one, yea and the exiled persons (as many as there inhabited) dispatched their Embassadors to the Achaeans. Philopaemen their Pretour (who ever from the beginning friended the cause of the banished, and had alwaies advised and counselled the Achaeans to abate and take downe the puissance and reputation of the Lacedaemonians) graunted them at their suite and seeking, a Diet. In which (upon a motion by him made) there passed a decree in this forme: That whereas T. Quintius and the Romanes, had committed and delivered to the safeguard and protection of the Achaeans, the fortresses, burroughes, and villages, situate along the sea coast of the Laconians, and(by vertue of a covenant and accord) the Lacedaemonians had nothing to doe therein, but ought to forbeare them; and yet notwithstanding, the towne Las was by them forced, and a great massacre there committed: therefore unlesse the principals and accessaries both of that outrage, were yeelded to the Achaeans, they deemed the covenant and accord in that behalfe provided, to be broken. H
ereupon incontinently were ambassadours addressed to Lacedaemon, to challenge and demaund the parties abovesaid: but the Lacedaemonians tooke this for so proud a commaundement, and thought it such an indignitie, that without all doubt, if they had beene in as good estate then, as sometimes they were, they would immediatly have taken names. But nothing troubled and disquieted their spirits so much as this, for feare least if once they receive the yoke of subjection upon their neckes, in yeelding obedience to their first hests, Philopaemen would effect and put in execution that which he long intended and went about; even to deliver the citie Lacedaemon into the hands of the banished aforesaid. Enraged therefore with choller and anger, they fell upon thirtie of that faction who were complotted in counsell with Philopaemen and the exiles, and slew them out-right; and withall made a decree, To renounce and reject, all societie with the Achaeans; and forthwith to send their Embassadors to Cephalenia, with commission, to deliver Lacedaemon unto M. Fulvius and the Romans; and to beseech him to take the pains to come into Peloponnesus, there to receive the citie Lacedaemon under the obeisance and protection of the people of Rome. When the Embassadors had made relation hereof to the Achaeans, presently war was proclaimed against the Lacedaemonians, by common consent of all the states of that assembly and generall counsell: but the winter impeached them for entering into any action and present execution. Howbeit they made small rodes into their frontiers, and wasted the same not only by land, but also by sea, after the maner of robberie and piracie, rather than warlike hostilitie. These troubles drew the Cos. into Peloponnesus, and by his commandement a Diet was published to be holden at Elis; and thither were the Lacedaemonians sent for to argue and debate their cause. Where there was not only much reasoning and dispute, but also wrangling and altercation. The Co
nsull who in other points bare himselfe nicely ynough, and answered in doubtfull tearmes, as one willing to entertaine both parts, determined and ended the controversie in one only word, warning them both to put up their swords, and lay armes aside, untill they had sent their embassadours to the Senate of Rome. So there were embassages addressed both from the one and the other to Rome. In likewise the banished Lacedaemonians joined their cause and embassie with the Achaeans. Diophanes and Lycortas, both Megapolitanes, were the cheese in the embassage of the Achaeans, who as they jarred and disagreed in the managing of State-affaires, so they accorded not but varied in the speeches that they delivered. Diophanes referred the decision of all matters unto the Senate, as who were best able to compose all controversies between the Achaeaans and Lacedaemonians. But Lycortas, instructed by Philopaemen, required that the Achaeans might do and execute whatsoever they had ordained; according to the covenant, and the conditions therein comprised; and that they would maintaine their full libertie without abridging and empairing the same, according as they had received it at their hands. The nation of the Achaeans

in those daies was in great credite and reputation at Rome, howbeit the Senate thought it not good to make any chaunge and alteration in the State of the Lacedaemonians. In conclusion, they returned such an intricate and doubtfull answere, that both the Achaeans might construe it, as if they had permission and free libertie to doe what they would with Lacedaemon, and the Lacedaemonians againe tooke it, as thought they had not so large a scope and absolute power allowed them, as to doe their pleasure in everything. But this authoritie and libertie whatsoever it was, more or lesse, the Achaeans stretched beyond all measure and compasse, and used it too proudly and insolently. Philopaemen continued still in place of soveraine government, and levied a power to be readie in the beginning of the spring, and so encamped upon the frontiers of the Lacedaemonians. This done, hee sent his embassadours to demaund the deliverie of them into his hands, who were the authours of the revolt; promising withall, that if they would so doe, their citie should remaine in peace without any molestation, and they suffer and sustain no harm, before they had answered for themselves in open audience. All the rest for feare kept silence and said not a word, only they whom he had challenged by name, made offer of them selves to go, undersafe conduct received from the embassadours, and faithfull promise that no violence should be done upon their persons, untill they had pleaded their answer. Accompanied they were with divers noble personages of great marke and name, both as advocates unto them in their particular quarrels, and also in regard of the Commonweale, as farre as their private cause any way touched and concerned it. Never had the Achaeans before time brought the Lacedaemonians exiles with them into the confines of Lacedaemon, because they supposed that nothing might so much alienate and estrange the hearts of the whole citie as that. But then the whole head, as it were, of the
vaward, were no other but those banished persons. And as the Lacedaemonians abovesaid were comming, who should meet and affront them arraunged in order of battell at the very gate of the campe, but they? At the first they welcommed them with chiding and railing, after that they fell to bitter words and brauiles, and their bloud was up on both sides, insomuch as those of the banished crew who were of hotest spirit and sharpest mettall, made no more adoe but ran upon the Lacedaemonians: whereupon they called the gods to witnesse, and cried to the embassadours for protection; who together with the Pretour himselfe came between, voided the prease, and the safeguarded the persons of the Lacedaemonians, empeaching and staying some of their hands who were alreadie about to bind them and make them sure. But the tumult still encreased, and the multitude was all up on a hurrey. The Achaeans ran first to see onely what the matter was, and to be lookers on. But afterwards, when the exiles began with a loud voice to crie out, and report what wrongs and injuries they had sustained, beseeching them of their helpe, and avouching withall right confidently, that if they let slip this opportunitie, they should never have the like againe, alleadging moreover, That the league first made in the Capitoll, after renued at Olympia, and last of all confirmed by a sacred oth in the castle of Athens, had ben broken and disannulled by them, and therefore the guiltie and culpable parties were to be punished accordingly, before they entreed into any bond of new accord. At these words the multitude was incensed, and by occasion of one mans voice, who cried to strike and knocke them downe, fell to flinging stones at them. And by this meanes seventeene of them, who during the garboile chaunced to be tied in bonds, were stoned to death. The rest, to the number of sixe and thirtie, were the next morrow apprehended, whom the Pretour had sheelded and protected from violence, not for any desire hee
had to save their lives, but because hee would not have them miscarie and perish before they were heard. These were presented and exposed as a prey to the unruly and angrie multitude: and when they had made some small speech unto them, from which they turned away their eares, they were all condemned and delivered over to bee led to execution. When the Lacedaemonians were once put in this feare, then they were commaunded, Imprimis To demolish and breake downe their walls. Item, That all forraine auxiliarie souldiours, who were waged and served for pay under the tyrants, should avoid out of the Laconian countrey. Item, That all the slaves whom those tyrants had set free(and of such there was a great number) should depart before a certaine day; and that it might be lawfull for the Achaeans to attach the bodies, to sell and carrie away as many as staied and remained behind. Item, That they should abolish the lawes ordinances and customes of Lycurgus, and frame themselves to live after the fashions and manners of the Achaeans, for so they should be incorporate into one civile bodie, and better accord and sort together in all things. They condesended to none of all these conditions

more willingly and sooner, than to the raising of their walls, and nothing troubled them so much and vexed their heart, as the restoring of the banished persons. Howbeit there passed an act at Tegea for their restitution in a generall Counsell of all the Achaeans there held. In which assembly, upon a report and mention made, that the mercenarie straungers above specified, and the new enrolled Lacedaemonians called Ascripti (for so they tearmed them, who by the tyrants were enfranchised and endued with freedome) had abandoned the citie, and were departed sundry waies into the countrey, it was thought good before the armie was dissolved and called, that the Pretor should go with a companie lightly armed and appointed, to lay hold upon all that sort of people, and make sale of them, as of a prize and bootie gained from the enemies. Many of them were apprehended and sold. And with the money raised of them, that porch or gallerie at Megalopolis, which had been ruinate by the Lacedaemonians, was by the permission  unjustly held in the possession, was laid againe to that citie, according to an old decree of the Achaeans, which was made during the reigne of king Philip, sonne of Amyntas. The citie of the Lacedaemonians by this meanes much enseebled, continued a long time in subjection and thraldome under the Achaeans. But their State received dammaged by no one thing so much, as by the abolishing of the discipline of Lycurgus, to which they had beene used and accustomed for the space of seven hundred yeares.
Presently after the holding of this Diet, wherein the Achaeans and Lacedaemonians debated their causes before the Consull, M. Fulvius repaired to Rome(for that the yeare was almost expired) against the solemne election of new magistrates; wherein he created for Consuls, M. Valerius  Messala, and C. Livius Salinator, and gave the repulse to M. Aemylius Lepidus his enemie, who that yeere made suite also to be Consull. This done, there were Pretours also chosen, to wit, Q. Martius Philippus, M. Claundius Marcellus, C. Stertinius, C. Catinius, P. Claudius Pulcher, and Lo. Manlius Acidinius. When this election was ended, at was thought expedient that M. Fulvius should returned into his former province to the armie there: and not only he, but his colleague also Cn. Manlius, had their commission revived, and they continued in government another yeere. The same yeere according to the direction of the Decemvirs, there was brought into the temple of Hercules the statue of the same god: and within the Capitoll were set up by Cn. Cornelius sixe steeds in gold drawing a chariot with this inscription, That he being Consull, gave that present. Also P. Claudius and Serv. Sulpitius Galbe, AEdiles Curule, hung up twelve  brasen shields, made of the fines that certeine commudgins paid, for hourding up and keeping in their graine. Moreover Q. Fulvius Flaccus an AEdile of the Commons, erected two golden images raised of the monie that one guilty person was condemned in (for they commensed their actions severally by themselves.) As for A. Cecilius his companion, he condemned none. The Romane great games were set forth all throughout, thrice: and the Plebeian plaies exhibited likewise full and whole, five times.
After this, M. Valerius Messala and C. Livius Salinator, entred their Consulship upon the (...) 15. day of March, and proposed before the Senat as concerning the affaires of the State, touching their provinces also, and the armies. As for AEtolia and Asia, there was no change at all. The Consull, by a decree of the Senat had the charge, one of Pisae, togither with the Ligurians;  and the other of Gaule: and they were commaunded either to agree between themselves, or to cast lots for their provinces. They were enjoyned also to levie new armies, and each of them to enroll two legions, and either of them to charge the allies of the Latine nation with 15000 foot, and 1200 horsemen. Vnto Messala fell the government of Liguria: and to Salinator of Gaule. After this, the Pretors likewise cast lots for their provinces: the jurisdiction within Rome of citizens was allotted to M. Claudius, and of forainers to P. Claudius. Sicilie to Q. Martius, Sardinia to C. Stertinius, high Spaine to L. Manlius, and the low to C. Atinius. As for the armies, ordeined it was, that the legions under the conduct of C. Laelius should be withdrawne out of Gaule, and made over to M. Tuccius the Propretour for to serve in the Brutians countrie. Item, That the forces which were in Sicilie should be discharged: and that M. Sempronius the Vizpretor there, should bring from thence the fleete to Rome. Ordeined likewise served there; and that both the of Spaine should have one legion, which at that time served there; and that both the Pretors should for supplie levie of the allies three thousand foote and two hundred horsemen apeece, and transport the same over with them. Now before that these new governors went

 to their provinces, by order from the whole colledge and societie of the Decemvirs, ther was published a generall procession and supplication to be holden for 3 dayes in all the quarrefours or crosse streets of the citie: for that in the day time between the third hour and the fourth, ther arose a generall darknes which continued almost all that while. Moreover, a Novendiall sacrifice was published to be celebrated for 9 days together, because on the Aventine hil it had rained stones.
The Companes, when as the Censors (by vertue of an act of Senat which passed the former veere) compelled them to be enrolled at Rome, (for aforetime they knew not where to be enrolled): made petition now that they might contract mariages and take Romane citizens to their wives; and that whosoever had wedded any of them before, might keep them still; and what children forever they had borne before that day, should be reputed legitimate and their rightfull  heires. Both suites were graunted. As concerning the free burgesses of Formiae, Fundi, and Arpinum, C. Valerius Tappo a Tribune of the Com. preferred a bill, that they might be priviledged to give their voyces in Rome: for before that time, citizens in deed they were of Rome, (and that was all) for libertie of suffrages they had none. This bill was crossed and nipped by foure other Tribunes, because it was propounded without the warrant and approbation of the Senate. But being afterwards better advised and enformed, that it apperteined to the people and not to the Senat to geve their voyces where it pleased them, they gave over their enterprise, and opposed themselves no more hinder the proceeding thereof. So it passed; and enacted it was, That the Formians and Fundans should give their voyces in the tribe AEmylia; and the Arpinates in Cornelia: so in these tribes then first and never before, were they enrolled by an  act of the same Valerius. M. Claudius Marcellus the Censor tooke a survey of the citie, and by lot obteined the preeminence thereof before his colleague T. Quintius. In which there were numbred 258308 polles of Romane citizens. This review being accomplished, the Consuls tooke their journeys into their severall provinces.
During that winter season whiles these things thus passed at Rome, there resorted embassages from all States, cities and nations which inhabit on this side Taurus, unto Cn. Manlius first Consul, and afterwards Proconsull, whiles he kept his winter in Asia. And as the victorie atchieved over Antiochus was more honorable and glorious to the Romans, than that over the Gauls, so the conquest of the Gaules was more joyous and pleasing to the Romane allies, than that other of Antiochus. For the servitude in which the king held them was more tolerable, than the crueltie  of these savage and in humane barbarians, and the doubtful feare and fright wherein they stood every day; as not knowing how farforth they would proceede, caried so (as it were) in a tempest to walt and spoile them cleane. And therefore as nations who by the defeature of Antiochus recovered libertie, and by the subduing of the Gaules enjoyed peace, they presented themselves not only to givethanks and shew their contentment in that behalfe, but also brought with them certeine coronets of gold, every one according to their abilitie. Likewise there came embassadors from Antiochus, as also from the very Gaules, to have conditions of peace ministred unto them: yea and from Ariarates king of the Cappadocians, who craved pardon, and offerd to buy out his trespasse for mony, in that he had given aid unto Antiochus: and fined he was to pay 200 talents of silver. The Gauls had this answere returned unto them, That K.Eumenes when he came should  render them article of peace. The embassages of the other states and cities were dismissed with gracious answers, and went away better pleased and contented, Than they were at their comming. The embassadors of Antiochus were commaunded to bring the monie into Pamphylia, and come likewise, according to the covenant made with L. Scipio: for thither the Consull purposed himselfe to come with his armie. After this, having t
aken a review and survey of his forces, he set forward in the beginning of spring, and within 8 daies arrived at Apamea. There he sojourned in camp for three daies: from thence he removed, and at the third daies end came to Pamphylia, thither he had given order to the kings embassadors to convey their mony and corne. There he received 1500 talents of silver which were transported unto Apamea. The corne was devided in the armie. From thence he marched to Perga, which was the only country in those parts held  with a garison. When he approached, the captain of the garison met him on the way, requesting XXX daies space, in which time he might know the pleasure of K. Antiochus as touching the rendring of that citie. The time was granted, and within that day the garison quit the place and departed. From Perga he sent his brother L. Manlius with 400 souldiers to Oroanda, for to demaund the rest of the money which by promise was due: and himselfe because he was advertised that

K. Eumenes and the deputies or commissioners were come from Rome to Ephesus, retired with  his armie also to Ephesus, and commanded the embassadors of Antiochus to follow him thither. There, by the advise of the ten commissioners, a small league was concluded, and comprised in these of such like tearmes: There shall be armitie and friendship betweene king Antiochus and the people of Rome, under these conditions ensuing. Imprimis, The king shall not suffer to passe through any part of his realme, or their countries that are under his dominion, any armie that intendeth to make warre against the people of Rome or their associates, nor aid them with virtuals or any other succour whatsoever. Item, The Romanes and their allies shall doe the like by Antiochus, and all those that are under his subjection. Item, It shall not be lawfull for Antiochus either to make warre with those that inhabit the Ilands, or to passe over into Europe. Item, He shall quit all cities, lands, villages, and fortresses on this side the mountaine Taurus unto the  river Tanais; and moreover from the foot and the valley under the said hill, unto that ridge thereof which bendeth toward Lycaonia. Item, Out of those townes, territories, and castles which he is to void, he shall carrie away no armour: and if he have conveighed from thence any alreadie, he shall duly restore the same to everie place accordingly. Item, He shall receive neither souldiour nor any other person out of the kingdom of Eumenes. Item, If any citizens belonging to those cities which are dismembred and cut off from his realme, chaunce to remaine now with him, they shall returne all to Apamea within a certaine day. Item, As many as appertaine to the kingdome of Antiochus, and are now with the Romanes or their allies, may depart home ortary still at their pleasure. Item, All slaves, whether they be fugitives or taken captive in warre; likewise all other persons free o
f conditions before, and afterwards either taken prisoners or revolted, he  shall deliver againe to the Romanes and their allies. Item, He shall make deliverie of all his elephants, and shall provide himselfe of no more hereafter. Item, He shall yeeled up all his gallies of warre, with the tackling to them belonging: neither shall hee keepe above ten small vessels, and none of them shall have more than thirtie ores to guide and row them; nor so much as one (...) galley with a single banke of ores, to serve in any warre that himselfe shall first begin. Item, Hee shall not saile within the promontories of Calycadnum and Sarpedon, unles haply there be some ship that bringeth mony, embassadors, or hostages. Item, It shall not be lawfull for king Antichus to levie and wage any souldiours out of those nations which are subject to the people of Rome; no nor to entertaine so much as voluntaries from thence. Item, What houses and edifices belonging to the Rhodians and their allies, are now within the precincts of the realme of  Antiochus, shall returne to the said Rhodians and their associates, in as good estate and tenour as they were before the warre began. And if any money or debts be to them due, they may demaund and recover the same. Item, If ought have been taken from them, they shall have good law and right to search, owne, demaund, and challenge it againe. Item, If any of those cities which ought to be rendred, be held by those unto whome Antiochus hath committed them, he shall withdraw the garrisons from thence, and take order that they be surrendred accordingly. Item, Hee shall pay within twelve yeeres by even portions, 12000 Atticke talents of good and lawfull silver: provided, that every talent weigh no lesse than eightie pound after Roman poise; besides 540000 modij of wheate. Item, Hee shall pay unto king Eumenes 350 talents within five yeeres; and for corne according to the rate and propo
rtion 127 talents. Item, He shall send  unto the Romanes 20 hostages, and change them for others every three yeeres: provided, that they be not under 18 yeere of age, nor above 45. Item, If any allies of the people of Rome, begin of their owne motion to make warre upon king Antichus, it shall be lawfull for him to revenge himselfe, and used forcible meanes to withstand their violence: yet so, as he hold no citie in right of warre, nor receive any into amitie: and all controversies which shall arise betweene them, shall be decided by law and justice; or if both parties be so pleased, they shall trie the issue by force of armes. Item, it was comprised also within the covenants of this accord. That hee should deliver into the Romans hands, Anniball the Carthaginian, Theas the AEtolian, Mnasimachus the Acarnanian, Eubulus likewise and Philo the Chalcidians. Finally, if ought hereafter happened to be added moreover, or chaunged otherwise, the same in no case to prejudice any  thing conteined within the covenants aforesaid. To this accord the Consull sware; and to receive the kings oth likewise, there went unto him Q. Minutius Thermus and L. Manlius, he who fortuned at that time to returne from the Oroadians. And the Cos. wrote his letters to Q.Fab. Lebeo admirall of the fleet, presently to come to Patara, and what ships soever of the kings were there,

 to hew them in pieces, and make a light fire of them. So he departed from Ephesus, and either brake into fitters or burnt, 50 covered ships belonging to the king. In the same voyage and exploit he surprised and woon Telmessus, by reason that the townesmen were so affrighted at the sodaine comming of the fleete. Then forthwith hee departed out of Lycia, and having given order to those that were left behind at Ephesus to follow after, he crossed the seas (betweene the Ilands) over into Greece. After he had sojourned some few daies at Athens, until the ships from Ephesus were entred into the harbour of Pyraeum: from thence he brought backe his whole armada to Italie. Cn. Manlius having received (among other things which were to be yeelded up of Antiochus) the elephants also, and bestowed them all freely upon Eumenes; gave audience to the controversies of many cities and states, amongst whome (during these changes and alterations)  there arose sundry troubles and much variance. And Ariarates the king, who by the means and mediation of Eumenes (unto whom about that time he had affianced his daughter in marriage) was discharged and had acquittance for the one moitie of the mony imposed upon him, entred into amitie with the people of Rome. When the differences of the cities aforesaid were debated and known, The ten Commissioners set down an order between them, respectively to their condition. To as many as had beene tributaries to king Antiochus, and yet sided with the people of Rome in affection, they graunted franchise and immunitie: but as many as tooke part with Antiochus, or were tributaries unto king Attalus, those were commaunded to pay their customes and duties to king Eumenes. Moreover, they freed and exempted from all taske and tallage (expressely by name) the Colophomans inhabiting Notium, together with the Cymeans and the Milesians Vnto the Clazonemians (over and besides the same freedome) they ga
ve the Iland Drymusa. To the Mislesians also the territorie called Sacer: to the Ilians, they annexed Rhaeteum and Gergithus, not so much for any fresh and late deserts, as in memoriall of their auncient beginning and foundation; which was the cause also that they set Dardanus free. Semblably the Chians, Smyrneans, and Erythraeans, for their singular loyaltie and devoir which they shewed in that warre, they not only indued with faire lands and territories, but also graced with all kind of honour and reputation above the rest. Moreover, the Phocaeans had both their owne lands restored unto them which they enioyed before the war, and also libertie to live under their auncient lawes. As for the Rhodians, they had those things now confirmed and established unto them, which by a former decree were granted and to better their estate, Lycia, and Caria were  bestowed upon them, as farre as the river Maeander, all save the citie Telmessus. Vnto the dominion of king Eumenes, they laid Chersonesus in Europe; and Lysimachia, with all the castles; villages, and lands thereto belonging, in as large tearmes and ample manner as Antiochus held the same: also within Asia, the one and the other Phrygia, as well that which consineth upon Hellespont, as the other which they call the Greater. Moreover, they restored unto him Mysia, which king Prusias had taken from him: over and besides, Lycaonia, Mylias, and Lydia; together with these cities by special name, Tralleis, Ephesus, and Telmessus. As touching Pamphylia, some debate there was betweene the agents of Eumenes and the Embassadors for Antiochus, because one part thereof is situate on this side the mount Taurus, and the other lyeth beyond. The decision of this controversie was wholly referred to the arbitrement of the Senate. Manlius  having set downe these covenants and decrees, departed with the ten Legates and all his armie toward Hellespont; and when he had caused the princes of the Gau
les thither to repaire before him, he declared unto them in what tearmes, and under what conditions they should entertaine peace with Eumenes: and therwith he gave them warning, to leave their manner of roding and roving in hostile wise by force of armes, and to containe themselves within the precints and bounds of their owne territories. After this, having gathered into one-place all the vessels from the sea coasts, together with the entire flore of king Eumenes, which by his brother Achaeneus was brought from Elea, he transported all his forces into Europe. From whence hee marched through Chersonnesus by short and easie journies, because his armie was heavily charged with prises and booties of all sorts; and encamped at Lysimachia, purposing there to rest a while,  to the end that his travelling beast of draught and cariage, might be fresh and in good heart to passe through Thracia, which was a voiage and journey commonly feared and abhorred. The same day that he dislodged from Lysimachia, he came to the river which they cal Melas, and from thence the next day to Cypsela. When they were past Cypsela, they had for ten miles almost no other way, but through wild woods, narrow streights, and those rough withall and uneven underfoot

For the difficultie of which passage, the armie was devided into two parts. The one hee  commaunded to march before, the other to come behind in the rereward a great distance after, and in the middest betweene, he bestowed the carriages with bag and baggage, and amongst them were waggons and waines, loden with the publicke treasure, and other pillage of great price. As he thus marched through the streight passe, there were about ten thousand and not above, raised out of foure nations of Asia, to wit, the Astians, Caenians, Maduarenes, and Coeleres, who be set the streights to debarre them of passage. It was supposed that king Philip of Macedonie his hand was herein, and that they entred not into this action without his privitie and fraudulent practise; who as he knew that the Romanes could returne no other way but by Thracia, so he was ware and wist well ynough what a masse of money they carried with them. The Romane Generall himselfe was in the vaward, careful only and troubled aboutthe difficultie of the way. All this while the Thracians  sat still and stirred not, until the armed souldiours were passed by. But when they perceived once, that the vauntguard was gotten out of the streights, and that the rereward was farre ynough behind, they fel in hand with the packes and coffers of the carriages; and after they had killed the guards, some of them ransacked and risted that which was in the waggons, others led away the packe horses and other sumpter beasts with their lode and burden on their backes. Hereupon arose a crie and alarme, and was first heard of those that followed, but afterwards of them also in the foreward, and so from both ends they ran to the middest, and at one time in diverse places, skirmished without all order confusedly. The Thracians heavily charged and encombered with pillage, and most of them without any weapon at all, because they might have the use of their hands more nimble and deliver to snatch and catch unto them their prises, were by this meanes  more exposed to receive hurt, and soone killed. The Romanes againe were much distressed and annoied through the disadvantage of the ground and the waies; which the barbarous people were well ynough acquainted with, and out of them would issue forth to encounter, and otherwhiles lurke within hollow blind caves, and not bee seene. The very packes likewise and the waggons, standing and lying untowardly in the way, sometime of one, and sometime of other (as it happened) troubled and hindered their much in their fight. So as here in one place lay the theese dead, there in another the true man that pursued him. And according as the plot of ground was good or bad, as well for the one sort as the other, as their hearts and courages served or failed them, and as the number was more or lesse, so the medley and fight was variable: and in one word, of both sides many a man lay in the dust and lost his life. By which time the  might approched, and the Thracians departed out of the conflict, not so much to avoid wounds and for feare of death, as for that they had sped themselves sufficiently of prizes. The Romance vaward encamped without the forrest, in the open ground about the temple of (...) Bendis. The rereward remained still behind in the middlest of the woods to guard their carriage, fortified within a double pallisado of strong stakes. The morrow after, when they had well discovered by their espials the way before them, they joined themselves with the vauntguard. In this battell (over and besides a great part of their pillage lost, and a number of camp-followers and lackies slaine, with some souldiours also, for that there was skirmishing every where throughout the chase) there died Q. Minutius Thermus: and a right great losle there was of him, for he was a man of much valour and execution. That day the armie marched as farre as to the river  Herbus. From whence they passed through the confines
of the AEnians, neere unto the temple of Apollo, whome the inhabitants name Zerynthius. And there they met with another streight passage about a place called Tempyra, as rough and combersome under foot as the former. But for as much as there were no woods about it, it yeelded no good place for ambushes. Howbeit the Thrausians (a people likewise of Thrace) assembled together, hoping also to light upon the like bootie. But by reason that the vallies lay naked and open, so as if any beset the narrow waies they might be discovered a farre off, the Romans were lesse afraid and troubled. For say that they were to fight in some place of disadvauntage, yet they might arraunge themselves in battell ray in open field, and joined in close fight hand to hand. Being therefore embarrelled in squadrons thicke and strong, they charged the enemie with a great shout and crie, and at the first shocke  forced them to recule and lose ground, and afterwards to turne back and flie. And in the rout they were beaten downe and killed; for even their owne streights which they seized for their vantage, empeached and hindered themselves. The Romanes having gotten the victorie, encamped neere a village of the Maronites, called Sare. The next day they marched through the champian

 open countrey Priaticus, where they sojourned three daies to take in come, partly from out of the fields of the Maronites, which willingly of themselves they conferred upon them, and partly out of their owne ships, which followed after, well furnished with all kind of provision. From this giste they made but one daies journey to Appolonia, and so passing through the territorie of the Abderites, they came to Naples. All this way they journeied peaceably through the Colonies of the Greeks. But the rest behind, if it were not daungerous unto them for any hostilitie, yet suspected still it was, all the whiles that they passed night and day through the middest of the Thracians, untill at length they came into Macedonie. The same armie conducted sometime before by Scipio that very way, found the Thracians more gentle and tractable, for no other cause, but that they had lesse store of pillage and bootie with them to set their teeth on water, and fingers  on itching. And yet even thenalso (as Claudius writeth) there were a fifteene thousand Thracians that encountered Mutines the Numidian, as hee marched before the avauntguard to discover the coasts; and hee saith, that he had in his companie foure hundred Numidian horsemen, and some few elephants: also that his sonne, with an elect wing of a hundred and fiftie horse, brake through the middest of the enemies, who also within a while after, (when his father Mutines having placed the elephants in the middest, and the horsemen in the flankes, joined in battell with his enemies, charged them upon the backes, and put them in great feare) by meanes of which slorme and tempest (as it were) of the Cavallerie, they never came so farre, as to deale with the barrell of the footmen. Cn. Manlius led his armie through Macedonie into Thessalie, and marching on by the way of Epirus, arrived at Apollonia, where hee abode all winter. For hee made  not to light a matter of winter sailing, that hee durst take the sea, and hazard the passage at that time of the yeere.
The yeere almost expired, M. Valerius the Consull returned out of Liguria to Rome, for the creation of new magistrates, having atchieved no such memorable exploit in his province during the time of his government, as might have yeelded any colourable reason of his long slay, in that he came more tardie (than the usuall manner was) to the assembly for an election of Consuls: (for holden it was upon the18 of Februarie. 12 calends of March) wherein were created, Mar. Aemylius Lepidus and C. Flaminius. The next day after, these Pretors were elected; namely, Ap. Claudius Pulcher, Ser. Sulpitius Galba, Q. Terentius Culleo, L. Terentius Massaliota, Q. Fulvius Flaccus, and M. Furius Crassipes. After the election of magistrates, the Consull proposed to the  Senate as touching the provinces and governments of the Pretors. And the LL. decreed, that two of them should remaine at Rome, to minister lawes and execute justice: other two should bee employed out of Italie, in Sicilie and Sardinia: two in Italie, to wit, at Tarentum and in Gaule. Immediatly before they entered into office, they were enjoyned to cast lots: and Ser. Sulpitius had the jurisdiction of the citizens, and Q. Terentius of strangers and aliens: L. Terentius took the charge of Sicilie, Q. Fulvius of Sardinia, Ap. Claudius was to govern Tarentum, and M. Furius to rule Gallia. It fortuned the same yeere, that L. Minutius Mytilus and L. Manlius were delivered to the Carthaginian Embassadors, by the hands of the Faeciall heralds at the commandement of M. Claudius Pretor of the citie for the time being, and transported over to Carthage, for that the voice and speech went, That they had beaten the said embassadours. A bruit and rumour  there was of a great Senate ordained to both the new Consuls the province of Liguria, that day on which they propounded unto the Senate to Consult about the provinces and the affaires of the Commonweale.
But Lepidus the Consull opposed himselfe against this their act and ordinance, alleadging That it was a shameful indignitie, that both the Consuls should be shut up and enclosed within the vallies of Liguria; whereas for two yeers alreadie M. Fulvius and Cn. Manlius had raigned like kings, the one in Europe, the other in Asia, in steed of Philip and Antiochus. And if (quoth he) it bee the pleasure of the Senate that there should bee armies maintained in those parts, more meet ywis it were, that Consuls should have the command and conduct thereof, than those privat persons. As for them, they raunge about those nations, terrifying them  with threats of warre, against whome there hath beene none proclaimed; making merchandise and selling peace among them for summes of money. Now if it bee requisite and needfull to keepe two armies for the government and defence of those provinces, like as M. Fulvius and Cn. Manlius Consuls, succeeded M. Atilius and L. Scipio Consuls: so C. Livius and M. Valerius the Consuls ought to have entred in place of Falvius and Manlius. At leastwise now, when the AEtolian

warre is finished and brought to an end, Asia recovered and conquered from Antiochus, and  the Gaules vanquished and subdued, either ought Consuls to bee sent unto their armies, or else the legions to be brought back from thence, and at length delivered to the Commonweale.
The Senate notwithstanding they gave him the hearing, persisted still in their resolution, that both Consuls should be imploied in the province of Liguria. Yet thought good it was, that Manlius and Fulvius should leave their provinces, withdraw their forces from thence, and returne to Rome. And old grudge there was and a cankred enmitie between the said M. Fulvius, and M. Aemylius the Consull: and among other matters of discontentment, Aeymylius gave out, that by the meanse of Fulvius, himselfe was created Consull two yeeres later than otherwise he should have bene. And therefore to worke him despight and make him odious to the world, he caused the embassadors of Ambracia (whom he had suborned and set on for to lay matters to  his charge) to enter into the Senate house. These being in place, complained that M. Fulvius had warred upon them, at what time as they were in peace, performed all that other Consuls before had imposed upon them, and were also readie in all dutie and allegance to do the same unto him. First our land and territories say they, were piteously spoiled and wasted: then were we terrified with the sacking of our citie, and threatned with the killing of our people, that for very feare we were forced to shut out gates. Afterwards we were beleaguered and assaulted, and against us all kinds of hostilitie practised, by sword, by fire, by ruinating and ransaking our citie. Our wives, our children, have bene led and haled into captivitie and bondage; our goods violently taken from us (and that which above all went neerest to our heart) our temples throughout the whole citie despoiled and robbed of their goodly ornaments: the images of our gods, and finally our gods themselves plucked out of their shrines and places and so caried away; yea, the very walls and pillers-left bare and naked, so as the Ambracians have no gods remaining amongst them to adore, and to whome they might make their prayers and supplications. As they poured out their complaints, the Consull of a mind to aggravate and heape more matter upon his adversarie, ceased not to propose unto them many interrogatories (as it was complotted betweene them before) and drew them on to speake many things, as if with their good will they would not have uttered them. VVhen the rest of the LL. were moved herewith, then the other Consull C. Flaminius undertooke the apologie and defence of M. Fulvius, saying, that the Ambracians trod in an old beaten way, and did no otherwise than some before them had done. For even so was M. Marcellus accused by the Syracusians, so was Q. Fulvius charged by  the Capuans. And why by the same meanes suffred they not T. Quintius to be charged by king Philip, M. Acilius and L. Scipio by Antiochus, Cn. Manlius by the Gaules, and the same Fulvius himselfe by the AEtolians and people of Cephalenia? That Ambracia was assaulted, battred, and forced in the end; that images and ornaments were taken from thence; that other acts were done and committed, which usually follow upon the winning of townes, thinke yee my LL. that either I in the behalfe of Fulvius will denie, or Fulvius himselfe will disavow? who, in regard of these worthie exploits and noble acts, is minded to demaund at your hands the honor of a Triumph, who purposeth to carie before his triumphant chariot the portraiture of Ambracia as it was taken, the images which they accuse him to have caried away, and other spoiles of that citie; yea and to set them upon the posts of his house for a memoriall to posteritie? No  reason there is that the Ambracians should sever themselves from the AEtolians, and
do more than they, for their case and condition is all one. And therefore let my colleague shew his ranchor and malice, and bewray a festered enmitie in some other cause: or if he will needs follow and pursue this forward, let him interteine and keep still his Ambracians unto the comming of M. Fulvius. And for mine owne part, I will suffer no act to passe either of the Ambracians or the AEtolians, so long as M. Fulvius is absent. Aemylius accused his enemie for having a craftie head of his owne, and for his suttle fetches, as being notorious and well knowne to all men for no better; saying, that full cunningly he would trifle out the time, and make delaies all the yeere long, that he might not come to Rome so long as his adversarie was Consull. Thus in this debate betweene the two Consuls two dayes were spent, and nothing else done. And it appeered evidently  that so long as Flaminius was in place and presence, nothing could be concluded and determinined. VVhereupon a time was spied out when Flaminius chanced to be sick, and by that occasion was away. Then upon a motion made by Aemylius there passed an act of the Senate, That the Ambracians should have all their goods restored unto them againe; that they should enjoy

 their freedome and franchises, and live under their owne lawes: and finally might take what customes, toll and imposts they would for portage, as well by land as sea: provided alwayes that the Romanes, and their allies the Latines, should be exempted and free therefrom. As for the images and other ornaments which they complained were taken out of their sacred temples, the Senate ordeined that when M. Fulvius was returned to Rome, the colledge of the Pontifies should have the hearing and deciding thereof, and looke what they awarded and set downe, it should stand and be performed accordingly. And the Consull not content with all this, tooke the vantage when there were but few Senatours in the house, and procured an other act of Senate in this forme, That they judged Ambracia not to be reputed a citie forced by assault. This done, there was by vertue of an order from the Decemvirs a solemne supplication holden  three dayes for the helth of the people, in regard of a grievous pestilence that dispeopled both citie and countrey. After that, the Latine feasts and holidaies were celebrated. VVhen the Consuls had accomplished these devotions, and rid their consciences of scruple, and withall made a full and complet levie to furnish their legions (for both of them were desirous to have new souldiours) they departed into their provinces, and cassed all the old.
After the Consul were set forward on their journey, the Proconsull Cn. Manlius returned home to Rome. For those sake the Pretour Servius Sulpitius assembled the Senat in the temple of Bellona. VVhere after relation made of his deeds atchieved, he demaunded that in consideration thereof, due honor and thanksgeving should be rendered to the immortall gods, and withall, that himselfe might ride triumphant into the citie. The most part of the Legates and  Commissioners, who had bene with him gainsayed and denied the same, and above all the rest L. Furius Purpurio, and L. Aemilius Paulus, who stepped forth, and enformed against him in these termes: That they had bene sent in commission to assist Cn. Manlius, for the making of a peace with Antiochus, and finishing of that accord and those covenants and conditions, which were commensed and begun betweene him and L. Scipio. Yet Cn. Manlius say they, endevoured all that ever he could to trouble that peace, yea and to have surprised and entrapped Anticchus by traines of ambush, if he had ever come in his way, or within his reach. But the king being ware of the Consull his fraud and deceit, albeit there was made great meanes many a time to have caught him by coulor of parley and conference, yet avoided evermore not onely to have speech and communication with him, but also to come within his sight. And  when Maulius would needs have passed over Taurus, hardly and with much ado could he be keptback, notwithstanding all the commissioners prayed and befought him to stay, and not to hazard himselfe and incurre the danger of a notable losse and overthrow, foretold by the verses and prophesies of Sibylla to light upon them that would passe beyond the bounds limited by the fatail destinies. All this notwith standing he advaunced forward and approched with his armie, yea and encamped neere the very pitch and top of the mountaine, where all the water that falleth from above, runneth contrary wayes into divers seas. And when he could find no quarrell there for which he might make war (because the kings people and subjects were still and quiet) he turned the armie about to the Gallogreeks, against which nation there was no warre intended, either by warrant and authoritie from Senat, or by graunt and commission from the people.  And what man was ever so hardie and bold, as to warre upon his owne head? The wars against Antiochus, Philip, Anniball, and the Carthaginians, are most fresh in each mans remembrance: and of all these, the Senate was consulted with, and the people graunted their ordinance. Embassadors many a time and often were addressed before: restitution and amends were by order demaunded: and last of all, heralds were sent, solemnly to denounce and proclaime war. Now tell me, Cn. Manlius, VVhich of all these things were done; that wee may call this by the name of a publicke warre, allowed by the State of the people of Rome, and not rather a privat brigandage and robberie of your own? But contented you your self with this, and did you no more? marched you directly forward, and tooke you nothing but that which was in your way; leading your armie agaisnt those onely whome you tooke to be your enemies? or rather at all turnings  and quarrefours, nay at every sorked high way leading on both hands, when you were at a stand, followed not you like a mercenarie and waged Consull unto Attalus (king Eumenes his brother) with the Romane aremie, what hand soever he turned and marched? There was not a cranke and nouke but you visited; there was not a corner that you left unsearched, in all Pisidia, Lycaonia, and Phrygia. There was not a tyrant, prince not potentate, there was not a lord of any borough

or castle, how farre soever out of the way, but you had a saying to them to pill and poll them, and to picke with out of their purses. For what businesse had you with the Oroandians? What had you to doe with other nations, as innocent and guiltlesse as they? Now as concerning the warre, (in regard whereof you demaund a triumph) in what sort managed you it? Fought you a battaile either in place commodious, or time convenient? Cerres, I must needs say, great reason you have and good cause, to require that honor and praise be given to the immortall gods; first, for that their gracious will and pleasure was, that the armie should not smart for the temeritie and rashnesse of their chiefe leader, warring as hee did against the law of nations: then, in that they presented unto us, not men indeed for enemies, but very beasts and no better. For yee must not think, that it is the name only of the Gallogreeks, which is mingled and compounded; for long time before, both their bodies and minds have beene mixed and corrupted, and the men themselves bastard and degenerate from their first nature. Had they been the same Gaules with whome we have fought a thousand times in Italie, and with doubtfull issue, and lost as much as we woon, and every foot received as good as we brought, thinke yee there would have returned one messenger from thence, to bring us newes, for any good at least-wise that our Generall there did? Twise he came to conflict with them; twise he encountred them in place of disadvantage; mounting with his armie against the hill, and raunged in the botome of the valley even under the enemies feet: in such sort, that if they had lanced no darts against us from the higher ground, but onely come upon us with their naked and disarmed bodies, they had beene able to have overcome us and gone over our bellies. And what happened hereupon? God-amercie the good fortune of the people of Rome: wee may thanke (I say) the great and terrible name of the Romanes. The fresh renow
me of the late ruines and overthrowes of Anniball, Philip, and Antiochus, amased and astonished (as one would say) these men with their so corpulent and mightie bodies; with slings and arrow-shot onely were they discomfited and put to flight, so affrighted were they. There was not a sword once bloudied in all this Gaules war: at the first twang of the bow and singing of the arrow, they fled away, like swarms of bees with ringing of basens. And yet beleeve me, even we the same and no other (as if fortune would admonish and shew what had become of us if we had affronted an enemie indeed) in our returne, when we fortuned to light upon certaine pettie robbers and theeves of Thrace, were soundly beaten, killed, and put to flight, and spoiled and well stript of our bagge and baggage. Q. Minutius Thermus (by whose death we have susteined a farre greater losse, than if Cn. Manlius had miscaried, whose rashnesse was the cause of all this calamitie and misfortune) with many a tall and valiant man besides, lost his life in this skirmish. Our hoast, bringing away with them the spoile and pillage of king Antiochus, was dismembred and parted into three troupes: the vaward in oneplace, the rereguard in another, and the cariages in a third, were faine to take up their lodging one whole night amongst bushes, briars, and brambles, and lurke within the caves and dennes of wild beasts. Are these the brave and worthie exploits, for which you demaund a triumph? But say, that you had received in Thrace, neither domage nor dishonour; which be the enemies over whome you would needs triumph in all the hast? I trow they be those, whome the Senate and people of Rome destined and assigned to be your enemies: for so, was triumph graunted to this L. Scipio here in place: so likewise to that M. Acilius before him, over king Antiochus: so also erewhile to T. Quintius for the victorie of Philip: and so to conclude, unto P.Asricanus for subduing Anniball, the Carthaginians, and king Syphax. And when the Senate had ordeined war, yet before they enterprised and began these high and hautie affaires, they made some doubt and pause in such pettie circumstances as these, to wit, unto whome they should send defiance and denounce the said warre: whether to the kings themselves in their owne person; or it were sufficient to give intimation to one garison or other within their fortresses. And would ye now (my masters) that all these observations and ceremonies should be polluted and confounded, that the rights and lawes of the Feciales and heralds should be abolished, and that there shall be no more Feciall at all. But let religion and divine service (God forgive me if I seeme to bla^pheme) be troden under foot: suppose the gods were utterly forgotten of you, and their remembrance quite exiled out of your hearts: Is it your pleasure also, and thinke yee it meet, that the Senat be consulted no more for their advice in question of war? or that a bill be not propounded to the people, in this wise: Pleaseth it you or no, to ordeine that warre belevied against the Gaules? The other day, and no longer since, the Consuls were desirous and earnest to governe Greece

and Asia, yet when they perceived you to bee resolute and persist still in assigning unto them both, the province of Liguria, they were content and obeyed. Great reason shall they have therefore to demaund a triumph at your hands, after they have atchieved an happie victorie and finished that warre, which they first enterprised under your warrant and authoritie. After this manner as yee have heard, spake Furius and Aemylius. And Manlius againe, as we find in record, answered thus, or much to this effect, as followeth: Right honorable and my very good LL. the Tribunes of the Commons were ever woont afore-time, to repugne and croste them that demaunded triumph: and I take my selfe much beholden unto them for this favour, that either in their love to my selfe, or in regard of my great and notable exploits, they have not only by their silence given their consent for my honor, but also seeme readie and prest to propound the same unto the people, if need had beene. But now forsooth, whome haveI (and God will) for mine adversaries, but even some of my ten adjacents or suffraganes, whome our ancestors thought good to give unto their Generals in the war, as a counsell both to assist and aid them, and also to countenance and grace them in their victorie? L.Furius and L.Aemylius are the men and none but they, who inhibit and debarre me for mounting up into the triumphant chariot; they are ready to plucke from my head the glorious and honourable crown that I should weare: even those (I say) whome (If the Tribunes had hindred and empeached my triumph) I would have reported my selfe unto as witnesse of my worthie acts. Certes (my LL.) faire be it from me, that I should envie and repine at the honour of any man: but I remember well, that of late daies when certeine Tribunes of the Common state (men of great courage and action) went about to stay and forbid the triumph of Q. Fabius Labeo, yee by your authoritie diverted and shared them from that intended enterprise; and hee triumphed in the end, notwithstanding his adversaries gave out and said aloud, not that hee had fought a warre unjustly, but in reprochfull manner charged him, That he had not so much as set eye upon the enemie. And I, who have so often in ranged battell fought with an hundred thousand most fierce and warlike enemies, slain or taken prisoners more than 40000 of them, forced and woon two of their campes: and left all places on this side the ridge of the mountaine Taurus, more peaceable and quiet than is the land of Italie, am not only frustrate and put beside my triumph, but also stand here before your honours to defend my selfe against the challenge of these mine owne Counsell and Suffraganes. Which accusation of theirs, consisteth (as yee have heard my LL.) of two principall points: for objected they have, first, that I ought not at all to have made warre with the Gaules; and secondly, that I conducted and managed the same, rashly and without discretion. The Gaules (say they) were no enemies of ours; but being quiet in peace, and readie to do whatsoever they were charged, were by you abused and wronged. I will not require (my LL.) that yee should have the same hard conceit of the Gaules which inhabite in Asia, as touching their crueltie and mortall hatred against the Romane name, which yee know generally to be in the people of the Gaules: Doe but consider and judge of these Gaules as they bee in themselves simply without respect of the infamous name and odious opinion that goeth of the whole generation: o that king Eumenes were here. Would to God that all the States of Asia were present in place, that yee might heare them rather what complaints they would make, than my selfe accusing of them. Send but your embassadors to all the cities of Asia, and enquire whether servitude were greater and more greevous, that which they were delivered from by the chasing of Antiochus beyond the mountain Taurus, or this whereof they are now eased by the subdu
ing of the Gauls? Let them relate unto you, and make report how often their territories have ben wasted by them, how many booties have beene driven, and prises carried away out of them, and how they were brought to so low a passe, that they hardly could find meanes and make any shift to redeeme their prisoners by raunsome. Let them tell you what they heard there besides, how they killed men, yea and their children, to sacrifice, unto their gods. But know yee now from mee, that your allies yeelded tribute to the Gaules, yea, and should have paied still at this day, notwithstanding they were by you delivered from their subjection undertaking Antiochus, if I had not bestirred my selfe the better. For the farther that Antiochus was removed from them, the more proudly and outrageously would these Gaules have ruled like LL. over all Asia, and whatsoever lands had lien on this side the top of the mount Taurus, you should have laied to the seignorie of the Gaules and not annexed to your owne Empire and dominion. All this is true will some one say, and what of all that? These Gaules likewise once spoiled the temple at Delphos, reputed in times past the

common Oracle of the whole world, and situate in the very heart and middest of the earth, and yet the people of Rome neither denounced nor made warre for all that. Certes I alwaies would (...) thought there had been some difference to be made betweene those daies, when as neither (...) nor Asia was under your jurisdiction and obedience (that you should need to take care (...) ^^gard of what was done in those parts) and this present time, in which ye have set the mountaine (...) to be the bound and limit, whereunto your Empire extendeth; in which you give free(...) immunitie to cities; in which ye enlarge the confines of some, and take in the precincts (...) these cities with forfeiture and losse of their territories, punishing those with taxes (...) tributes: in which I say, you augment and diminish realmes, give and take away kingdomes (...) your good pleasure; and in one word, in which yee judge it a matter that concerneth you, to (...) that there may be a generall peace both on land and sea. Were you of opinion indeed, that Asia might not be counted free, unless Antiochus had withdrawne his garisons, which kept quiet within their fortresses and castles, and stirred not forth? and thought you withall, that your (...) graunted unto king Eumenes, might bee assured unto him, and the freedome likewise of the cities, established unto them, if whole armies of Gaules might raunge all about too and fro in those countries? But why stand I so much arguing and reasoning in this manner, as if I had not found the Gaules enemies, but rather caused them to be our enemies? O L. Scipio, I call you here to witnesse, into whose charge and government I succeeded, whose vertue and felicitie withall, I besought the immortal gods to vouchsafe unto me (and my praier was not in vain;) and you likewise, o Pab. Scipio, who with the Cos. your brother and in the whole armie, had the roume and place indeed of an adjoinct lieutenant and no more, but caried the majestie of a Collegue and joint companion; speak frankly both of your upon your knowledge, whether whole legions of Gauls served norm in the armie of Antiochus? Tell us, whether you saw them not in the field, marshalled in both the points and flanks of the maine battell, as the very flower and strength of the whole puissance of Antiochus? Say directly, fought yee not with them, slew you them not, and caried away their spoils, as undoubted and lawfull enemies? And yet both Senate decreed and people ordained war with Antiochus by name, and not with the Gauls. But I trow (or els I am much deceived) within this decree and ordenance, they included all those besides that came to aid and assist him. Of whom (excepting Antiochus himselfe, with whom Scipio had articled peace and alliance, and yee also had expressely given order therfore) they all were our enemies no doubt, who had born arms against us in the quarrell and behalfe of the said Antiochus. Now albeit the Gaules above all others were comprised in this number, together with some pettie kings and tyrants besides; yet I contracted accord and peace with others, (after I had forced them to suffer due punishment according to their trespasse) as same forth as I thought it expedient for the honour of your Empire: yea, and I aslaied also to gaine and win the hearts of the Gaules, if happily it had beene possible to have dulced and reclaimed them from their inbred fiercenesse and naturall crueltie. But when I perceived that they were untractable, untamed, and implacable, then and not before I resolved, that it was high time to bridle and bring them into order by violence and force of armes. Now that I have cleered the former point of my accusation, as touching the enterprise of the war, it remaineth that I yeeld you an account of the conduct thereof. Wherein verily I would make no doubt to approve mine innocence, and justifie the goodnesse of my cause, if I were to plead, I say not, in the
Senat of Rome, but even at the counsell table of Carthage; where (as men say) they make no more ado, but trusse up, hand, and crucie their Generals, if they proceed to execution of any service in war with bad advise and counsell, although the issue and event be never so good. But in that citie, which therefore useth the name of the gods both before they begin, and also when they proceed to the managing of all their affaires, (because no person should come to destract or deprave that malliciously, which the gods have once approved) and which citie in the grant and ordinance either of procession or triumph, useth this solemn forme of words: For that hee hath well and happily administred and managed the weale publicke; In this citie, I say, If I were unwilling, nay, if I reputed it an odious matter, and savouring too much of pride and arrogance, to vaunt my selfe and boast of mine owne prowesse; yet if in regard of the happie successe and felicitie of  my selfe and mine armie, in that without any losse of souldiours, wee vanquished and subdued so great and mightie a nation, I demaunded first that due honour and thankesgiving should bee rendred unto the immortall gods, and then, that I might my selfe and mount up the Capitoll in triumph, from whence I descended to take my voiage, after I had conceived and pronounced

 my vowes, and made my praiers after the solemne and religious order; would ye denie both me and the immortall gods also? Yes marrie would you, and why? Forsooth I fought in a place of disadvauntage. But tell mee then, I pray you, in what ground I might have fought with better vauntage? considering the enemies were seized of the hill, and kept themselves within their strength and fort. I should have gone unto them, if I had been willing to have vanquished and overcome them. What? how if they had been there within a strong cittie? how if they had kept within the walls, and would not have issued forth? You must then have laid siege unto them and given the assault. Must I so indeed? And how I pray? Fought M. Acihus (I beseech you) at Thermopylae in a place of advauntage? Why? did not T. Quintius after this manner dispossesse Philip of the high mountaines, which hee held over the river Aous? In faith, I cannot yet devise  what kind of enemies they either imagine to themselves they were, or would have you to take and esteemed them to be. If degenerate, if effeminate, if enervate with the delights and pleasures of Asia, what danger was it to march up the hill against them with all disadvantage? If redoubted and terrible for fierce courage and bodily strength, denie yee triumph for so noble a victorie? Envie (my good LL.) is blind, and can skil of nothing but to detract and desame vertues, to falsifie and corrupt the honors and rewards due therto. Pardon me I beseech your HH. and hold me excused, if I have ben over long and tedious. It is not, I assure you, any delight and pleasure that I take to put forth and glorifie my selfe, but a necessitie imposed upon me (in mine own defence, to consute these crimes objected against mee) which hath driven mine Oration out in length. To proceed, was it possible also that in Thrace I could make the passes within the forrests large and  wide, which naturally were streight and narrow? the ground plain and smooth, which by nature was uneven and rugged? Could I make levell downs of steep mounts?open champion and fair fields of woodland overgrown, and tough wylds. Lay it in me, to prevent those Thracian theeves that they should not hide themselves within their peakish holes and ordinarie covert musets; Was it in my power, to impeach them that they might snatch and carie away nothing of our baggage? Was I able to warrant that none of our laboring beast out of so great a number, should be driven and led away from their companie? that no person should bee hurt? and finally, that Q.Minusius a brave and hardie knight, should not die of his wound? My adversaries presse hard and stand much upon this misfortune, that it was our unluckie hap to loose so worthy a gentleman: but they never think that if they would say nothing but suppresse and conceale all, yet you should know (since the whole  armie is here present to restifie that which I say) That althought the enemie assailed us in a narrow streight, in an inconvenient place of great disadvantage, yet both of our battallion at once, as wel the vantguard as rereward, compassed the armie of the Barbarians busie and occupied in rifling of our sardage, slew many thousands of them that very day, and within few daies after either killed or took prisoners a greater number of them by far. Well, if I had not drawne a sword in Asia, if I had not seen an enemie there, yet I Proconsull had deserved a triumph wel ynough for those two battels in Asia. But ynough hath ben said of these matters, and I am to request you rather (my Lords all) to forgive me for my boldnes, if I have held you longer than my will and desire was.
The accusation that day had prevailed more than his owne defense, but that they continued arguing and debating in the Counsell-house untill it was late in the evening. Then the Senate  arose with this mind (as if should seeme) to denie him a triumph. The next morrow, the kinsfolke and friends of Cn. Manlius, laboured all that ever they could. Likewise the authoritie of the auncients stood him in great steed; who said plainly that the precedent could not be found in any histories, That a generall who had vanquished his enemies, accomplished the full time of government in his province, and brought his armie back, returned into the citie as a privat person, without the honor of the triumphant chariot and the laurell girlond. The very indignitie and shame of this example, surmounted the malice of his adversaries, in so much as the Senatours in a frequent assembly graunted this triumph.
The remembrance and memorie of this debate, was afterwards drowned in a greater contention, that arose with a farre mightier and more noble personage. For as Valerius Antius hath  recorded, the two QQ. Petilij, called P. Scipio Africanus into question, and set him downe a day petemptorily to make his appearance, and answere for himselfe. This action divers men construed diversly, according to their severall disposition and affection. Some blamed not so much the Tribunes of the Commons, as the whole citie in generall, for suffering such an abuse; discoursing in this wise: That the two chiefest States and Commonwealths in the world were become

come at one time unthankfull, but Rome more ungratefull of the twaine. For Carthage being  subdued, had banished Anniball likewise vanquished: but Rome a victresse was about to expulse Africanus a conquerour. Others againe reasoned thus: that in no State there ought to be a citizen so preminent and high above the rest, that he might not be under law, and brought to answere unto interrogatories accordingly. And nothing preserveth isonomie in a citie, and mainteineth equall libertie more, than to have the mightiest man to hold up his hand at the barre. For what may be safely committed to any man (and surely the soveraigne rule of the state least of all other things) if he be not to yeeld an accoumpt of the managing of his affaires? And verily, he that cannot abide to be equall unto others, to proceed against such a one by rigor and force, is no injustice at all. Thus men commonly talked pro and contra, untill the judiciall day came of his personall appearance, and answere to be made. Never was there man knowne before that  day (no not Scipio himselfe when he was at the highest, either Consull or Censor) accompanied with a greater traine of men of all degrees and qualities, than he that day was conducted unto the common place and court of Pleas as an accused person, there to plead his cause. Being commaunded to speake in his owne defense, he began his oration without any mention at all of the imputations and matters with which he was charged, and entered into a discourse of the acts by him atchieved; and that with such a majestie and magnificence as it was well knowne and confessed, that never man was praised either better or more truly than hee. For with what courage and mind he atchieved those his brave exploits in deed, with the same spirit he delivered them in words. And no man thought him tedious and was weery to heare his speech, because all that he related was for his owne defence in this his danger, and not upon vaineglorie  and oftentation. The Tribunes of the Commons his adversaries, when they had laid open certeine supposed crimes committed of old, as touching his wastfull excess whiles he wintered in Syracusa; as also the riot and outrage of Pleminius which hapned at Locri; they proceeded to charge him by presumptions and suspitions, rather than by direct evidences and prouses, for embezzeling and averting to his proper use certeine treasure gotten from king Antiochus; and namely, that his sonne being taken prisoner, was rendred unto him without ransome; and that in all other things, Scipio was respected and regarded of Antiochus, as if he alone had caried the Romane peace and warre under his girdle. Also that he bare a strong hand over the Consull, more likeywis a Dictatour and absolute commaunder, than a Lieutenant and assistant unto him, all the while he was in the province. Neither aimed he and shot  at any other marke, when he went that journey, but that the same, which long before was notoriously knowne to Spaine, Gaule, Sicilie and Affrick, might as evidently appeere to Greece, to Asia, and to all the kings and nations of the East parts, to wit, that hee was the onely man, hee was the chiefe, the head and piller of the Romane Empire; that under the shadow of Scipio his wing, that citie which is the ladie of the world, was couvert and protected; that a beck and nod of his head, was as good as all arests of Senat and hests of people. Thus when they could not touch him in life, nor fasten upon him any note of infamie, they charged him all that ever they could with matter to kindle envie. Thus with orations they spent the time untill night came, and the busines was put over to another day: which being come, the Tribunes onely betunes in the morning were set in their pewes within the Rostra [or common pleading place.] The defendant was called; who garded with a great companie of his friends and followers, passed through the mids of the assembly, approched the Rostra, and stood just under it. Then after an oyez; and silence made: My maisters (quoth he) you that are Tribunes of the Commons, and ye likewise Quirites, my neighbours and citizens of Rome, upon this very day of the moneth it was that I fought a pight battaile against Anniball and the Carthaginians, with right fortunate and happie successe; meete therefore and good reason since it is, that to day all pleas and actions surcease: I will go directly and immediatly from hence to the Capitoll, and present my selfe before Iup. Opt. Max. before Iuno, and Minerva, with all the rest of other gods and goddesses, presidents and patrons of that temple and fortresse, to performe my humble dutie unto them, to salute and thanke them, for that they have vouchsated me that  resolute affection and powerfull meanes withall, both on such a day as this, and also many times besides, to performe my devoir well and truly unto the Common-weale. As many of you therefore (Quirites) as well may, go yee with me, and pray the gods to send you like governors to my selfe, and no worse. If I say (and not else) as you ever since I was seventeene

 yeeres of age, even to these mine old dayes, you alwayes advaunced me to honours before the ordinarie time of mine age, so I againe devanced and prevented the said honors with good service and noble deeds. This said, he departed from the Rostra and ascended up to the Capitoll; whereat the whole audience there assembled turned at once and followed Scipio: in so much as at last the scribes and notaries, yea and the very sergeant left the Tribunes there alone, without any to beare them companie but their owne bondservants and the common cryer, who still from the Rostra called and cited the defendant. Scipio not only visited the temples upon the Capitoll hill, but also made a perambulation with the people of Rome throughout the whole citie to all the churches and chappels of their gods and goddesses. This was in manner a more solemne day unto him in regard of the affectionat favour of men, and the estimation of his true grandeur  in deed, than on which he rode into the citie in triumph over king Syphax and the Carthaginians. But it was the last faire day that ever he saw: and never shone the sunne againe pleasantly upon P.Scipio. For after this, foreseeing envie growing toward him, and what a life and how full of debates he should have with those Tribunes, upon a longer day graunted for the processe of law against him, he retired himself apart to Liternum, of set purpose to make default and not appeere to plead his cause any more. He caried a greater spirit with him, his heart was too big, and used he had bene to higher degree of port and honor, than to take knowledge what it was to be accused: he could not skill to vale bonet and stoup so low, and to abase himselfe to the abject condition of those that pleade for themselves at the barre. Now when the day was come, and that in his absence his name began to be called, L. Scipio answered for him, and alleadged sicknes to be  the cause why he was away. But the Tribunes his accusers, would not admit of that excuse, replying and saying, That upon the same pride of heart, in which he avoided once before, his judiciall triall, and left the Tribune and the whole assembly, he now also would not appeare to make his answere. Even for triumphed he then over the people of Rome, when accompanied with those whom he led after him as prisoners (after he had once taken from them their power and libertie to give their censure and doome of him) he sequestred himselfe that day, by way of an insurrection from the Tribunes of the Commons, into the Capitoll. Well are ye now served therefore (say they) and justly punished for that dayes folly and rashnes. For lo, how he himselfe now abandoneth you, who was your motive and leader then, to forsake us. See how everyday morethan other our courage is fallen and hart abated? And dare we not now send folke to fetch him (a privat  person and no more) out of his ferme and house in the countrey, and make him to appeare and plead his answere; unto whom not past 17 yeeres ago, at what time as he was Generall of an armie on land, and Admirall of the Armada by sea, we were so bould as to send tribunes of the Com. and an Aedile, to arrest and bring him away with them to Rome? In the end, the rest of the tribunes of the Commons, being called earnestly unto by L. Scipio for their lawfull favour, set downe this order and conclusion, That if sicknes were alledged for his excuse, and that there were nothing else but it that occasioned his absence, it should be received for good and lawfull, and their colleagues should adjourne his triall to a farther day. It fortuned at that time that Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus was one of the Tribunes, betweene whome and P. Scipio there was some quarrell and enmitie. He forbad expressely that his owne name should be subscribed to the instrument  of the foresaid decree of his colleagues. And when every man looked to heare some heavier sentence denounced against Scipio, he awarded in this manner. For as much as L.Scipio excuseth the absence of his brother by sicknes, it is good and sufficient in my opinion. And more than that, I will not for my part suffer P. Scipio to be accused before he returne againe to Rome. Yea and then also, if he call for my helping hand, I will geve him assistance, and stop the course of processe against him. And as to the marine point of the cause, this is my resolution, That P.Scipio being advanced so highly (as he is) to that pitch of honor, by his noble and famous exploits, and by the dignities received at the hands of the people of Rome, as if both gods and men had consented to set him alost, for him to come downe now and stand pleading below at the barre beneath the Rostra, and there to have his eares glow and ring againe with the checks  and taunts of certaine greene heads and busie youths, were a greater shame and disgrace to the people of Rome, than to himselfe. Nay, he staid not thus with this bare award, but sealed and set it on surely with word of indignation, testifying his discontentment for this course and manner of proceeding. And shall Scipio (quoth he, my masters Tribunes) that renowned conquerour of Affrick, stand under your feet at your devotion? Defeated he and put to flight in Spain 4 most brave and noble

Generals of the Carthaginians, with their soure entire armies, for this? Tooke hee Syphax prisoner, vanquished he Anniball, subdued he Carthage and made it tributarie unto us? Chased he Antiochus beyond the mountaine Taurus, (for it must be confessed, that in this glorious conquest L. Scipio had his brother compartner with him) and all for this, to be troden under foot of two Petilij? And that yee should seeke to triumph over P. Africanus? Will it never be better? Shall great personages (with all the good deserts of their owne, for all the dignities and honors by you upon them conferred) never reach and attaine to a strong fort and sure place of defence, wherein they may make account to be safe and past all daunger, and wherein their old age may rest and respose, if not with worship and honour, yet at least-wise in securitie, exempt from abuse and violent outrage? The sentence it selfe of Gracchus (enforced with such a speech especially) mooved not others only, but also the very accusers themselves; who made  no other rejoynder againe but thus, That they would consider better what they might by their place, and what they ought of dutie to doe. When the assembly of the people was broken up, the LL. of the Senate began to sit in counsell; where, the whole order of the Senators (but principally the auncients and as many as had been Consuls) highly commended and thanked Tib. Gracchus, for that he had preferred the weale-publicke, before privat grudges and particular quarrels. But the Petilij were well shent and baited with reprochfull checkes and bitter rebukes, in that they would seeme to rise by the fall of another, and to grace themselves with the disgrace of Africanus, and seeke to triumph over him and be enriched with his spoiles. Well, after that, there were no more words of Scipio Africanus. The rest of his life hee passed at Liternum, and never had mind to come to the citie: there ended he his daies in a countrey village;  and (as they say) he charged his executors upon his death-bed, to interre him in that very place. And there, his tombe or monument was built, because he would not that so much as his funerall obsequies should be perfourmed at Rome, (his native countrey) so unthankfull as it was. A rare man he was, and worthy to be recommended to the memorie of all posteritie: howbeit, the former part of his life was more singular and memorable, as well for the conduct of martiall exploits in war, as the governance of civill affaires in peace, than his latter daies. For in his youth, he followed the warres continually; whereas in his old age, as his bodie decaied and faded, so whatsoever he did, lost much of the woonted beautie and lustre. Besides, there was no matter presented, to employ that wit and spirit of his. What ods was there between his former Consulship and the second, although ye put his Censorship to it in the ballance? What comparison  was there, and what semblable thing in that lieutenantcie of his in Asia? of so little or no emploiment was it by reason of his owne sicklinesse; and blemished withall, by occasion of the misfortune of his sonne. And afterward, his return home againe was no lesse unfortunate, for the hard choice whereunto hee was driven, forced of necessitie to abide the triall of a doubtfull issue in judgement, or in avoiding it by making default, to quit withall his native citie for ever. Howbeit he alone went away with the honour above all other, of finishing the Punicke war, as great and daungerous to the Romanes as any that ever they made.
When Africanus was once dead and his head laid, his adversaries and enemies were aloft: of whome, M. Porcius Cato was the chiefe and principall: a man who was woont to barke (as it were) and raile against him during his life, in regard of his greatnes. And it is thought, that the  Petilij were set on by him, and procured through his persuasion, both in the life of Africanus to have drawne out, and after his death to have preferred a bill in this forme and manner following: May it please you to graunt and ordeine, that true search and diligent enquirie be made, what summes of mony were taken in prize, caried away, and levied of king Antiochus and those which were under his obedience and dominion; and that of as much thereof as came not into the publicke treasurie and chamber of the citie, Ser. Sulpitius (the Pretour of the citie) may propose unto the Senat, to know their advise and pleasure touching it: that whomsoever of all the Pretours for the time now being, it shall please the Senat to appoint, hee may sit in commission and inquisition thereof. This bill was first crossed by Q. and Lucius Mummius, who thought it meet and reason, that the Senat alone (as at all times heretofore) should make due enquirie of  the monies so purloined and embezeled, as is aforesaid, and not brought into the common chest of the citie. The Petilij charged the Scipions for being over great and mightie, and as it were KK. in the Senat, to carrie all away before them. L. Furius Purpureo (a man that had been Consull, and one of the ten commissioners in Asia) was of opinion, that the foresaid enquest should be

 graunted in more large and ample tearmes, namely, as touching the money not onely taken from Antiochus, but also from other kings and nations: covertly taxing herein Cn. Marlius his old enemy. L. Scipio on the other side stepped forth to dissuade this matter; albeit it was thought he would rather speake in defence of himselfe, than against the thing. Hee complained much and shewed his grievance, that such a bill as this should come forth now, and be set on foot after the death of his brother Africanus, the most valiant knight and noblest personage that ever was. As if it were not sufficient, that P. Africanus wanted the solemne Panegyrick oration at the Rostra after his death, but hee must be accused also. Why? the very Carthaginians are contented with the exile of Anniball, and seeke no more: but the people of Rome is not satisfied even with the death of Scipio, unlesse both his owne good name after hee is buried be wounded and  angled, and his brother also (to fill up the measure of mens malice and hatred) be killed and sacrificed upon his tombe. M. Cato spake in the behalfe of the bill, and persuaded that it might passe. His oration as touching the treasure of king Antiochus, is extant to be seene: and by the majestie of his authoritie, he diverted the two Mummy Tribunes of the Commons, cleane away, from interposing themselves any more. When they once had renounced and given over their negative, all the tribes in generall passed their voices affirmatively, Vitrogaslis. After this, Scr. Sulpitius proposed unto the Senat, Whome they would appoint for this enquest according to the act Petilia? and the LL. of the Senat deputed Q. Teretius Culleo. This Pretor was so great a friend to the house of the Cornelij, that some authors, namely those, who report how P. Scipio both died and also was carried forth to be enterred at Rome (for that bruit also runneth currant)  have written, How he went at his funerals before the biere and the mourners, with a cap of libertie on his head, like as hee had done before in his triumph, and gave sweet wine or mede to all those that attended the convoy, as farre as to the gate Capena. This honour he did Scipio at his death, for that among other prisoners in Affrick, he was by his meanes recovered out of the enemies hand. But it should seeme rather, that hee was such an enemie to that familie, that for the cankred rancour and malice which he caried against that name, he was by the adverse faction of the Scipions, chosen especially of purpose to sit upon and execute this inquisition. But certein it is, before this Pretour (all in his extremities, who either in love and friendship, or in hatred and enmitie, kept no meane) information was given immediately against L. Scipio. Presentments were made likewise, and the names received of his lieutenants A. Hostilius and L. Hostilius  both Catoes: and of his treasurer besides, C. Furius Aculeo. And to the end that it should appeare to the world, that they were all attaint of this crime of purloining and robbing the publick treasure of the common weale in one complot, there were two secretaries also and one of his sergeants called into question. But these three last mentioned, and L. Hostilius before-named, were found unguiltie and acquit, before Scipio had his judiciall triall: howbet Scipio and A. Hostilius his lieutenant, together with C. Furius were condemned. Scipio, for that he (as Valerius Antias writeth) to make a more easie peace to the contentment of Antiochus, received 6000 pound weight of gold, and 480 pound weight of silver more than he brought into the citie chamber. A. Hostilius, for that he likewise deteined eightie pound weight of gold, and 483 pound of silver: and Furius the Questor for keeping back to his own use 130 pound of gold, and two hundred of silver.  These summes I set downe of gold and silver, as I find them gathered and registred by Valerius Antias in his Chronicle. As for the summes of gold and silver, which L. Scipio should embezele, I would rather thinke that the clerke or secretarie faulted with his pen in writing the copies, than the authour lied so lowd with his tongue in the first enditing of the Originall. For it is more likely of the twaine, that the weight of the silver was more than of gold. As also that the fine wherein he was condemned, should amount but to fortie thousand Sestertius, is the fourth part of a Romane denarius, 3 halfepence farthing cue. Sesterces, than arise to two hundred and fortie thousand. And the rather I am induced thus to calculate, because it is said, that P. Scipio himselfe was required in the Senate to give his account but of such a summe; and when he had bidden his brother L. to fetch him that booke of accounts, he tooke it of him, and there before the Senat, tare and rent it with his owne hands, with great indignation, that having  brought into the Treasurie two millions of Sesterces, hee was called to his account for fortie thousand. In which confident boldnesse of spirite and courage', when the Questours durst not (against the order of law) take foorth money out of the Treasurie, hee called for the keies, and said he would bee so bold as to open the chists of the Treasurie, since hee was the cause that they were locked. Many things besides are diversly reported of Scipio, especially as touching the

latter end of his life, his trouble and accusation, his death, his funerals, and last of all, of his sepulchre  and tombe, which distract mee so, that I wot not what report to cleave unto, nor which records to beleeve. For they accord not as concerning his accuser. Some write it was M. Naevius, others againe say that they were the Petilians that called him to his answere. Neither agree they in the time when he was thus troubled, nor in the yeere, no nor the place wherein he died, ne yet where he was enterred. Some affirme he ended his daies and was buried at Rome, others at Liternum. And in both places there are monuments and Statues of his to be seene. For at Liternum there stood a tombe, and over the same tombe an image of his personage erected, which of late time we our selves saw overthrowne in a tempest. At Rome likewise without the gate Capena, there be three statues upon the monument of the Scipioes, whereof two are said to be of Pub. and L. Scipio, and the third of Q. Ennius the Poet. And this difference among authours is not  touching his acts and affaires onely, but also about the very Orations (if so be they were the Orations indeed of P. Scipio and Tiberius Gracchus, which are commonly so taken and caried about) which disagree so much as they doe. For the title of the Oration that goeth for P. Scipio, hath the name of M. Naevius, a Tribune of the Commons: but through the whole Oration it selfe there is no mention at all of that accuser. He tearmeth him one while Nebulo [Knave] and another while Nugator [Cousiner.] In like sort the Oration of Gracchus maketh no mention at all either of the Petilij, the accusers of Africanus, or of the day assigned unto him for his answere. And we must devise to tell the whole tale otherwise, if we would have it to agree with the Oration of Gracchus: and follow wee must those authours; who write, that when L. Scipio was accused and condemned for taking bribes of king Antiochus, his brother Africanus was embassador in Tuscane; and upon  the newes of his brothers trouble and misfortune, left his embassage, and made hast to Rome. Where hee tooke his way directly from the gate to the common place (for that it was told him how his brother was going to prison) and thrust the seargeant from his bodie, yea, and when the Tribunes themselves would have restrained him, he used violence against them, and carried himselfe in this action so, as as he shewed more kindnesse and love to his brother, than manners and civilitie otherwise. For thus complaineth Gracchus in his Oration, That the Tribunes authoritie and power was infringed and broken by a private person. And in the latter end, when he promised to assist L. Scipio, hee knit up his speech with these words, That it was a thing more tollerable, that both the Tribunitian puissance and the Commonweale should seeme overcome and surmounted by Tribunes themselves, than by a private man. But hee aggravated and enforced this  one violence and excessive outrage against him, and made it odious in such sort, that in blaming him for so much overshutting himselfe and degenerating as it were from his owne nature, he rehearsed the commendable parts of his moderation and temperat cariage of himselfe aforetime, and that in so good tearmes and ample manner, that thereby he made him some part of amends for the sharpe reprehension he used for the present. For he said, that in times past he had rebuked and reproved the people, when they would have made him a perpetuall Consull and Dictatour; that he had forbidden expressely, that any of his Statues in triumphant habite, should bee set up and erected in the publicke places of assemblies, as in the Comitium and Curia, in the Capitoll and chappell of Iupiter Opt. Max. These commendable reports of him, if they were uttered in an Oration penned of purpose for his praise, must needs testifie and shew a wonderfull magnanimitie  of his, in the moderate use of high honours according to a civile port; which an enemie by way of reproch and upbraiding him, acknowledgeth and confesseth. But all writers accord, that Gracchus tooke to wife the younger of his two daughters (for the elder without all question was affianced and given in marriage by her father unto P. Cornelius Nasica.) But it is not so certainely agreed upon, whether she was both betrothed and wedded also unto him, after her fathers death or no. As also, whether it be true (as it is reported) that when L. Scipio was a leading to prison, Gracchus, seeing none of his owne fellow Tribunes to succour and rescue him, sware a great oth and protested, that he was an enemie still to the Scipioes as much as ever hee was, and would not doe any thing to currie favour with them, or to come into their grace; yet could hee never endure that he should be caried to that prison, into which he had seene his brother Africanus lead  kings, great Generals and Commaunders of enemies, captive. Moreover, that the same day the Senate fortuned to be at supper together in the Capitoll, and arose up all at once, and requested Africanus to affiance his daughter to Gracchus, before the supper and banter was ended. Which espousals being performed with all due complements accordingly, during the time of

 that solemne feast, Scipio when hee was returned home to his house, said unto his wife Aemylia, that he had fianced and bestowed his daughter upon an husband. Shee then, falling into a fit of choler like a woman, and chasing that he had not made her acquainted with the matter, and taken her advise touching the maiden, who was as much her child as his, brake out into these words withall, that if hee had given her in marriage to Tiberius Gracchus, yet good reason it was that the mother should have been at the making of the bargaine. Wherupon Scipio tooke great contentment and joy at this conformitie of judgment in the choise, and inferred streightwaies, that hee was the man to whome shee was espoused. Thus much I thought good to relate of this worthie and noble person, albeit there is great varietie of opinions, and diversitie of writings in that behalfe.
 After the Pretor Q. Terentius, had finished the inquisition and whole processe thereof, Hostilius and Furius, who were attaint and condemned, that very day put in sufficient fureties to be bound in recognisaunce to the treasurers of the citie, for the paiment of their fines. But Scipio debating the matter still, and pleading that all the mony which he had received was in the citie chamber, and that he had purloined none of the publick treasure, was laid hold on to be had away and committed to prison. Then P. Scipio Nasica called unto the Tribunes for their help, and made a speech, full of true praises and commendations, not in generall only of the whole name and familie That himselfe and P. Africanus, together with L. Scipio (who now was going to prison) had to their fathers Cn. Scipio and P. Scipio, most noble and famous personages: those who for certain  yeers in the land of Spain, advaunced the renoume and glorie of the Roman name, maugre the heads of many captains and armies, as well of Carthaginians as Spaniards; not only in martiall tears of war, but also in this especially, that they had given testimonie and proofe unto those nations, of the temperate government, and faithfull dealing of the Romanes; and in the end both of them spent their bloud and lost their lives in the quarrell of the people of Rome. And albeit it had ben sufficient for all their posteritie to maintain only and uphold the glorie from them received, yet P. Africanus so farre surpassed the praise-worthie acts of his father, that it was verily beleeved he was not borne of humane bloud, but descended from some divine and heavenly race of the gods. As for L. Scipio, who now is in trouble (to say nothing of his worthie acts which he atchieved in Spaine and in Affricke, when hee was lieutenant there to his brother Consull) hee  was both reputed by the Senate sufficient, without any casting of lots, to undertake the province of Asia and the warre against king Antiochus, and also esteemed by his brother Africanus so worthie a person, that himselfe who had been Consull twice, Censor once, and had ridden in triumph, thought not scorne to accompanie him into Asia in qualitie of his lieutenant. In which province (to the end that the greatnesse and resplendent glorie of the lieutenant should not dimme the brightnesse of the Consull, and drowne his vertues and good parts) it to fell out, that the very same day, on which L. Scipio vanquished Antiochus neere Magnesia, P. Scipio lay sicke at Elaea, a citie distant certain daies journies. He defeated I say an armie there, nothing inferior to that of Annibal, with whom his brother had encountred before in Affrick. In which battel, among other great commaunders and captains under the king, Annibal was himselfe emploied in person, even  he who had ben the grand-Generall in the Punick war. Which service was so well conducted and mannaged, that a man possibly could not find fault so much as with fortune, or any accident that happened there. And now, when the war is unblamable, there is picked matter of crimination in the peace: and it (they say) was bought and sold for mony. In which challenge the ten deputies and assistants in counsell, are also touched and noted with corruption, by whose advise the said peace was granted and concluded. Well, of those ten, there were some that stepped forth and accused Cn. Manlius: yet so far off was that accusation of theirs from being credited, that it did not so much as hinder and delay the very time of his triumph. But (beleeve me) in Scipio his case, the very conditions of peace savour strongly of briberie and indirect dealing, for that they are advantageous, respective and favorable on the part of Antiochus. For, his kingdome is left entire and whole unto  him; now that he is vanquished, he possesseth as much as before the war began; and Scipio having received from him a mightie masse of gold and silver, hath brought nothing into the common treasurie, but averted all from thence, and converted it to his proper use. Why? was there not caried in pomp at the triumph of L. Scipio (in the very sight of all men) as much gold and silver, as in ten triumphs before (and put them all together) could not be shewed. For what should I speak of

the confines and frontiers of his realme? Namely, that Antiochus beforetime held under his dominion all Asia, and the marches also of Europe adjoining? And how great a part of the world that is, which extendeth from the hill Taurus, and lyeth out so farre as the AEgean sea; how many not cities onely, but spacious countries and populous nations it containeth, all men know right well: as also that this countrey, bearing out in length more than thirtie daies journey, and in bredth betweene two seas ten daies journey, even as farre as to the top of the mountaine Taurus, is taken from Antiochus, and he driven into the utmost angle and corner of the globe of the earth? What could hee have been disseized of more, in case his peace had cost him never a pennie of money? When Philip was conquered, he had Macedonie left unto him; when Nabis was subdued he enjoied still Lacedaemon: and no man ever went about to call Iuintius in question for it. And why? mary hehad not to his brother Scipio Africanus, for whose sake, the envie and mallice of men hath defaced and hurt L. Scipio, whereas his brothers glorie ought to have graced and helped him; Would any man of sence, and reason judge, that so much gold and silver was brought into the house of L. Scipio, as may not possibly be raised if all the goods he hath were sold to the worth? What should become of all that gold of the kings? Where be those great purchases of lordships and inheritances that he hath made therwith? Certes it cannot be, but in that house which hath not exceeded in superfluous expense, there should be seen some heap and mount of this new treasurer: But what care his enemies for this? That which cannot be made of the substance and goods of L. Scipio, they will make good on his bodie and back; which they meane to torture (belike) and expose to all contumelic and villanie; to the end, that a man of the best mark and qualitie that ever was should be shut up in a dungeon among robbers by the high way side, amongst night theeves and cutpurses, and there in the hard stocks and balefull darkenes render his last breath; and when he is dead, to have his bodie cast out naked at the prison dore. But be it whensoever it shal, this wil be no greater blot to the house Cornelia, than a shamefull reproch for ever to the citie of Rome. Against all these remonstrances, the Pretour Terentius opposed and red the law Petilia, the decree of the Senat, and the sentence given against L. Scipio. And he for his own part said, he could not doe withall, but if the summe wherein he was condemned, were not brought into the common Treasurehouse, hee knew no other remedie, nor what els to doe, but to commaund him (a condemned person) to be apprehended againe, and had away to prison. Then the Tribunes went apart to consult and lay their heads together. And within a while after C. Flaminius pronounced aloud, according to his owne advise and the opinion of all his Colleagues (excepting onely Gracchus) That the Tribunes would, not interpose themselves, but that the Pretour might do and execute his office and his authoritie to the full. But Tib. Gracchus set down his own decree in this forme, That as touching the summe wherein L. Scipio was condemned, he would not bee against it, not impeach the Pretour, but that hee might use his power according to his place, and take it out of his goods, as farre as they would stretch. But that L. Scipio, who hath subdued the mightiest and most puissant monarch in all the world, who hath set out and extended the bounds of the Romane empire, as farre as the farthest frontiers and ends of the earth, who hath obliged and bound king Eumenes, the Rhodians, and so many cities and States besides of Asia, and made them beholden to the people of Rome for favours and benefits bestowed upon them, finally, who hath himselfe laid up fast in prison many a Generall captaine over the enemies, after heeled them in triumph: that he I say, should lie in prison and yrons among the enemies of the people of Rome, hee would never suffer and therfore he commaunded him to be released and set at large. This decree was heard with so great applause, and all men were so joious to see L. Scipio delivered, that hardly a man would have beleeved (unlesse he had seene it) that there had been such a judgement passed in the same citie. Then the Pretour sent the Questours or Treasurers, to enter and seize upon all the goods of L. Scipio, in the name and to the use of the citie: where of there was not to bee found, so much as any one token or mention of the kings money, no nor so great a sum could be raised, as the fine came to wherein he was condemned. The friends, kinsfolke, followers and well-willers of L. Scipio, made such a contribution of money for him, that if hee would have accepted of it, he had been a richer man by ods, than he was before this crosse and calamitie fell upon him. But he tooke never a denier. His neerest kinsmen in bloud bought againe and redeemed as much of his owne goods, as served for his necessarie maintenance and no more. And the envie and hatred of men intended against the Scipioes, turned upon the heads of the Pretour and his counsell, together with the accusers themselves.



THE XXXIX. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the nine and thirtith Booke.
MArcus AEmylius the Consull after he had subdued the Ligurians, made the street or high way from Plaisance to Ariminum, untill it met with the way Flaminia. In this booke are recounted the beginnings of roiotous and dissolute life brought in by the Asian armie. All the Ligurians on this side Apennine are tamed and brought under. The Bacchanales (a Greekish feast and celebrated in the night season, the very seminarie and nource-garden of all wickednesse, being growne to this enormitie, that therein was contrived a conspiracie and complot of a mightie multitude) were now visited and searched into by the Consull, and put downe with the punishment of many persons. L. Iuintius Flamininus, the brother of T. Quintius, was deprived of his Senatour's dignitie by the Censors, to wit, L. Valerius Flaccus, and Mar. Pacius Cato, a right excellent man, as wel for seats of arms as peace. The cause was this, for that whiles he was Consul and governor in Gaule, at the request of one Philippus Poenus, a notorious wanton Ganymede whom he loved, he slew a certain Gaule with his own hand: or, as some have written, because at the entreatie of an harlot, upon whom he was enamoured, he beheaded one of them that were condemned. The in vective Oration of M. Cato against him is extant. Scipio departed this life at Liternum, and (as if Fortune would have his funerall accompanied with the death at the same time of two most renowned and great personages) Anniball poisoned himselfe, by occasion that Prusias king of Bithynia (unto whom hee was fled for succour after the defeature of king Antiochus) would have yeelded him into the hands of the Romans; who had sent of purpose T. Quintius Flamininus to demaund him. Likewise Philopamen the Generall of the Achaens, an excellent man, was poisoned by the Messenians, who tooke him prisoner in warre. Colonies were sent to Pollentia, Pisaurum, Mutina, and Parma. Over and besides, this booke containeth the prosperous affaires against the Celtiberians: also the beginning and cause of the Macedonian warre, whereof the originall spring arcss from Philip, much discontented, that his kingdome was empaired by the Romanes, in regard that he was forced by them to withdraw his garisons out of Thrace and other parts.

DVring the time that these affaires passed at Rome (if this were the yeere wherein they happened) both Consuls made warre against the Ligurians, a nation borne as it were to maintaine the militarie discipline of the Romanes, and to find them occupied in all times of respite and rest from greater warres; neither was there any other province that gave a sharper edge to the valour of the soldior. For Asia with the beautie of their cities, the abundance of all commodities as well by sea as land, the effeminate tendernesse of the enemies, and the roialtie of the kings riches, had made their armies more wealthie than valiant: and especially under the government of Cneus Manlius, nusled they were in much loosenesse and negligence. And therupon it was, that finding the way in Thrace a little more rough and difficult than ordinarie to travell in, and an enemie better practised and exercised to deale withall, they received a great foile and losse among them. Now in Liguria, they met with all thingsthat might rouse and awake sleepie souldiours: the countrey rough and full of mountaines, that much adoe they had themselves to seize the same, and as great a labour they found to disseize the enemies, that were before possessed  of them: the waies, sleepie up-hill, narrow, and daungerous for ambushes: the enemie, light, swift, nimble, and suddainely setting upon them, giving no time of rest, no place of repose and securitie. Driven they were of necessitie to assault strong and fortified castles, with great difficultie and daunger both: the countrey poore and needie, which caused the soldiors to spare and live hardly, and affourded them no foison of preys and prizes: and therefore no victualers,

scullions, souldiors boyes and lackies, followed the camp; neither the labouring beasts for carriage, tooke up a length their march: nothing there, but armour and men, reposing all hope in their armes, and nothing else. And never wanted they some matter of quarrell, and some occasion or other to make war: for by reason of their barenesse and penurie, they made rodes into the lands of their neighbors, but so, as they never ventured all at once, nor put the main chance in hazard.
C. Flaminius the Consull having fought sundrie times with the Friniat Ligurians, and in many battailes gotten the better hand over them, even at home in their owne countrey, brought the whole nation by composition under obedience, and disarmed them: but because in the deliverie of their armour, they dealt not soundly and faithfully, and should have beene chastised therfore, they abandoned their villages, and fled to the mountain Auginus; whither, the Consul  pursued them hard at heeles: howbeit, being disbanded and scattered againe, and most of them disarmed, they fled into the valley through places where no wayes led, and over broken and cragged steep rocks, whereas the enemies could not possibly follow after, and so passed the other side of Apennine. But as many as kept still within their hold, were beset round about and overthrowne. Then were the legions led to the further side of Apenninus, where the enemies for a small while, defended themselves by the height of the place, but an on they yeelded. Then was their armour sought up with more care and diligence than before, and they were disfurnished and stript out of all. After this, was the warre diverted and turned wholly upon the Apuan Ligurians, who had so over-run the territories of Pisae and Bolonia, that they could not be manured and tilled. The Consull having subdued them also, graunted peace unto the borderers: and now  that he had brought the province into quietnes and rest; to the end, that his souldiors should not be idle and doe nothing, he made a causey or street-way from Bononia to Arretium.
The other Consull M. AEmylius, set on fire the villages and wasted the lands of the Ligurians, as well in the champaine fields as the valleys, when the inhabitants themselves were retired into the two mountaines Balista and Suismontium, which they held. Afterwards, hee assailed them also who had taken the hills aforesaid; and first wearied them with lights skirmishes; afterwards, he forced them to descend into the plaine, and there in a set battaile vanquished them: in which conflict the vowed a temple to Diana. Thus having subdued all on this side Apennine, hee then set upon those that dwelt beyond the mountaine; among whom were the Frisinat Ligurians, (so farre as to whome C. Flaminius went not:) all those, AEmylius subdued, despoiled them of their  armour, and forced the multitude of them to forsake the mountaines and come downe into the plaines. After he had quieted the Ligurians, he led his armie into the country of the Gauls, and made an high way from Placentia to Ariminum, so as it met with the causey Flaminia: and in the last battell wherein hee fought with banners displayed against the Ligurians, he vowed a temple to queene Iuno. And these were the exploits for that yeere, in Liguria.
M. Furius the Pretour in Gaule, seeking in time of peace for some pretence and colour of warre, had taken from the Cenomans their armour, notwithstanding they were innocent and did no harme. The Cenomanes made complaint hereof at Rome to the Senate, and were put over to the Consull AEmylius, unto whome the Senat had directed a commission of oier and determiner. After great debate with the Pretor, they overthrew him in the action, and had their armour  delivered unto them againe: and so the Pretour was commaunded to give over his government and depart out of the province.
After this, the Embassadours of the Latin nation, who assembled and resorted in great number out of all parts of Latium, had audience given them in the Senat. These complained, that a great multitude of their own naturall citizens, were removed and gon to inhabit in Rome, and there were enrolled: whereupon a commission was graunted to Q.Terentius Culleo the Pretour, to make search for such: and looke how many of them those Latine allies could proove to have been enrolled (either themselves or their fathers) in any citie or corporation of theirs, either at the time that C. Claudius and M. Livius were Censors, or after their Censorship, to force those to returne thither againe, where they had beene entred or matriculated. By vertue of this inquisition, to the number of twelve thousand Latines returned home againe into their owne countrey: for now the citie of Rome was overcharged and pestered with a multitude of straungers and forreiners.
Before that the Consuls repaired to Rome, M. Fulvius the Proconsull returned out of AEtolia:

 who, after he had discoursed of his exploits perfourmed in AEtolia and Cephalenia, before the Senate assembled in the temple of Apollo, requested of the LL. to judge it meet and requisite, and accordingly to graunt and ordeine, that praise and thanksgiving might be rendered unto the immortall gods, and himselfe allowed to triumph, for that he had so well and happily managed the affaires of the Common-weale. Then stept forth M. Aburius a Tribune of the Commons, and declared openly, That in case they went about to passe any decree in that behalfe, before the comming of M. AEmylius the Consull, he would crosse it: for that the Consull himselfe was minded to contradict that proceeding, and had given streight charge unto him, at what time as he tooke his journey to the province, that the consultation of this matter should be reserved wholly untill his returne home. And Fulvius (quoth he) shall loose so much  time: and when the Consull himselfe is present in place to assist, then might the Senate moove what decree it pleased them. Then answered M. Fulvius and said: If men were ignorant either of the grudge and quarrell betweene me and M. AEmylius, or with what outragious spirit and king like choller and indignation hee pursued the said enmitie and variance, yet it were not a tolerable thing and to be endured, that the absence of the Consull should both impeach the honour due unto the immortall gods, and also hinder and stay the triumph which I have so justly deserved: that a Generall (I say) who had so worthily atchieved his service, and an armie so victorious, should stay and give attendance without the citie gates, untill it pleased the Consull to returne home; who no doubt of very purpose and for the nones, upon this occasion would make slow hast and take his leisure. But now considering that the enmitie and heart-burning that the  Consull beareth to me is so notorious as it is, What indifferencie and reasonable dealing may a man looke for at his hands? who taking the advantage of the time when a small number of Senatours were assembled, caused an act of the Senat to passe by stealth, and entred it in the treasurehouse, conteining thus much in effect, That Ambracia should not be reputed as a towne forced by assault, notwithstanding it were assailed with mantilers and platformes: where we were driven to erect new fabrickes, and plant other engines and ordinance of warre after the former were consumed with fire: where we mainteined fight about the walls, as well under the ground as above, for the space of fifteene dayes togither: where, after that the souldiours had scaled and gained the walls, the conflict endured notwithstanding a long time doubtfull, from morning to night; and where were slaine above 3000 enemies. Now as touching the sacriledge committed (after the citie was forced) in spoiling the churches of the immortall gods, what a slander think yee, hath hee raised of me? what a matter hath he made thereof? and how hath hee enformed the Pontifies and Bishops? Vnlesse a man would say, that lawfull it was for the citie of Rome to be garnished and beautified with the ornaments of Syracusa and other cities woon by force; but the law of warre extended not to this onely citie of Ambracia? I beseech therefore the LL. of the Senat, yea and I request the Tribunes, not to suffer me to be mocked and abused by a most insolent and proud adversarie. Then on all hands they dealt with the Tribune, some intreated him, other rebuked and blamed him: but the speech of Tib. Gracchus (one of his colleagues) mooved him most of all others; who shewed, That it was no good precedent and example, that men should maintaine and follow their owne privat quarrels in time of magistracie and publick government;  but a shamefull matter and a soule indignitie it was, and much unbeseeming the Tribunes of the Commons and their sacred lawes, that a Tribune should be a proctor to other men and prosecute their actions and enmities. Men ought (qd.he) according to their own discretion and judgement, either to love or hate the persons, to like or dislike the causes; not to depend and hang upon the countenance and becke of others, nor to be caried too and fro with the will, pleasure, and appetites of other men. As for the Tribune of the Commons here, he accordeth and taketh part with a chollericke and restie Consull, and remembreth well what M. Aemilius left with him in private charge; but forgetteth altogether that the Tribuneship was committed unto to him by the people of Rome: committed I say, and put into his hands for to assist privat persons, and to mainteine their liberties, and not to uphold the kinglike rule and roialtie of a Consull.  Never seeth he thus much before him, that it will be written another day in the Animals and yeerly Chronicles, That of two Commoner Tribunes in the same fellowship and societie, one for the love of the Common-weale renounced and gave over his owne private displeasure and enmitie to a particular person, and the other tooke charge as it were by way of Commission, to pursue the quarell of another man. The Tribune could endure no longer these rebukes and

checks, and therewith departed out of the temple: then the Pretour Scr. Sulpitius propounded  the bill the second time, and so a triumph was graunted to M. Fulvius. Who after he had rendred great thanks to the LL. of the Senate, added moreover and said, That the very day wherein he forced the citie Ambracia, he had by vow promised, to the honor of Iupiter Opt. Max. for to exhibit the great and solemne Romane games. And to that effect the cities of Greece had contributed toward the charges, a hundred pound weight of gold: his petition was therefore, that the Senate would ordeine that out of that masse of money which he was to cary and shew in triumph, and ment to bestow and lay up in the city Treasurie, the foresaid summe of gold might be sequestred and reserved apart for the proper use above named. The Senate commaunded, that the Colledge of the Prelates and Priests in this case should be consulted with, and their advise demaunded, whether they thought it necessarie that so much gold should be spent and  consumed in the charges of the said Games? The Prelates made answere againe, that it was not materiall to religion and to the service of the gods, to how great a reckning soever the charges of the games should arise and amount. Whereupon the Senate permitted Fulvius to deffray what he would himselfe, so as hee exceeded not the summe of 80000 [Asses.] Hee had purposed to triumph in the moneth of Iannarie, but hearing that Aemilius the Consull (who was advertised by letters, that Aburius the Tribune of the Commons had renounced and let fall his opposition which hee commensed) was comming in proper person to Rome, onely for to hinder the triumph, and stayed by the way sicke; hee prevented the day, for feare hee should have had more anger and trouble in his triumph, than during his warre. So upon the 22 day of December he triumphed over the AEtolians and Cephalenia. Before his chariot there were borne a hundred  crownes of gold, weighing twelve pound a peece: of silver 83000 pound weight: of gold 243 pound weight: of Attick Tetradraches 118000: of Philip peeces of gold coyne 12422: images of brasse 285: of marble 230. Likewise of armour, as well defensive as offensive, and other spoile of the enemies, an huge deale: besides Catapults, Balists, and other engins and peeces of batterie. Moreover there went before him 27 captaines either AEtolians and Cephalenes, or els under king Antiochus, left by him in those parts. The same day before that he entred into the citie, he bestowed in the cirque Flaminius many militarie gifts and presents upon many colonels, captaines, horsemen and centurions, as well Romanes as allies. Generally to all the footemen he gave out of the pillage 25 Denarij apeece: twise as much to the centurions, and threefold to the horsemen.
Now approched the time of the solemne assembly for the election of Coss. and because M. Atemilius whose lot it was to be president thereof, could not be present at the day, C. Flaminius came of purpose to Rome. By whom were created Consuls sp. Posthumius Albinus, and Q.Martius Philippus. After that were Pretours elected, to wit, T. Moenius, P. Cornelius Sulla, C. Calpurnius Piso, M. Licinius Lucullus, C. Aurelius Scaurus, and L. Iuintius Crispinus. In the end of the said yeere, after the Magistrates were thus created, Cn. Manlius Volso, the third day before the Nones of March, triumphed over the Gaules who inhabit Asia. The cause why he triumphed so late, was this, for that he would avoid making his answere (according to the act of Petilius) whiles Q.Terentius Calleo was Pretour: fearing he should burne in the flame of the same sentence and judgement, whereby L. Scipio had bene condemned: or least the flame of another  mans judgement, I meane the sentence whereby L. Scipio had bene condemned, would have bene too hote for him, and caught hold of him likewise: considering that the jurie and enquest were more incensed and provoked against him than Scipio; for that he succeeding after him, had spoiled and marred with all kind of licentious loosenes, the militarie discipline, which Scipio had observed most precisely and severely. Neither was he noted and touched in name for those things only which by bare heeresay were reported to have bene done in the province, farre remote from the view of men, but also of those particular instances to be seene daily in the demeanour of his soldiours. For verily the forein excesse and strange superstuities tooke beginning from the Asian armie, who brought all with them into the citie. They were the first within Rome that tooke up the use of brasen tables, of rich counterpoints, carpets, cupbourd-clothes, hangings and curteins of sundry kinds of tyssew. Likewise of one footed standing tables, buffotes, and cupbourds, which in those dayes were counted magnificent and stately moveables. Then came up the manner of having at bankets singing miniken wenches, and such as could play upon the dulcimers and other instruments of musick, with dauncers, jesters, and other pastimes

 and delight some pleasures and fits of mirth at the table. Then began the bourd to be furnished and set out with more exquisit and deintie viands, and of greater expense. Then Cooks who in old time were reputed the most contemptible slaves as well for calling and estimation as for the use they were put unto, came to be in great request and price: and that which before time was a mechanicall kind of manuall service, grew now to be accoumpted a science of deepe skill and understanding. And yet all these things that then bare so great a shew, were scarce so much as small seeds and slips, to the excessive superfluities that were to ensue.
'Well, C. Manlius caried in triumph two hundred crownes of massie beaten gold, weighing twelve pound a peece: of silver 220000 pound weight: of gold 2103 pound weight: of Attick Tetradrachmes 127000: of Cistophores 250000: of Philip golden peeces 16320. Also much  armour there was, and spoiles of Gaules caried in shew upon wagons: and 52 captaines of enemies were led before his owne chariot. Amongst the souldiours hee gave a donative of two and fortie denarij apeece, he doubled the same to every centurion. Also to every footman hee gave duple pay, and to every horseman triple. Many there were of all States and degrees, whom he rewarded with militarie presents for especiall service, and those followed next after his chariot. The souldiours chaunted such songs and sonnets, as a man might easily see they were composed to feed the humor of a Generall desirous of glorie, and one that made much of his souldiours especially; whereby his triumph was more honored with the affectionate favourof them, than otherwise recommended and celebrated with the heartie love of the people. Howbeit, the friends of Manlius served him in good sleed to win the good will of them also, through whose solliciting  and earnest endeavour, there passed an act of the Senate, that out of that money which had been shewed in triumph, there should be repaired unto the people that subsidie which had bene levied among them for souldiers pay, and not yet contented back againe. So the Treasurers of the citie made true and faithfull paiment with all diligence of 25 asses and d. in every thousand [for the loane.]
About the same time two Colonels came out of both provinces of Spaine, with letters from C. Catinius and L. Manlius the governours there: by which letters intelligence was given, that the Celtiberians and Lusitanes were in armes, wasting and spoiling the lands of the Rom. confederates. The Senate referred the entier consultation of this matter to the new Magistrates. During the time of the Roman games that yeere which P. Cornelius Ceihegus, and Aulus Posthumius Albinus  represented, a certeine mast or high pole which stood not fast in the shew place called Circus maximus, fell downe upon the image of Pollentia, and overthrew it to the ground. The LL. hereupon made some scruple in conscience, and ordeined, that the solemnitie of those games should continue one day longer, and caused two images to be set up for that one, and that the new should be all gilt. Likewise the Plebeian plaies were renewed one day more, by the AEdiles C. Sempronius Blaesus, and M. Furius Luscus. The yeere following averted the Consuls Sp. Posthumius Albinus, and Q.Martius Philippus from the armie, from the regard I say of warres and government of provinces abroad, to the punishment of a certeine intestine conspiracie at home. The Pretours cast lots for their provinces. T. Menius had the jurisdiction of the citizens, and M. Licinius Lucullus betweene citizens and strangers. Vnto C. Aurelius Scaurus sell the governance  of Sardinia, and to P. Cornelius Sulla of Sicilie: L. Iuintius Crispinus was assigned to the hither Spaine, and P. Galpurnius Piso to the farther. Both Consuls were enjoined to make inquisition into secret conspiracies within the citie.
There was a certeine Grecian of base degree and condition, who came first into Hernaria; a man not endued with any of those artes, whereof that nation (of all others most learned) hath brought many unto us, as well for the erudition of our minds, as the trimming of our bodies: but a sacrificing priest he was, and a divining wisard withall. Neither was he one that made outward prosession of teaching men, and thereby getting a living openly, and so by an ouvert shew of religion possessed their heads and minds with feare and horror; but the knowledge he had forsooth of certeine hidden and secret sacrifices. These mysteries of his at first he taught but unto  a few, howbeit afterwards they began to be communicated and divulged as well to men as women: and to this religion were added pleasures and delights of wine and good cheere, to the end that more customers might be allured and enticed for to have a liking thereof. Now when as wine had drowned and droused the understanding: when the night seasn, when the entermingling of men and women together one with another (and namely, they of young

and tender yeeres, with those of elder age) had cleane put out and extinguished all respect and regard  of shame fast honestie: there began first to be practised all sorts of corruption, for every one had all pleasures readie at commaundement, and his choise of those whereto by nature he was more prone and given to lust after. Neither was there wickednes committed here, of one sort, namely, the abusing of mankind and womankind one with another without distinction: but out of this shop and workhouse proceeded false witnesses, forging of seales, depositions, and testimonies; and more than so, wrong and untrue informations. From hence came the divelish cast of poisoning, and privie murders of the neerest of kindred in one house; and the same so secret, that otherwhiles the bodies would not be found for to be committed to the earth. Many sinfull parts were there played by way of fraud, guile, and cunning cousenage; but more by apert force. As for violence, it was kept close and hidden, byreason that with the hideous noises, with the sound and ringing  of tymbrels, tabours and cymbals, there could no voice nor word be heard of such as cried our, when either they were forced to vilanie and abuse, or beaten and wounded to death. The infection of this catching poison out of Hetruria, spred as far as Rome, like a contagious maladie. At the first the spatious capacitie of the citie, having bin used to wink and beate with such enormities, concealed all: at length revealed it was and detected to the Cos. Posthumius, much after this maner.
P. Ebutius (whose father had served in the warres in qualitie of a gentleman of Rome with a citie horse) left an orphane,The Eacchanales detected. after that is guardians were likewise deceased, became ward to his mother Duronia and his father in law (her second husband) T. Sempronius Rutilius, under whom he had his bringing up. Now as his mother was wholly devoted and obsequious unto her husband, so his father in law had so handled the matter in his guardianship, that he could  make no good accoumpt thereof, and therefore his desire was, that either the infant his ward should be made away, or else obliged and enthralled unto him. The only way to compasse and bring this about, was the corruption and abuse of the Bacchanales. The mother therefore upon a time called her sonne unto her, and told him, that she had made a vow for him when he was sick, that so soone as ever he should recover and be well againe, she would present him to the priests of Bacchus to be consecrated and prosessed in their mysteries: and now quoth she seeing that by the goodnes of the gods thou art amended, and I thereby obliged by the bond of that vow, I will acquit my selfe thereof, and performe it accordingly. She bare him in hand therefore, that he must for ten dayes live chat, and not touch a woman, and at the tenth dayes end after he had taken his supper, and was well washed and purified after the manner, she would  bring him into the holy place of those sacred mysteries. Now there was a famous strumpet, by condition a bondwoman enfranchised, named Hispala Fessenia, too good ywis for that occupation which she used while she was a young wench and a bondservant: but yet still after that she was manumised and in franke state of a freed denizen, she mainteined her selfe by the same trade and manner of living. Growen she was into familiar acquaintance with the foresaid young Ebutius, by reason they were neere neighbours, and dwelt not farre asunder: yet so, as she endamaged not the youth one jot either in charging his purse, or touching his credit. For she it was that first was inamored upon him, and him she woed: and for as much as he had but short allowance every way from his mother and father in law, and by them kept hardly, he was mainteined well by the bounteous liberalitie of this loving harlot. Nay, more than that, in continuance  of time she was so deepely ingaged in him, that when her owne patron was dead, and herselfe at the disposition of none, she sued unto the Tribunes and the Pretour for another tutor, because she ment to make her last will and testament, wherein she declared Ebutius her onely heire in remainder to all that she had. There passing thus betweene them these gages and pledges of love, and they using to empart the one unto the other the secrets of their hearts, the young youth by way of mery and pleasant talke, willed her one day not to marvell or thinke any thing in it, if for certeine nights he lay away and parted beds with her: for that upon a religious zeale and devotion that he had, he was minded to be prosessed and consecrated by the priests of Bacchus, and all to be assoiled from a vow made in regard of his health. The woman hearing him say so, and troubled in spirit, Many god forsend, quoth she, and I would not that  for all the good in the world. And better it were for me and you too to dye both at once, than so to do: and with that she threatned, she cursed and banned, wishing all mischiefe and plague to light upon them that had put such a thing into his head. The youth wondered much to heare her words, and to see her so to fare and take on beyond all reason and order, beseeching her of

 all loves to be content, and to forbeare those cursed speeches, and said withall it was his owne mother, by the consent of his father in law, that had enjoyned him so to do. And is it that father in law of yours, quoth she, (for peradventure I should not do well to blame your mother) that hasteneth you by this action of yours, to make shipwrack of your honestie and chastitie, of your credit and good name, of your hope another day, and lastly, to hazard your very life? Here at the young man marveiled much more than before, and desired earnestly to know the depth of all this matter. Then after she had prayed all gods and goddesses to pardon her, if for tender love and affection that she bare unto him, she could neither will nor chuse but reveale those secrets that in deed were to be concealed, she set tale on end and said, That she herselfe once entred into that chappell, when as she waited upon her mistresse, but since that she was  made free and at her own libertie, shenever setsoote within the dore. And upon my knowledge (ad.she) it is the very shop and workhouse of all wickednes that can be devised. And now for certeine these two yeares last past, there is not one prosessed and admitted to those mysteries there, who is above 20 yeeres of age. So soone as any one is inducted and brought in thither, she or he is delivered to the priests as a very sacrifice to be killed: for they lead them to a place which resoundeth with yelling and crying, with singing of divers consorts, with jangling noyse of cymbals, with thumping and beating of tabers, to the end that the voice of any one that crieth and complaineth of force and violence done to the abuse of his or her bodie, might not be heard. Now I beseech you therefore and all loves I pray you, that in any case by one meanes or other ye avoid this, howsoever ye do: and plunge not your selfe headlong thither, where first you shall  be sure to endure and suffer, and afterwards to perpetrate and commit all abhominable wickednes not to be named. And never would she let the youth go from her, untill he had made her faithfull promise to absteine and forbeare such mysteries and ceremonies. When hee was come home, and that his mother was in hand with him, telling him what hee must do this day and that day, and so forth; he flatly denied and said plainly he would do neither the one nor the other, and at one word, prosessed and consecrated he would not be, whatsoever came of it. His father in law was present and at one end of this resolute speech of his. His mother straightwaies cried out and said, that he could not find in his hart to lie apart from Hispala one ten daies, and that he was so far bewitched and envenomed with the charmes and poisoned allurements and baits of that false serpent and perilous Hydra, that he had no respective regard either of his mother, or mothers husband,  no not any reverent feare of the immortal gods. The mother rated him of one side, the father baited and coursed him on another, till in the end they hunted him out of dores with 4 bondslaves besides. The young man betooke himselfe to Ebutia, an aunt that he had by his fathers side, and shewed her the whole matter, why his mother had thrust him out of her house by the head and shoulders: which done, by her advise and counsell the next day he opened and declared the same in great secret, without the hearing of any earthly creature, to the Consull Posthumius. The Consul commanded him to repaire again unto him three dayes after, and so for that time dismissed him. Then the Consull in the meane while enquired of his wives mother Sulpitia, a grave and sober matron, whether she knew an old wise called Ebutia dwelling in the Aventine? Yes that I do qd.she, and I know her to be an honest dame, and a woman of the old world, and sew her like now  adayes. I must needs speake with her (qd.he) and therefore I would have you send a messenger unto her, for to will her to come hither. Ebutia at the first sending came unto Sulpitia; and the Consul within a while sorted (as it were by chance) into their companie, and began to find some talke of her brothers sonne Ebutius: with that, the womans eyes stood full of water, and with teares she began to bewaile the case and mishap of the young man; who being spoiled of all his goods and patrimonie (by those who of all others should least, have done it) was now at home in her house, chased and driven out of doores by his owne mother: for that the honest good youth (God blesse us all and be mercifull unto us) was unwilling to be consecrated and admitted to certaine filthie and detestable sacrifices (if all be true that is reported thereof.) The Consull had enough now, and was fully persuaded of Ebutius that he had told him no lie. Then hee  gave Ebutia leave to goe her waies home, and requested his mother in law Sulpitia aforesaid, to send likewise for Hispala from thence out of the Aventine to come unto her; a woman (qd.hee) affranchised and well enough knowen to all the neighbours of that street: for that I have somewhat also to say to her. Hispala was somewhat disquieted at this message, to think that she should be sent for to so noble and honourable a dame, and knew no cause wherefore. But after that she

saw the Lictours before the entrie of the dore, the troupe and traine also belonging to the Consull, and withall, the Consull himselfe in person, shee was astonied and (in manner) halfe dead. The Consull taking with him his wives mother, had the woman into an inward roume of the house, and said unto her, That shee need not to bee affraid, if so be she could find in her heart to tell the truth: and for assurance thereof, she should have the faithfull word and promise either of Sulpitia (a ladie of so good credit and reputation) or of himselfe, if need were. Only he would have her to urter and declare what was ordinarily done at the grove of Similla in the Bacchanals, where they used to sacrifice in the night season. The woman had no sooner heard that word, but she fell into such a feare, trembling and quaking all over her bodie, that for a good while she was not able to open her lips and speake a word: but after shee was come to herselfe againe out of this traunce, and by them heartened and encouraged, she said, That when she was a very young  wench and a bond-maiden, shee, togither with her mistresse, was there prosessed and consecrated: but for certaine yeeres of late, and namely since that she was affranchised and made free, shee was not acquainted with the place, nor wist not what worke was there. I con thee thanke for this yet (quoth the Consull) that thou deniest now how thou wert there entred into that prosession; but say on and tell out the rest as truly and faithfully. Shee answered againe, that she knew no more than shee had alreadie disclosed. The Consull replyed upon her and said, That in case shee were taken in a trip, and that another came forth to her face and reprooved her, she should neither find the same pardon nor have the like favour at his hands, as otherwise shee might if of herselfe shee confessed the thing, for as much as hee who had all from your owne mouth, hath alreadie discovered the whole. The woman knew where he was then, and was persuaded verily (as it was indeed) that Ebatius was a blab of his tongue, and had revealed this secret: whereupon shee fell downe at the feet of Sulpitia; and first began in most humble manner to beseech her, that she would not suffer, that words of course passed betweene her an enfranchised woman and her paramout, should turne not onely to earnest and importance, but also to a capitoll matter, to touch her as much as her life was worth: for what I said (quoth shee) was but to fright him, and not for what I knew any such thing. Posthumius here at was chased, and fell into a sit of choller: What? (quoth hee) thou thinkest belike that thou are jesting and cogging with thy lover Ebutius, and forgettest how thou art in the house of a right worshipfull ladie, and in communication with a Consull. But Sulpitia on the other side, willed her to stand up, (affrighted as she was) and withall, both exhorted her to be of good cheere, and also appeased the wrath of her sonne  in law. In the end, after she had taken a better heart unto her, she greatly blamed and sound fault with the disloyaltie and falsehood of Ebutius for serving her so, and requiting her full badly again for so singular a good turne that shee had done him; and then said, That shee stood in great awe of the gods, whose secrets shee should reveale and divulge; but in greater feare of men, who no doubt for be wraying these matters, would be readie to teare her in pieces with their very hands. And therefore she besought Sulpitia, and entreated the Consull to take some order for her, and to send her into some place out of Italy, where she might passe the rest of her daies in safetie yet of her life. Be of good cheere woman (quoth the Consull) let me alone for that, I will provide well enough, that thou shalt live at Rome, and that without all daunger. Then declared Hispala the originall and first commencements of these sacrifices and solemnities. At the beginning  (qd.shee) it was apriviledged place and consecrated for women onely, and they alone medled with those mysteries; neither was in the custome and manner, that a man should enter in among them; and three set holidayes they had in the yeere, during which time, the priests of Bacchus performed their ceremonies in the day time, and folke were admitted by them, to their religion and prosession; and women they were all (and those matrons) who were created priests for that purpose, in their time and turne one after another. But Paculla Minia (a Campane woman) when she was the priest, changed all, as being advertised and admonished by the gods so to doe: for shee was the first that sacred and admitted men, to wit, her owne sonnes Minius and Herennius the Cerrinians: shee altered the solemnitie from the day to the night; and for three dayes in the whole yeere, shee ordeined five in every moneth, to serve for the attendance and ministerie of M these mysteries. Since which time that these sacrifices and ceremonies were thus divulged, and men and women intermingled togither, and the licentious liberty of the night time also to help all forward, there is no act so wicked, no fact so filthie, but there it is committed: and more sinfull and unnaturall abuse there is, of mankind one with another, than there is of women. If any

 are either unwilling to suffer this soule silthinesse, or bestirte themselves more dully in the beastly action and performance of that villanie, such presently are to be killed and sacrificed as beasts. And this is supposed amongst them, the principall point and summe of their religion, To hold and beleeve that nothing is unlawfull whatsoever. The men shaking and wagging their bodies too and fro after a fanaticall fashion, as if they were bestaught and out of their right wits, seeme to divine and tell things to come. The women, attired like the shee-priests of Bacchus, with their heads unbound and their haire hanging loose about their eares, runne downe with flaming torches to the river Tyber; where they dip their torches into the water, and take them out againe light burning still, because they are made with sulphur vise and quicke time: and they say, that certaine men are by the gods carried away from among them, no man knoweth whither; such  as they bind fast to a certaine engine or frame, and harrie them out of sight into certain hidden caves: and those be such, as either would not sweare to be of their conspiracie, or be parteners with them in all their mischievous designments, or endure against kind to be abused. The number and multitude there assembled, is exceeding great, and growne now to be another bodie of a people: and among them are some noble persons, as well men as women. But now for these two yeeres last past, ordeined it is, That none should be there prosessed and sacred above twentie yeeres old; for such ages they lay for, to serve their turne, as are soonest seduced and drawen to errour, or most subject to be forced to suffer abuse and villanie. When shee had thus finished her information and discovered all, shee fell downe upon her knees againe, and lay at their feet, and repeated her former supplication the second time, to wit, That he would send her away out  of the countrey. Then the Consull intreated his mother in law to spare some void corner of her house, where unto Hispala might retire herselfe, and there make her abode. So she allowed her an upper lodging in her house, and the staires that led toward the street were stopped up, and the entrance turned into the house. Then presently were all the moveable goods and houshold stuffe of Fessenia remooved, and her family sent for thither, and there entertained. Likewise Ebutius was commaunded to goe and lodge with a tenant or client belonging to the Consull. Thus when both the informers were forth-comming and under Posthumius his hand, he declared the whole matter to the Senate. And after hee had laid every thing abroad in order, namely, what was reported to him first, and what he had learned afterwards by enquitie, the LL. of the Senat were surprized with exceeding great feare, as well in regard generally of the commonweale, least  those conspiracies, nightly meetings and conventicles, might import some secret complot of mischiefe and daunger: as also for doubt in particular, that some of their owne friends of familie should bee accessarie and culpable. The Senate yet were of this mind, that the Consull was highly to be praised and thanked, for that hee had found out and brought to light such a matter as this, both with so singular care and diligence, and also without any tumult and uprore. Then they tooke order and ordained, Imprimis, That the Consuls should have an extraordinarie commission to make search and inquisition into these Bacchanales and night-sacrifices. Item, That Ebutius and Fessenis that informers thereof, should not bee prejudiced thereby, nor come to harme for it, yea, and that a recompence and reward should bee propounded to others that could give light and reveale the same. Item, That the priests belonging to these religions, bee  they men or women, should bee sought out not onely at Rome, but in all other market townes, faires and places of frequent resort, and convented before the Consuls to be and remain at their disposition. Item, That proclamation be made at Rome, and edicts sent out throughout all Italie, that no person whatsoever, who had beene sacred and prosessed religious by the priests of Bacchus, resort any more into assembly or conventicle for those sacrifices, ne yet doe ought pertaining to such divine service. And above all things, that information and presentment he made of all those that had frequented such meetings or conventicles, to commit whoredome or any such filthinesse and wickednesse. And these were the ordinances of the Senate. The Consuls then graunted their warrants out to the AEdiles Curule, to make diligent search and enquitie for those priests of that religion, and upon apprehension to keep them in free ward and large prison-forthcomming  comming for to be examined: also to the AEdiles of the Commons to looke well, that no service of the gods be celebrated in secret. Moreover, the Triumvirs capitall were streightlycharged to set good watch and ward throughout the citie, and see to meetings by night, for feare that no skate-fire caught hold of any place. To those three Commissaries or Triumvirs were five: other Quinquevirs adjoined assistants, who every one should watch well and take keepe of all

the houses of his quarter within Tyberis. Then the Consuls having set them about these their severall  charges, mounted up the Rostra or place of publicke audience. And when the people were assembled together, then the Consull after he had pronounced the solemne praier which magistrates are wont to use as a preamble, before they make speech unto the people, began his Oration unto them in this wise.The Oration of the Consull Post-huntius, for the overthrow of the Bacchanales. Never in any of your assemblies, o Quirites, was this solemne praier unto the gods, either so meet and convenient, or so requisite and needfull as in this, to advertise and put you in mind, that those be the true gods indeed whom your auncestors ordained, that you should honour, serve, worship and pray unto, and not these here who pricke and provoke (as it were) with goads of furies, your spirits and minds transported and caried away with false and straunge religions, to commit allwickednesse, mischeefe, and filthie lust. Certes, for mine owne part I wot not either what I were best to conceale, or how sarre forth to speake out and utter my  mind. If you know not all, I doubt I should give you occasion to bee negligent; againe, if I discover all, I feare me that I shall affright and terrifie you too much. But what and how muchsoever I shall say, be yee sure it will bee farre lesse than the greatnes and enormitie of the thing requireth. Yet endevour will we so much to deliver, as may suffice to give you a warning and watchword to take heed. This am I well assured of, that you understand not onely by heare say and bare report, but also by the ringing noises and yelling cries in the night season, that the Bacchanales have been a long time kept over all Italie, yea and in many places throughout the cittie of Rome, which resoundeth againe there with. But what manner of thing it is, I am verily persuaded there is not one of you that knoweth. Some beleeve that it is a certaine worship and service of the gods; others suppose it is some foolerie and wanton pastime tollerated and winked at. But bee  what it will be, they thinke there are but a few interessed and emploied therein. As touching the number and multitude of them, if I should tell you that they were many thousands, you cannot chuse but suddainely bee afraid, unlesse I also presently shew, who they bee and of what qualitie. Know yee therefore first and formost, that the most part of them are women (and from thence is sprung the source of all this mischeefe.) Then are there men indeed, but such as for all the world resemble women, so effeminate they are: such I say, as have abandoned themselves as well to bee abused as to abuse others: fanaticall persons and bestraught of their wits by reason of excessive watching, past sence and even astonied with bibbing of wine without measure, with houting, hollaing and crying all night without intermission. This conventicle of conspiratours is yet of no great force, howbeit it gathereth much strength, in regard that they multiplie still, and their number  is every day more than other. Your auncestors in times past would in no wise admit that yee should assemble together at a venture and without important and just occasion, unlesse it were either by rearing a standerd or banner upon the fortresse for to levie an armie; or to gather the people togither to give their voices in elections of magistrates; or that the Tribunes proclaimed a generall congregation of the common people; or some of the magistrates summoned them to an open audience for to heare an Oration: and wheresoever a multitude were thus met togither, there they ordained and thought meet to have a lawfull governour and overseer of them. But what kind of night conventicles thinke ye first these might be, and namely, where men and women are met and jumbled together pell mell one with another? In faith, if yee wist at what age they of the male sexe are prosessed and made novices, yee would not onely pitie them, but also be ashamed and dismaied. Thinke yee my masters Quirites, that young men thus prosessed and having taken this oth, are meet to make souldiours of? and that yee are to put weapons into the hands of such as are taken out of that stinking and detestable chappell? Shall these, thus stained, polluted, and overwhelmed with filthie uncleannesse, as well of their owne kind as others, fight for the pure chastitie, for the honestie I say of your wives and children? Lesse harme had it beene, if they could have rested so, and become onely effeminate by their owne unchast impuritie (for that had redounded most to their proper shame and dishonour) and not have abused their hands to practise mischeefe, and busied their braines to contrive fraud and deceit. But never was there in Commonweale either so great and daungerous a maladie, or touching more persons, or reaching to farther matters of greater consequence. For wot yee well this, that all the  sinfull parts committed for these late yeers, were it filthie lust, craftie cousening, or any wickednes whatsoever, proceeded and sprung out of this one ungracious chappell and place of counterfet holinesse, and no other. Yet have they not put in practise all their mischeefes, which they have most cursedly complotted and sworne to execute. Hetherto their impious and detestable conspiracie

 hath broken out, and passed no further than to particular and privat mischeefs, because they have not gathered force and strength ynough to invade and oppresse the Commonweale. Howbeit the evill encreaseth, and the maladie spreadeth further daily, and by this time is growne so much, as it will not containe within the private fortune and condition of particular persons, but threateneth the very maine State of the Commonweale. And unlesse (Quirites) ye take order to prevent it, these night-congregations may soone bee as frequent and great as this present assembly, summoned by order of law and commaundement of the Consull, in the open day time. Now are they (singled by themselves apart) afraid of you, when they see you thus all assembled together; but so soone as you are retired either to your houses within the citie, or farmes in the countrey, and by that meanes severed as under, they will surely meet together; devise they  will and consult both to save themselves, and also to ruinate and destroy you at once. Then take heed to your selves: then shall you (singled one from another) bee in dread and daunger of them all in generall. It behooveth therefore every one of you to desire and with, that all they who belong any way unto your charge, be wise and well given. Then, if either fleshly lust or furious rage, have drawne and haled any one of them headlong into that gulfe and sinke of sinne, to hold such a person to be of their crue, with whom he hath thus sworne and devoted himselfe to all sinne and abhominable wickednesse, and not reckon him of your owne retinue and traine any more. Moreover, carelesse I am not of your owne persons in this behalfe, that none of you should be seduced and led away with error. For nothing is there in the world, that deceiveth more under faire semblance, than false religion. For when the name and majestie of the gods is pretended to cover  and colour naughtinesse, suddainely there entereth into our mind a scrupulous awe, which doth captivate andpossesse our conscience, for feare least in chastising and punishing humane trespasses, we violate and offend some divine right and power therwith. But of this scrupulositie discharged yee are, by an infinite number of Pontificall decrees, acts of Senate, yea, and answeres of divine Sages and Soothfaiers. For how many a time and often in the daies of our fathers and grandfathers, hath commission beene graunted to the Magistrates, To restraine and forbid expressely all forraine sacrifices and straunge liturges? To chase and banish all odde hedge-priests, wizards, tellers of fortunes, and Magicians out of the common place, out of the shew place and theatre, yea, and quite out of the cittie? To search out all their bookes of Magicke and prophesies, and to set a fire on them? Lastly, to abolish all other order and manner of sacrificing, but according  to the Cannon, forme, and order of Rome? For they judged (wise men as they were, and deepely seene in all divine and humane lawes) nothing so forcible to ruinate and overthrow religion, as when divine service is celebrated after some straunge and forraine fashion, and not according to the auncient custome of the place. Thus much I thought good by way of caveat to foretell you of, to the end, that no superstitious opinion should trouble your spirits when you shall see us to demolish and overthrow the Bacchanales, and scatter these unlawfull assemblies. For all this will we doe with the good leave, favour and grace of the gods. Who being highly offended to see their divinitie and godhead thus polluted with wicked and abhominable filthinesse, have discovered the same, lying hidden in darkenesse, and brought it to light: neither in their wisdome and providence, was it their will and pleasure, that such enormities thus detected, should remain unpunished,  but be suppressed and extinguished for ever. Now hath the Senate directed out unto me and my colleague, an extra ordinarie commission and warrant to make due inquisition here into: by vertuewhereof, wee for our parts will accomplish our charge accordingly with all diligence and expedition. As for the night-watch throughout the citie, wee have given order alreadie to the inferior magistrates to looke unto it. Semblably, meet and reason it is, that every one of you according to his place and calling, quit himselfe well in whatsoever shall bee imposed and laid upon him: and especially to endevour and prevent, that no daunger or mutinie arise by the maliciousnesse of those that are culpable and offenders. Then the Consuls commaunded the acts of the Senate in this behalfe to be read openly: they propounded and promised also rewards to all informers, that either convented and brought before them any such persons, or presented  their names, if they were absent and out of the way. And looke whosoever were thus nominated and fled upon it, they would assigne him a certaine day to make his appearance: upon which day, if he answered not to his name when he were called, he should be condemned notwithstanding his absence. And if any of their names were presented, who happened at the time of the information to be without the land of Italie, he should have a longer tearme set downe, to come

in and make his answere. After this, they published an edict, forbidding (least any one should be  desirous to sell or buy ought tending to flight and departure) to receive, conceale, aid or mainteine by any meanes those that were about to slie. After the assemblie of the people dismissed, great feare there was over all the citie: neither was it conteined within the walls, liberties, and territorie only of Rome, but in all parts of Italie they began to quake and tremble for feare; and namely after that letters came from their friends and acquaintance, touching the ordinance of the Senate, the solemne assembly of the people, and the Edict of the Consuls aforesaid. The night next following that day (wherein this matter was thus declared openly in audience before the people) many would gladly have started aside and bene gone, but apprehended they were and brought back againe by the Triumvers, who had set a good watch at every gate. Many presentments were made, and certeine persons thus presented, as well men as women, killed themselves. It is reported that there were found in this conspiracie of both sexes one with another above seven thousand. The principall heads were knowne for certeine to be M. and L. Catinius, Romanes both, and by calling de Pabe. not so good as Senatours: L. Opitermius of Falerij, and Mintus Cerrinius a Campane. These were the ringleaders of the rest, from them arose all mischiefe and villanie whatsoever: these were the chiefe priests (surreverence) and the founders for sooth of this religion. To apprehend these persons with all speed, no possible meanes were neglected. And when they were brought before the Consuls, they confessed all, and for any let in them, they might presently have bene condemned. But such a number there was of them who fled out of the citie, that because the actions and goods of many men hereby were in danger to be lost and perish, the Pretours T. Menius and M. Licinius were constreined by the Senate to geve thirtie  dayes respit and delay for the pleas, untill such time as the Consuls went through with their inquisition. By occasion of the same infrequencie (for that they whose names were presented, neither made answere not could be found) the Consuls were enforced to ride their circuit about market townes and places of resort, and there to hold Assise and Sessions for to make inquisition, and judicially to proceed in sentence against the offenders. As many as they found to be only entred, and to have taken orders, namely such as according to a certeine forme of words endited and prompted by the priest, had made their prayers saying after him (in which was conteined a detestable sacrament and oth that they tooke, to commit all wicked acts and beastly filthines, and yet notwithstanding had offred and done no such act either in their owne persons or in others, to which they were obliged by oth) those I say they left still in prison and durance. But such as were defiled with filthines of lust, polluted with bloudie murders, such as were atteint and steined, with bearing false witnesse, with forging and foisting of wills and restaments, with counterfeiting of seales, and other such cousening casts, those they executed with losse of life, and the number of them that thus were put to death surmounted those other that suffred only imprisonment. But a wonderous multitude there was of both sorts the one and the other, and those as well women as men. As many of the women as were condemned, they committed over to their next kinsfolke, or to those guardians under whose tuition and subjection they were, that they might themselves privatly at home punish them accordingly. But if there were none to be found meete to do the execution, then they suffred publickly abroad in the face of the world. After this, a commission was graunted to the Consuls, for to overthrow and pull downe first at  Rome, and then throughout Italie, all the places of theseBacchanales, unlesse in any of them there stood some old aulter or image consecrated. And for the time to come by an act of the Senate a prohibition went out, that there should be no Bacchanales any more either in Rome, or in all Italie. Moreover, if any person made some conscience of this religion, and held it for a devout, solemne and necessarie institution, and withall protested before the Pretour of the citie, that he could not lay away the same without prick, remorse, and clogge of conscience: then the said Pretour was to put the cause in question before the Senate, and if the Senate (assembled in no lesse frequencie than one hundred) would allow and permit the same, then might the partie solemnize that devotion and divine service provided alwayes, that there were not above five persons present thereat, to assist him, nor any common silver to be used in the ministerie, nor Offer-master, nor Priest. Over and besides, another act of the Senate there was joyned unto this, and the same moved bythe Consull Q.Martius, That as touching those persons whom the Consull had for the enformers and revealers of this matter, the full authoritie in disposing of them, should be wholly referred to the Senat, so soone as Sp. Posthumius had finished his inquisition,

 and was returned to Rome. As for Cerrinius the Campane, they ordeined that he should be sent to Ardea, there to lye in prison, and that the magistrates of Ardea should have a charge geven them beforehand to looke to their prisoner more streightly, that neither hee brake prison and made an escape, nor yet might have meanes and opportunitie to make himselfe away. After a certeine time Sp. Posthumius came to Rome againe, and when he put to question before the Senate, concerning the reward of P. Ebutius, and Hispala Fessenia, for that by their meanes the Bacchanales were disclosed, there passed an act and decree, That the Treasurers of the citie should deliver unto them out of the citie chamber 100000 asses a peece. Also that the Consuls should deale with the Tribunes of the Commons for to preferre a bill unto the people, as soone as possibly they might, that P. Ebutius for ever after might be exempt from souldierie, and have  his pension and fee, as if he had accomplished his terme of service by law required, so as he neither were compelled to go to warfare against his will, nor the Censors should assigne unto him a publick horse of service. Moreover, that Fessenia Hispala might have the libertie and power to make a deed of gift or alienation of her goods unto whom she pleased, yea and spend the same, and do there with what she thought good. Item, that she might be wedded out of her owne familie into what house she would her selfe, and make choise of her tutor and patron to her owne liking and contentment, as if her husband by his will and testament had so ordeined and set down. Item, that she might be wedded to one of franke condition or freeborne, and that he who had espoused and maried her, should not there by susteine discredit or receive damage. Finally, that not only the Cos. and Pretors now in place, but also those here after to come, should provide and  take order that no wrong be done to that woman, but secure her from all harme. This the Senat judged meet and requisit to be done. All these things were likewise propounded unto the Com. and executed according to the ordinance of the Senat. Finally, as touching both the impunitie and also the recompense of other the enformers, it was referred to the discretion of the Consuls.
By this time Q.Martius also having finished the inquisition in his circuit and quarter, made preparation to go into his province of Liguria, after he had received for to supply and make up his legions 3000 foot, and 150 horsemen Romanes, besides 5000 footemen and 200 horse of Latines. The same province with the like number as well of horse as foote, was decreed likewise unto his companion in government. Those armies they tooke charge of which the former yere C. Flaminius and M. Aemylius the Consuls had: moreover by an act of the Senat, enjoyned they  were to enroll two new legions besides: and withall they levied of the Latine allies 20000 foot, and 3000 horse; 3000 footmen also, and 200 horsemen Romanes. All these forces (setting aside the legions) it was thought good to be led to furnish out the armie in Spaine. And therefore the Consuls whiles they were themselves in person occupied about the foresaid inquisitions, gave commission to T. Menius for to takethe musters. And when those enquests were performed and done as is before said, Q.Martius tooke his journey first of the twaine towards the Apuans in Liguria. But whiles in eger pursuit of them hee engaged himselfe into the secret and blind passes, wherein at all times they had their lurking retraits and places of safe receit: within those streights and passages which the enemies had seized before, hee was environed by them in a place of great disadvantage: where he lost foure thousand souldiours, with three ensignes of  the second legion, and eleven banners of the Latine allies, which were all taken by the enemies. Also, much armour and many weapons were throwne away here and there, by reason that they were encumbred therewith as they fled through the woodie paths of the forest: neither did the Ligurians give over their chase, before that the Romanes ended their flight. The Consull, so soon as he was escaped out of the enemies territorie, sent his armie away into divers parts of the peaceable countrey, to the end, that it might not be seene, how much his forces were empaired, yet could not he for all that suppresse and smudder the bruit that was blowne abroad of his unfortunate journey, nor cancell the remembrance of the overthrow: for ever after, the forest out of which the Ligurians hunted him, was called The streights of Martius. A little before the newes of the affaires in Liguria, the letters out of Spaine were read, conteining sorrow mixed  with joy; to wit, That C. Catinius (who two yeere before went as Pretour into that province) sought a field with the Lusitanes in the territorie of Asta; where, sixe thousand enemies fell upon the sword; and the rest were discomfited, put to flight, and driven out of their campe. Afterwards, hee conducted his legions to the assault of the towne Asta, which he forced and woon, with no greater adoe than before hee gained their campe. But as he approched neere the walles

and tooke no good heed to himselfe, hee was wounded, and of his hurt within few dayes died. Vpon the reading of these letters (importing the death of the Propretour;) the Senat was of advise to dispatch a messenger (to overtake the Pretor C. Calpurnius) as farre as the port of Luna, and give him to understand from the Senat, that their advise was, he should make all the hast he could in his journey, to the end, that the province might not be without a governour there to commaund. The courrier which was sent, within foure daies arrived at Luna: and but few daies before, Calpurnius was departed and had put himselfe in his journey.
Moreover, L. Manlius Acidinus (who was gone into his province at the same time that C. Catinius went) strucke a battaile likewise with the Celtiberians in the hither province of Spaine. But they departed on both sides out of the field with doubtfull victorie, save onely that the Celtiberians the next night following, dislodged and removed from thence: whereby the Romans had  libertie and time both to interre their dead, and to gather up the spoiles of their enemies. And within few daies after, the same Celtiberians having raised a more puissant armie, of themselves gave the Romanes battaile neere the citie Calagurris. It is not set downe in the historie, what should be the cause why they were the weaker, considering their number was reenforced: but soiled they were in fight and had the overthrow. Of the enemies there died upon 12000, and not so few as 2000 taken prisoners: and the Romanes likewise were masters of the camp. And had not Manlius beene empeached and restreined in this traine of victorie (which hee hotly followed) by the comming of Calpurnius his successour in government, the Celtiberians had been utterly subdued. The new Pretours withdrew both armies to their wintering harbours.
At the same time that these newes came out of Spaine, the playes called Taurilia were exhibited two dayes togither, in the honour of the gods. And after them, M. Fulvius set out (with great furniture in sumptuous manner for the space of ten daies) his plaies which hee had vowed in the Aetolian war. And for to doe him honor, and grace this solemnitie, many cunning actors and players came out of Greece. This was the first time that there was represented at Rome, the shew of champions and wrastlers for the best game: then also was exhibited the pastime of hunting and baiting lyons and panthers: and in one word, these sports were celebrated with as great magnificence and varietie almost as the moderne pastimes and games in these daies. After all this, was holden a Novendiall feast; during which, there was much sacrificing, and all by occasion that for three dayes it rained stones in the Picene countrey: and because it was reported, that the lightning in divers places and in sundry sorts, had blasted and lightly sindged the garments  especially, of many folke. To the said feast, there was adjoyned a supplication of one day, ordained by a decree of the Pontifies, for that the chappell of the goddesse Ops (standing in the Capitoll) was smitten with a thunderbolt. In regard of these prodigies, the Consuls procured explation by sacrificing greater beasts, and so they purged and hallowed the citie. At the same time word was brought out of Vmbria, that there was an Hermaphrodite or Skrat found, almost twelve yeers old. This was held for a detestable and abominable monster; and therefore order was given, that it should be kept out of the territorie of Rome, and killed out of hand.
The same yeere, certaine Gaules from beyond the Alpes passed into the territorie of Venice, without forraying, spoiling, and using any manner of hostilitie; and not farre from the place where as now Aquileia standeth, they seized upon a plot of ground to build a citie in. Certaine  Romane Embassadours were sent about this matter, beyond the Alpes; where they received this intelligence and answere from the inhabitants of the countrey, That neither those Gaules took that voiage and expedition by authoritie and warrant from the whole nation, neither knew they what they did in Italie.
L. Scipio likewise about the same time, set out his playes for ten daies togither; for which hee said, that he had made a vow during the time of the warre against Antiochus, and he deffraied the charges there of with the mony contributed unto him by divers KK. and States for that purpose. Valerius Antias writeth, that after he was condemned, and his goods confiscate and sold, he was sent embassage into Asia, for to take up certaine controversies and differences betweene the two kings Antiochus and Eumenes: and then it was (saith he) that the said contribution was made, and many skilfull artificers and players gathered unto him out of all Asia; and in the end, after this Embassage he moved the Senate for these games, because hee had made no mention not words at all of them after the said warre: by occasion whereof (by Valerius his saying) he vowed them.
 The yeere beeing now at an end, Q.Martius in his absence was to leave his magistracie: and Q.Posthumius having sitten upon the inquisition aforesaid, and with all fidelitie and carefull diligence that might be, brought it to an end, held the solemne assembly for election of magistrates: wherein were chosen Consuls, Ap. Claudius Pulcher and M. Sempronius Tuditanus. And the morrow after were elected for Pretors, P. Cornelius Cethegus, A. Posthumius Albinus, C. Asranius Stellio, C. Attilius Serranus, L. Posthumius Tempsanus, and M. Claudius Marcellus. At the yeeres end, upon the relation of Sp. Posthumius the Consull, that in his visitation about the enquests aforesaid, as he rode along the sea coasts of Italie on both sides, he found certaine colonies dispeopled and desolate, to wit, Sipontum upon the Adriaticke sea, and Buxentum upon the Tuscane. T. Manius the citie Pretour (by vertue of an act of the Senate in that behalfe)  created three commissaries called Triumvirs, for to enroll and plant new inhabitants there, namely, L. Scribonius Libo, M. Tuccius, and Cn. Babius Tamphilus.
The warre against king Perseus and the Macedonians, which now was a breeding, arose not upon that cause and occasion which most men imagine, ne yet from Perseus himselfe: for the first ground-worke thereof was laid by Philip, who if hee had lived longer, would have beene seene in open action. One thing there was above the rest which stung him, at what time as the Romanes imposed conditions upon him after he was vanquished, to wit, That the Senat laid a barre for to be revenged of those Macedonians who had revolted from him: which he despaired not but it had ben possible to have obtained at their hands, considering that Quintius in the capitulations of peace, reserved that point entire and excepted not against it. Now afterwards,  when Antiochus was defeated in the battaile of Thermopylae, and that both Philip and the Consull entred upon severall exploits; Acilius went in hand to assault Heraclea, and Philip at the same time the citie of Lamia. Heraclea was no sooner forced, but Philip had commandement to levie his siege before Lamia, and the towne was yeelded to the Romanes: and this hee tooke to the heart. Howbeit, the Consull appeased his choller for the time, in that making hast in person to Naupactum (unto which town the Aetolians after their rout were retired) he suffered Philip to warre upon Athamania and Aminander; to adjoyne also and lay unto his kingdome those cities which the Aetolians had taken from the Thessalians. Now had Philip chased Aminander out of Athamania, and woon certaine cities without any great adoe. Demetrias also (a strong citie of great importance, and very commodious for all things) together with the nation of the  Magnetes, he brought under his obedience. After this, he forced certain townes in Asia, which were troubled with the seditious variance of their principall and great personages, by reason that they knew not how to use their new libertie, wherewith they had not bene acquainted: hee woon these cities (I say) by taking part with those, who in this civile dissention were the weaker, and otherwise would have gone to the walles. By these meanes the wrath of the king against the Romanes was well allaied for the present: neverthelesse, hee ceased not all the time of peace to bethinke how hee might gather more strength, and be able to warre againe, whensoever any good occasion should bee presented unto him. Hee encreased therefore the revenues of the crowne, not onely by raising taxes out of all the fruits of the earth, and setting impost and customs upon all merchandise brought into his realme by sea from forrein parts; but also revived  the rents and issues of the old mines which had discontinued, yea and in many places ordained new. Moreover, to replenish his countrey, which by many calamities following war, was dispeopled, he not onely tooke order that his subjects should multiplie by forcing them to get, breed, and bringup children, but also translated a great multitude of Thracians into Macedonie; and for a good time wherin he was in repose and rest from the war, he bent his whole mind, and emploied all his studie how to make himselfe great, and augment the puissance of his kingdome. Then old matters and quarrels were renued, which might whet his stomacke, and kindle his anger against the Romanes. For the complaints which the Thessalians and the Perrhoebians made for that their cities were by him possessed, likewise those greevances which the embassadours of king Eumenes laid abroad touching the Thracian townes, which hee seized and held by force,  were heard by the Romanes; so as it evidently appeared, that they neglected them not. But that which moyed the Senate most, was this, That they had intelligence how hee entended to be lord of Aenus and Maronea: as for the Thessalians, they tooke lesse regard of them. Moreover, there came the embassadours of Athamania, who complained not for the losse of somepart of their territorie, nor that hee encroched upon their frontiers, but that all Athamania

full and whole, was reduced under the subjection and jurisdiction of the king. The banished persons  also of Maronea, who had beene chased out of the citie by the kings garison (for that they stood in defence and maintenance of libertie) made relation, that not onely Maronea was in the hands of Philip, but the cittie of Aenus also. Likewise there came embassadours from Philip, to purge him of all these matters laid to his charge, who averred, That their king and maister had done nothing but by commission and warrant from the Romane Generall. They pleaded and alledged, that the case of the Thessalian, Perrhoebian, and Magnesian cities, yea, and the whole nation of Athamania together with Aminander, was all one with the Aetolians: namely, That after Antiochus the king was chased and expelled, the Consull himselfe being emploied and occupied in besieging the cities of Aetolia, sent Philip for to recover the States abovenamed, which being vanquished inwarre, were now subject unto him. Hereupon the Senate, because they would  not determine and set downe any thing in the absence of the king, sent three delegates or Commissioners, to decide these controversies, to wit, Q. Caecilius Metellus, M. Boebius Tamphilus, and T. Sempronius. Vpon whose arrivall, there was published a generall Diet of all those States that were at difference with the king, to bee holden at Tempe in Thessalie. When they were all set there in counsell, the Romane legates, as umpiers and judges, the Thessalians, Perrhoebians, and Athamanes as plaintifes and accusers, and Philip as defendant to heare and receive the chalenges and accusations against him; the cheefe embassadours from the said cities, pleaded against Philip, bitterly or mildly, more or lesse, according to the severall disposition of their natures, and the proportion either of affectionate favour or malicious hatred which they bare to him. Now all the question and debate touching Philippopolis, Tricca, Phaloria, Eurymenae, and other  townes about them was this, Whether those peeces, considering the Aetolians woon and held them by force (and wel known it was, that Philip had taken them from the Aetolians) belonged in right to the Thessalians, or appertained of old time to the Aetolians? For Acilius had graunted them unto the king upon these conditions, namely, if they were any of the appertenances of the Aetolians, and if they combined and took part with the Aetolians willingly of their own accord, and not by constraint and force of arms. Vpon like tearms stood the controversie of the Perrhaebian and Magnesian townes. For the Aetolians had brought a confusion in all their tenures, by reason that they held and possessed those citties, by taking their vauntage upon divers occasions. Besides these substantiall points properly to be decided, the Thessalians came in with their complaints also: for that those townes (in case they were out of handdelivered unto them yet) hee  should render them spoiled, naked and desolate. For over and besides those who miscarried by casualtie of warre, Philip had carried away into Macedonie 500, even the principall floure of their youth, and abused them like slaves, in putting them to base ministeries and servile drudgeries, and looke whatsoever by compulsion he redelivered to the Thessalians, he had taken order afore that they should be good for nothing. As for example (say they) Thebes in Phthia, the only maritime citie for much trafficke and merchandise, was in times past gainefull and commodious to the Thessalians, and brought them great revenues and profites. But Philip had turned the staple and all the trade and negotiation by sea from thence to Demetrias, and having gotten hulkes and hoyes, caused them to baulke and passe by Thebes, and direct their course for Demetrias. Nay he could not so much as hold his hands from evill entreating their embassadours who by  law ofnations are inviolable. For hee forlaied them in ambush, as they were in their journey to T. Quintius. By which meanes the Thessalians all in generall were so over-awed by him, and put in such feares, that there is not a man amongst them dare open his mouth, either in their owne citties, or in any of the Diets and Councels of the whole nation. For why? their patrones of whome they hold their libertie are farre off, but an imperious lord they have that sitteth ever on their skirts, and pricketh them continually in the sides, and will not suffer them to use and enjoy the benefites graunted them by the people of Rome. For take away from them the libertie of speech once, what freedome have they left? And even at this present, for all the assurance and confidence they have in the priviledge of embassadours, they rather sigh and grone out their words, than speake franckly, and parley with libertie. And unlesse the Romanes  provide better in some good sort, that both the Greekes remaining inMacedonie, may bee void of fear, and Philip also curbed and kept short for being so bold, it will be to no purpose at all, that either he was vanquished, or they enfranchised. He is therefore to be held in with a rougher and harder bit in his mouth, like an headstrong and frampold horse, that will not be ruled with a gentle

 snaffle. In this sharpe and eager manner dealt the last, whereas the former had used faire language to appease and molifie his anger, beseeching his grace to pardon them in case they spake their minds for their libertie, to lay downe the rigour of a lord and maister, to beare himselfe like a kind allie and loving friend, and to take example of the Romanes, and them to imitate, who chose rather to gaine associates by love, than constraine them by feare. After audience given to the Thessalians, the Perrhaebians came in place, and alledged, that Gonnocondylus (a cittie which Philip named Olympias) belonged in right to Perrhaebia: and earnest they were, that it might be restored unto them. They demaunded also to have Mallaea and Ericinium again. Then the Athamanes put in, and spake for their libertie, and to have the forts of Athenaeum and Poetneum rendered unto them. Philip because hee would seeme more like a plaintife than a defendant,  and to accuse rather than tobe accused, began himselfe also with complaints. He found himselfe greeved, that the Thessalians had woon by force of armes the cittie Menelais in Dolopia, part of the appertenances belonging to his kingdome. Item, That the same Thessalians and the Perrhaebians together had forced Petra in Pieria. As for Xyniae (an Aetolian towne without all question) they had indeed laid it unto his seignorie, but Parachelois, which should bee under Athamania, by no right in the world was annexed to the Thessalians, and comprised within their charter. For as touching the matters (quoth he) charged upon me so odiously, namely of laying await for the embassadors, of frequenting these port-townes or abandoning those: the one is a meer mockerie and ridiculous thing: namely for me to give account what havens, merchants, and marriners saile unto or arrive at; the other is clean adverse and contrarie to my nature, and that which  I never could abide to practise. For this many yeeres (quoth hee) embassadours have never ceased and given over, to informe greevous matters against me to the Romane Generals, and to the Senate at Rome: and which of them ever to this day hath had so much as a foule word given againe unto him from me? Supposed and objected it is, that once they were forlaied by the way as they were going to Quintius, but it is not said withall what happened unto them. This manner of dealing and accusation savoureth of quarrellers that saine would have somewhat to say, bee it never so false, when they can find no matter of truth to charge a man withall. These Thessalians beyond all meane and measure abuse the kindnesse and indulgence of the people of Rome, and faring as men who had endured a long drought and thirst, they drinke over-greedily, pouring in sheere libertie, and nothing els to it, and know not when to make an end, and to breake their  draught: Like, for all the world to bondslaves sodainly set at freedome beyond their hope and expectation, whose manner is to breake out into broad tearmes and licentious language, and can not containe but revile and raile at their very maisters. And at last, in a furious fit of choler he burst forth into these words, That the sun was not set and gone to bed for ever, but would one day rise again. This minatorie speech of his not only the Thessalians took to themselves, but the Romanes also construed as a glaunce at them. Vpon these words arose some bruit and murmuring in the assemblie, but being in the end appeased and stilled, hee answered the agents for the Perrhaebians and Athamanes in this wise, That the case and condition of those cities for which they stood, was one and the same, namely, that the Consull Acilius and the Romans passed them unto him by a deed of gift, as having aforetime belonged to their enemies. Now if they who  have given, will also take away the same, then (qd. he) I must needs quit my hold, and leese them: but in so doing, they shall to gratifie their fickle, inconstant, and vaine allies, men of no regard, and good for nothing, do meer and manifest wrong to a far better and more faithfull friend For nothing is there in the world more thanklesse and lesse while accepted than libertie, especially with them who know not how to use it, and by abuse thereof will soone spill the grace of such a benefit. Then the Romane Delegates, having heard the reasons and allegations of both parties pronounced sentence, That the Macedonian garisons should quit the cities abovesaid, and the realme of Macedonie be confined within the auncient bounds and limits. As touching the injuries which they complained to have bene reciprocally offred from one to another, there was a forme and course of law to be set downe, which should conteine a processe and manner, how the  matters betweene the Macedonians and the other nations might be reformed and composed. Hereat the king was highly offended and displeased, but the Delegates went their wayes toward Thessalonica, to visit likewise the cities of Thrace, and to heare their causes; where the embassadors of king Eumenes made a speech to this effect.
If the pleasure of the Romanes be, that the two cities Aenus and Maronea shall be free, it is

not for us in modestie to say any more, but advertise and admonish them to leave the same in  reall and not in verball libertie, and not suffer a guift by them graunted to be impeached or intercepted by another. But if they have lesse care and consideration of the cities and states planted in Thracia, yet more meete and reason it is, that those places which sometimes were subject to Antiochus, should fall to Eumenes rather than to Philip; by way of recompence for war-service, in regard as well of the merits of his father Attalus during the warre against Philip, as of his owne deserts, who during the warre with Antiochus, was personally present in all travailes and daungers both by sea and land. And to this effect, hee hath besides an award of the ten Delegates passed alreadie before-hand, who in the graunt and donation of Chersonesus and Lysimachia, have no doubt geven Maronea and Aenus likewise to be as dependances and parcels of a greater gift, considering the neerevicinitie and neighbourhood of those  other cities. For, as concerning Philip, what hath he deserved at the hands of the people of Rome? what right of seignorie can he pretend, why he should plant garisons in these cities so farre remote and distant as they be, from the marches and frontiers of Macedonie? I wish yee would call for the Maronites, and heare what they can say, who are able to enforme you more fully and certainely in all respects of the whole state of these cities. Then were the embassadors of the Maronites called in: who affirmed, That the king had a garison not in one place onely of their citie (as he had in other cities besides) but in many quarters thereof at one time; so as Maronea was pestered full with Macedonians. And therefore (say they) the kings favorites and flatterers are they that rule all and beare the sway: they and none but they, may bee allowed to speake both in Senat at the counsell table, and in generall assemblies before the people: they go  away with all honors and dignities, and either are invested therin themselves, or els confer them upon whom they please. The best men, who stand either for defence of freedome, or in maintenance of the lawes, either are driven their country and banished, or sit a cold and blow their nailes, for any advancement they come unto; and being subject and thrall to persons of no worth, stand still like cyphtes and hold their peace. Somewhat they said moreover in briefe as touching the right of their limits, to wit, That Q. Fabius Labeo, at what time as he was in those parts, confined Philip within the bounds of the old kings-street or high way, which directly leadeth to Paroreia in Thrace, and in no place turneth and declineth toward the sea: but Philip afterwards had made a new causey, and drawne it with a compasse about, within which he empaled and tooke in the cities and territories also of the Maronites. To these chalenges  Philip began farre otherwise, than he did of late against the Thessalians and Perrhoebeans, and in this wise he spake.(...) I have quoth he no matter to debate either with the Maronites or Eumenes; but now at this present I am to contest even with you (my maisters of Rome) at whose hands I have seene thus long that I can obteine no reason and equitie. I thought it meete and right, that the Macedonian cities which had revolted from me during the time of truce, should be rendred againe unto me: not for any great increase of seigniorie that therby should have accrewed unto my kingdome (for small towns they are god wot, and situate upon the utmost frontiers) but because their precedent and example might have imported much, to reteine the rest of the Macedonians in their dutie and alleageance. In no wise it would bee graunted. During the Aetolian warre, I was enjoyned by the Consull Acilius to besiege and assault the citie Lamia: and after I had beene toiled out and wearied with maintaining skirmishes, raising fabrickes, planting ordenance and engines against it, even when I was at the very point to skale the walls and force the cittie, the Consull reclaimed and called mee away, yea, and compelled me to levie the siege, and withdraw my forces from thence. And for to make mee some part of amends for this wrong done, permitted I was to winne againe and conquer certaine small piles and forts, rather than citties of Thessalie, Perrhoebia, and Athamania. And even those also, I may say unto you Q. Caecilius, yee have taken from mee within these few daies. And now forsooth of late, the embassadours of Eumenes also (and God will) have presumed upon this as a thing graunted and without all question, That more reason it is for Eumenes to have and enjoy that which belonged to Antiochus, than for me. But my judgement is farre otherwise. And why? Eumenes could never have continued in his realme, unlesse the Romanes, I will not say, had vanquished king Antiochus, but surely if they had not waged warre against him. And therefore is hee endebted unto you, and you no waies beholden unto him. As for my kingdome, so farre was it off, that any part or quarter of it should bee in hazard and

 jeopardie; that when Antiochus of his owne meere motion offered to buy my societie with three thousand talents, and fiftie covered shippes of warre, together with all those citties in Greece which I held in possession aforetime; I refused all, and disdained his alliance, yea, and I prosessed openly, even before that M. Acilius came over with his armie into Greece, that I was his enemie, and together with that Consull, was emploied in what part soever of the warre, which hee charged and laid upon mee. Also when L. Scipio the Consull his successor, determined to lead his armie by land to Hellespont, I not only gave him leave to passe peaceably through my realme, but also caused the high waies to bee paved and gravelled, bridges to bee made against his comming, yea, and furnished him with provision of victuals. And this did I, not in Macedonie alone, but also throughout all Thrace, where among other  matters, this was not of least importance and consequence, to restrainethose barbarous nations there, from running upon them, and to keepe them in peace and quietnesse. In consideration now of this kind affection of mine (if I may not call it a good desert) unto you, whether ought yee Romanes in reason to give mee somewhat to that I have, to augment and encrease my dominion by your largesse and munificence, or, to take from mee (as you doe) that which I have either in mine owne right, or by gift from you? The Macedonian citties, which you confesse to have been parcels of my kingdome, are not restored unto mee. Eumenes on the other side, he comes to make spoile of me, as if I were Antiochus, and (marke I pray you the devise of it) he pretendeth a decree of the ten delegates to colour his most shamelesse, impudent, and cautelous falshood; even that by which himselfe may bee most refuted and convicted.  For in very expresse and plaine tearmes it is thus written, That Chersonnesus and Lysimachia are given to Eumenes. Where I pray you, and in what corner of the instrument and patent stand Aenus, Maronea, and the citties of Thrace? Shall hee obtaine that at your hands, and by your meanes, as given and graunted from those ten Delegates, which hee never durst so much as once demaund and require of them? Tell mee (if the thing bee worth so much) in what place yee would raunge and reckon me? If your purpose bee to persecute mee as an enemie and mortall soe, spare not, but goe on still as yee have begun: but if you respect mee as a king, as your allie and friend, I beseech you, repute me not worthie of so notorious and manifest a wrong. This Oration of the king in some measure mooved the Commissioners, and therefore by framing a meane and indifferent answere, they held the matter still in suspence undecided. If (say  they) the citties in question were given to Eumenes, by vertue of a decree set downe by the tenne Delegates, wee will not chaunge nor alter any thing therein. But in case Philip acquited them by conquest and force of armes, hee should have held them as the guerdon of his victorie. If neither, wee are of opinion, That the hearing and decision of this difference shall bee referred over to the Senate: and to the end, that all may remaine entire, the garrisons in those citties shall bee withdrawne and depart. These, I say, were the causes that principally estraunged the affection of Philip from the Romanes, and wrought discontentment in his heart; insomuch, as evident it is, that the warre was not enterprised by his sonne Perseus upon any new quarrels and fresh occasion, but upon these motives let unto him by his father to bee pursued.
 No suspition was there at Rome of a Macedonian warre. L. Manlius the Pro-consull was returned out of Spaine: and when he demaunded a triumph of the Senate, assembled in the temple of Bellona, the same in regard of his noble and worthie exploits might have beene obtained, but for example sake it was not graunted. For an order it was in Rome, by auncient custome of their forefathers, that no man might triumph, who brought not his armie backe with him, unlesse hee left unto his successour the province fully subdued and settled in peace. Howbeit, Manlius was allowed an indifferent honour, namely, to enter into the citie by way of Ovation. In which solemnitie he had borne before him in a pompeous pageant two and fiftie coronets of gold. Moreover in gold a hundred thirtie two pound weight, and in silver sixe thousand three hundred. Also he pronounced aloud in the Senate, that Q. Fabius the Questour was comming,  and brought with him ten thousand pound weight more of silver, and eightie of gold, which he meant likewise to bring into the chamber of the citie.
That yeere a great commotion and insurrection there was of bondslaves in Apulia. L. Posthumius the Pretour had the government of Tarentum, and he sat in inquisition upon a damned crew of certaine herdmen and grasiers, who had conspired together, and used to rob by the

high way side, and in the common pastures belonging to the citie; which commission he followed  with such severitie and rigor, that he condemned seven thousand of them. Many escaped and fled, but many were executed and suffred death. As for the Consuls, long were they kept in the citie of Rome, about the levie of souldiers, but at length they went into their provinces.
The same yeere, C. Calpurnius and L. Quintius the Pretours in Spaine, having in the beginning of the Spring led forth their armies out of their wintering holds, and joyned their forces togither in Beturia, advaunced forward into Carpetaine, (where the enemies were encamped) with a resolution to manage and conduct the warre with one joynt mind and common councell together. Not farre from the cities Hippon and Toletum, there began a skirmish betweene the foragers of both parts, that were gone forth to make provision: seconded they were from the one campe and the other, by meanes whereof, the whole armies of both sides by litle and litle, came forth into the field to strike a full battell. In this tumultuarie medley, the enemies had the vantage, as well of the ground wherein they were embattailed, as of the manner of fight and service. By reason whereof, both the Roman armies were discomfited and driven back into their campe; but the enemies pressed not upon them, notwithstanding they were put in great fright and much disordered. The Romane Pretors doubting least their camp the morrow after should be assailed, dislodged in the night betwene, in great secret and silence, without any found of trumpet, and departed. In the morning by breake of day, the Spaniards in ordinance of battaile approched the trench and rampier: and beeing entred within the campe (which they found void and emptie beyond their hope and expectation) they rifled and ransacked all that the Romanes left behind them, whiles they made hast away in the night season: from whence the enemies returned  to their owne campe, and there for certaine dayes abode in standing leaguer and stirred not. In that battell and in the chase together, there were slaine of Romans and allies 5000: and with the spoiles of their bodies, the enemies armed themselves: from thence they marched to the river Tagus. The Romane Pretours in the meane season employed all that time to levie and assemble new forces out of the consederate cities of Spaine, and in comforting and encouraging the hearts of their own souldiors after their fright, upon this adverse conflict and unluckie soyle. Now when they had gathered (as they thought) a sufficient power, and tooke themselves strong enough, and that the souldiors also desired to be doing with the enemie, for to rase out and cancell the former ignomie and disgrace, they encamped twelve miles from the river Tagus aforesaid: and about the third watch of the night advanced their standards, and marching  in a foure square barrell, by day-light they were come to the banke of the river (now were the enemies lodged upon a litle mount beyond the water:) and incontinently in two places (where the river shewed a fourd) they waded through with their armes, Calpurnius on the right hand and Quintius on the left. All this while the enemies continued quiet and mooved not: but in the meane time, while as they wondred at their sodaine comming, and devised how to trouble and disorder the souldiors as they should make hast to passe the river, the Romans had transported over themselves, and their bagge and baggage also; yea and brought all together into one place. And because they perceived by this time the enemie to stirre and remoove, and had no time to fortifie their campe, they put themselves in battell array. In the mids, stood the fifth legion of Calpurnius, and the eight of Quintius, which was the very slower and strength of the  whole armie. Now they had a faire open plain all the way betwene them and the enemies camp, so as there was no cause to feare any ambush. The Spaniards so soon as they espyed two armies of their enemies upon that side of the banke which was next to them, all at once issued out of their campe, and ran to battell; to the end, that they might surprise and empeach them, before they could joyne and raunge themselves togither. The fight was sharpe and hote in the beginning: for the Spaniards of the one side were puffed up withthe conceit and pride of their late victorie: and the Romanes of the other, were galled and incensed for anger of a dishonour received, which they were not used unto. The battaile in the mids (consisting of two most valiant and hardie legions) fought right courageously: which the enemies, seeing that they could not otherwise force to recule and give ground, began to charge upon them with a battailon in coinfashion close togither; and still they pressed hard upon them in the mids more and more in number, and ever thicker raunged. Calpurnius the Pretour seeing this battell distressed and in daunger, sent with all speed L. Quintilius Varus and L. Iuventius Talva, two lieutenants, to either of the legions severally, to encourage and exhort them to sticke to it like men, and to make remonstrance

 and relation, That in them alone consisted all the hope of conquering and keeping Spaine: if they never so little yeelded backe and lost their ground, there was not one of the whole armie that should ever see Italie againe, no not so much as the farther banke of Tagus. As for himselfe, he tooke with him the Cavallerie of two legions, and when he had wheeled a litle about and set a compasse with them, he charged hotly upon the flanke of the foresaid strong battaillon of the enemies, which assailed and urged still the maine battaile. Quintius also with his Cavallerie flanked the enemies on the other side: but the horsemen of Calpurnius fought more fiercely by ods than the other, and the Pretor himselfe in person was formost of them all; for he was the first that drew bloud of an enemie, and so far engaged himselfe within them, that hardly a man could know of which side he fought: by his singular valiance, the horsemen were mightily animated:  and by the valour of the Cavallerie on horsebacke, the Infanterie also were enkindled to fight on foot. The principall Centurions were abashed and ashamed to see the Pretour in person among the pikes and swords of his enemies: and therefore every man for his part did his best, put forward the port-ensigns, willing them to advaunce their banners, to the end, that the soldiours might follow hard after. Then began they on all hands to set up a fresh and lustie shout; they tooke their biere and charged upon them as from the vantage of an higher ground: by reason whereof, they disarrayed them first, and like a forcible streame they bare them downe before them, so as they could not stand upon their feet and susteine this violence of theirs, but fell one upon another. As many as fled toward the campe, the horsemen pursued, and so entermingled themselves among the rout of the enemies, that they entred peil-mell with them into their  hold; where, they that were left for the guard thereof, renued the fight, so that the Roman horsmen were forced to light from their horses: and whiles they maintained the medley, the fist legion came to second them, and consequently more and more succours as they possibly could, ran to them: downe went the Spaniards, and were massacred in all parts of the campe; and not above 4000 of them all, fled away and saved themselves: of which number, about three thousand (who still kept their armour) seized upon a hill neere adjoyning: the other thousand, being for the most part armed by the halfes, were scattered all over the fields. The enemies were at first above five and thirtie thousand, but after this battaile see how few of them were left: and from them were woon 133 ensignes. Of Romanes and allies, there died few above sixe hundred; of auxiliarie souldiors from out of the province, about 150. Five martiall Tribunes were lost, and  certaine Romane gentlemen, whose death especially, made it seeme a bloudie victory. After which, the armie abode within the enemies campe, for that themselves had no time to fortifie their owne. The next morrow C. Calpurnius in an open audience, highly praised the horsemen, and rewarded them with rich harnish and trappings, declaring aloud, That by meanes of their good service principally, the enemies were discomfited and their campe forced. As for Quintius the other Pretour, he bestowed upon his men of armes, small chaines and buttons of gold. The Centurions likewise of both armies received gifts at their hands, and namely those who sought in the maine battaile.
The Consuls having finished the levie of souldiours, and accomplished all things requisite to be done in Rome, led the armie into their province of Liguria. Sempronius departed from  Pisa, and made a journey against the Apuan Ligurians; where, by wasting their territories and burning their townes and fortresses, he made way into the forrest and opened the passages as far as to the river Macra and the port of Luna. The enemies tooke a certaine mount (an auncient hold) where their auncestors sometimes had seated themselves: but from thence they were by force disseized, by reason that the Romanes overcame the difficulties of the avenues thereto. Ap. Claudius likewise for his part, was equall in valiance and good fortune to his colleague, as having fought certaine prosperous battailes with the Ligurian Inguames. He forced besides six townes of theirs, and tooke many thousands of prisoners within them. Of the chiefe authors of that rebellion, he caused three and fortie to loose their heads.
Now approched the time of the solemne assembly for election of Magistrates at Rome: and  albeit Sempronius his lot it was to hold the said assembly, yet Claudius returned first to Rome, because P. Claudius his brother made suite to be Consull. He had for his competitours, L. Aemylius, I. Fabius Labeo, and Servius Sulpitius Galba, all foure of the nobilitie. Old suiters they were all, and because they had suffered the repulse aforetime, they renued the suite for this dignitie, as being so much the rather due, because it had beene once denied them. And this was the cause

that these foure followed and pressed the harder for to obtaine the same, because it was not lawful  for any more than one of the Patrisij at once to bee created Consull. There were also of Commoners certain persons well beloved and of good reputation that stood in election for the place, to wit, L. Porcius, I. Terentius Culleo, and Cn. Baebius Tamphilus: they also had taken repulse before time, and were put off still in hope one day yet to obtaine that honourable dignitie. Claudius of them all was onely the new Competitor. Now men thought verily without any doubt and question, yea, and destined in their conceits Q.Fabius Labeo, and L. Porcius Licinius to be Consuls. But Claudius the Consull together with his brother bestirred himselfe, and without his huishers attending upon him, travelled and laboured hard in all parts of the common place: notwithstanding the adversaries, yea and the most of the Senators cried out upon him and said, That he ought to consider and remember rather that he was the Consull of the people of Rome, than  brother to P. Claudius; why then sat he not still in the Tribunall either as president and judge of the court assembled, or els as a beholder and spectatour only, without saying any word himselfe? Howbeit, he could not possibly bee reclaimed from this disordinate affection of his which hee shewed in labouring for his brother. This election was divers times also troubled with the great debates and contentions caused by the Tribunes of the Commons: whiles some of them spake against the Consull; others againe maintained his suite, and tooke part with him. But in the end, Fabius tooke the soile, and Appius went away with the game, for his brother. So P. Claudius Pulcher was created Consull beyond his owne hope, and more than others looked for. L. Porcius Lictnius held his owne, and obtained the second place in his course; for that the Commoners went moderately to worke, and shewed not so much affection and forcible meanes as Claudius did. After this, was holden the election of Pretours. And chosen there were, C. Decimius Flavus, P. Sempronius Longus, P. Cornelius Cethegus, I. Naevius Matho, C. Sempronius Blaesus, and A. Terentius Varro. Thus much concerning the acts atcheeved both at home in the citie, and abroad in the warre, that yeere wherein App. Claudius and M. Sempronius were Consuls.
In the beginning of the next yeere, in which P. Claudius and L. Porcius bare the Consulship, when as Q.Caecilius, M. Baebius and T. Sempronius (who had ben sent to heare and decide the controversies betweene the two kings, Philip and Eumenes, and the States of Thessalie) had made report of their embassages; they permitted likewise the embassadours of the said princes and cities, to enter into the Senate. Who related the selfesame things againe, which had beene alleadged before in the presence of the foresaid Legates in Greece. After this, the LL. of the Senat addressed  another new embassage into Macedonie and Greece, whereof App. Claudius was the cheefe, for to visite and see, whether the cities adjudged and assigned to the Rhodians, Thessalians, and Perrhaebians were delivered unto them accordingly. They also had in charge to cause the garrisons to quit Aenus and Maronea, and to looke that all the sea coast of Thracia, were freed from the subjection of Philip and the Macedonians. They were enjoined moreover to goe into Peloponnesus, from whence the former embassie was departed in more doubtfull teaimes than if they had never gone thither. For over and besides other things they were sent away without any answere for their dispatch: and albeit they requested the Achaeans for to assemble their generall Diet, they mought not obtaine it. For which, when as Q.Cacilius found himselfe discontented and greevously complained, and the Lacedaemonians withall made piteous mone, that the  walls of their citie were demolished and rased, their common people lead away in captivitie into Achaea, and there sold, and the lawes of Lycurgus taken from them, under which their cittie and Commonweale untill that day had been mainteined and governed: the Achaeans excused themselves most of all for the imputation of refusing to hold a Councell; and to that purpose they rehearsed a law and ordinance, whereby they were forbidden expressely to call and publish a Diet unlesse it were in the case of levying warre and contracting of peace, upon occasion that any embassadours came directly unto them from the Senate of Rome with letters, or commission in writing. But for that this manner of excuse should not serve their turne againe afterwards, the Senate gave them plainely to understand, that they ought to take care and order that the Romane embassadours might at all times have meanes of free accesse to their Councels, like as  they also reciprocally should have a Senate held for their sakes, as often as they would themselves.
After these embassages were departed, Philip was advertised by his embassadours, that there was no remedie but he must abandon those cities, and withdraw his garrisons: and herewith being

 mightily offended and angered against all, yet he discharged his choler onely upon the Maronites. Vnto Onomastus, warden of the ports and sea-coasts, hee gave commaundement to kill the cheese of the adverse part. And he by the meanes of Cassander, one of the kings supports and favorites, who a long time had dwelt in Maronea, procured certaine Thracians to bee let into the towne by night, and there he committed murder and massacre, as if it had beene a citie woon by force of armes. And when the Romane embassadors made complaint to him, namely, of such outrages committed so cruelly against the guiltlesse Maronites, and so proudly and insolently against the people of Rome; in that they should bee killed and cut in peeces as enemies, unto whom the Senate had ordained restitution of their freedome, hee made answere and said, that neither himselfe, not any of those who belonged unto him, could doe withall: but it was long of  themselves and their variance one with another; whiles some of the citizens drew to him, and others enclined to king Eumenes. Which ye may (qd. he) soone know to be a truth, if ye will but aske the Maronites themselves: for this account he made, that whiles they were all terrified with so late and fresh a massacre, there durst not one of them open his mouth against him. Appius replied againe and said, That they were not to make an enquirie in this so evident and notorious a fact, as if it were in any respect doubtfull: but if hee would discharge and cleare himselfe as innocent of the action, hee should send to Rome Onomastus and Cassander, who were named to have committed the outrage, that the Senate might examine them upon interrogatories. This word at the first so troubled and dashed the king, that his colour went and came in his face, and he knew not how to keep his countenance. But after he was come again to himselfe, he made answer, That (if  they needs would) he cared not much to send Cassander, for that he had dwelt and continued in Maronea; but as for Onomastus, who neither was at Maronea, nor so much as in any quarter neer unto it, how possibly could he be charged or touched with the matter? Now as he spared Onomastus the rather of the twaine, and was loth to have him come in question, as being his more deere and honourable friend: so hee feared him much more than the other, least hee should bewray and disclose the thing; for that himselfe had conferred with him thereabout; and besides, he had served his turne divers times as a minister to execute, and been privie unto him as a complice to plot such like designements. Cassander also, as it is verily thought, was poysoned and made away, by certaine that were sent of purpose to accompanie him through Epirus to the sea side; and all because the villanie should not bee detected and come to light. Thus the  Legates departed from the parley and conference with Philip, as shewing in their countenance, that they were nothing well pleased: and Philip on the other side went his wayes as resolute to levie warre againe: but for as much as his forces as yet were not sufficient to doe any exploit, and because he would delay the time betweene, he determined to send his younger sonne Demetrius to Rome, both to purge his father of those matters wherewith hee was charged, and also by humble request to appease the anger of the Senate; supposing, that this young gentleman, who had beene left as an hostage at Rome, and there had shewed a good testimonie of a princely nature and royall disposition, might much availe in the cause. In the meane while himselfe under colour of aiding the Bizantines, but in very truth to strike some terrour into the princes of Thrace, made an expedition against them: and when he had in one battaile discomfited  them, and taken prisoner their cheefe captaine Amadorus, hee returned into Macedonie, having sent certaine messengers to sollicite the barbarous nations, inhabiting neere the river Ister, for to enter and invade Italie. In Peloponnesus also the comming of the Romane Legates was expected, who by this commission were enjoined to passe out of Macedonie into Achaea: against whom because the Achaeans would not be to seeke what to say, Lycortas their Pretour summoned a publicke counsell aforehand. In which there was parley as touching the Lacedaemonians, namely, how that of enemies they were become enformers and accusers, and daunger it was, least when they were vanquished they would be more to be feared, than al the time that they waged war. For during the warres, the Achaeans found the Romans to be their good associats, but now the same Romans are more friendly to the Lacedaemonians, than to the Achaens,  seeing that Areus and Alcibiades (banished persons both out of Lacedaemon, and by the meanes of the Achaens restored againe to their place) had undertaken to goe in embassage to Rome, against the Achaean nation, which had so well deserved at their hands; and there gave so hard language against them, as if they had been chased and driven out of their countrey, and not restored thereunto by them. Hereupon arose a great outcrie from all parts of the assembly, for to put

to question, what should bee determined expressely of them by name; and in this fit, where all  went by choler, and nothing by counsell, condemned they were to die. Some few daies after came the Romane embassadours, for whose sake a Counsell was holden at Clitore, a citie in Arcadia. But before any matter was treated on, the Achaeans were surprised with exceeding feare, considering and thinking how this deciding of matters was not like to be managed and carried with any indifferencie for their behoofe; for as much as they saw Areus and Alcibiades (condemned by them in the last counsell) to bee in the companie of the said embassadours, and no man durst open his lips and speake a word. Appius declared, That the Senate was much displeased at those matters whereof the Lacedaemonians had made complaint, namely, That first in a tumultuarie fray and conflict, they were murdered who had been called forth by Philopaemen, and came to plead and speake in their owne cause: Then, after they had exercised their crueltie thus against  their persons, to the end, that in no part their inhumanitie should be wanting, they had rased the walls of a right noble and famous cittie, abolished their most auncient lawes, and put downe the discipline and government of Lycurgus, so renowmed throughout all nations. When Appius had made an end of his speech, then Lycortas, both in regard that hee was Pretour, and also because hee tooke part with the faction of Philopaemen (who was the motive and author of all that had been done at Lacedaemon) made answer in this wife. More hard it is for us now o Appius to speak before you, than of late it was in the presence of the Senate. For then we were to answer the Lacedaemonians, who accused us: but at this present we have you to be our accusers, before whom, as competent judges wee should plead in our owne defence. Howbeit wee have submitted our selves, and undergone this unequall and hard condition, presuming upon this hope, that you  will lay aside that accusatorie heat which not long since you used, and put upon you the person of a judge to heare with indifference and equitie. For mine owne part, considering that you erewhile have but related those matters which the Lacedaemonians both here in place before Q.Caecilius of late, and also at Rome afterwards complained of, I would thinke that I am to answer therefore not unto you, but unto them in your hearing. You charge us with the murdering of them, who being called out by the Pretor Philopaemen to plead their cause, were killed. This crime I hold that it ought not to be objected against us by you Romanes, no nor so much by any other in your audience. And why so? because it was expressely specified in your own treatie and accord of covenants, that the Lacedaemonians should have nothing to doe with the maritime cities. At what time as the Lacedaemonians took arms, and seased by force in the night ofthose cities, which  they were precisely forbidden to meddle withall; if T. Quintius, if the Romane armie had been in Morea. Peloponnesus, as aforetime, no doubt we must needs thinke, that being thus surprised and evill entreated, they would have had recourse thither for succour. But since ye were so farre off, whether els should they flie and retire themselves, but to us your allies? whom they had seene before to helpe and succour Gyttheum, whom upon the like cause they knew to have assailed Lacedaemon together with you? It was in your quarrell therefore that wee enterprised a just and lawfull warre. Which being an act of ours, by others commended, and which ought not by the very Lacedaemonians to be condemned, and considering that even the gods themselves have approoved thereof, in that they gaveus victorie, how commeth it then to passe, that you bring those matters into question which are by right of law warranted? And yet a great part thereof in no  respect toucheth and concerneth you. That wee caused them to come forth to answere their cause, who had raised a commotion of the multitude, who had forced the maritime cities, who had ransacked them, who also had massacred the principall citizens, we are to answer therefore, and to us that properly appertaineth. But that they were murdered in the way as they came into our campe, was nothing to us, but your deed o Areus and Alcibiades, who now (forsooth) are become our accusers. The banished Lacedaemonians (of which number those two also are, and who at that time were with us, for that they chose the coast townes to retire into for their habitations) supposing that their owne death was sought, and that there would have beene outrage committed upon them, they ran upon those, by whose meanes they were driven out of their countrey; even upon an indignation, that they might not so much as passe their old age in banishment  with safetie. They were the Lacedaemonians then, and not the Achaeans that flew the Lacedaemonians: whether justly or unjustly, that is not the question, neither skilleth it. But what say yee to this, o Achaeans, how can ye denie but that ye are culpable, in that yee have abolished the lawes and the most auncient discipline of Lycurgus? and with all rased the walls of Lacedaemon?

 And how is it possible that both these points should be objected unto us by the same men? considering that those walls were never built by Lycurgus, but contrariwise (and not many yeeres past) for to overthrow and anull the discipline instituted by Lycurgus? For the tyrants of late daies built them to serve as a fortresse and bulwarke for themselves, and not for a defence unto the citie. And if Lycurgus at this day should rise againe from death to life, hee would take joy in their ruines, and say that hee acknowledged now his owne native countrey and auncient Sparta indeed. You Lacedaemonians should not have expected Philopaemen nor the Achaeans, but your selves ought with your owne hands to have pulled downe and destroied, all the tokens and memorials of tyrannie. Those walls were the very markes, and as a man would say, the unseemely and deformed skarres of your thraldome and servitude. And you who without wals for the space  almost of eight hundred yeeres had lived in freedome, yea, and for a certaine time also had ben maisters of Greece, became slaves during a hundred yeeres, enclosed and restrained within walls as if yee had beene settered by the feet. Now as touching the lawes, which yee pretend to have been taken away by us, I suppose verily that the tyrants they were, who deprived the Lacedaemonians of their auncient lawes: and that we have not taken from them theirs (for none they had of their own) but rather have given them ours: neither have we done otherwise than well by them, but regarded much the good of their citie and Commonwealth, in that we have united them in out solemne court of parliament, and incorporated them unto us; to the end, that in all Peloponnesus, there should be but one bodie, one State, and one Counsell. Then (I wote well) they might have justly complained to have been wronged, then they might have greeved and said they had  not been well used, in case we our selves had lived under one kind of lawes, and putthem to bee ruled by others. I know full well, o Appius, that all my speech hetherto is neither beseeming allies to use unto their allies, not decent and meet for a nation that is free, but rather (to speake more truly) fit for slaves debating before their maisters. For if that found of the trumpet, if that voice of the publicke crier were not in vaine, whereby ye ordained and declared, That we Achaeans before all others should be free; if the consederation stand firme and stable; if our alliance and amitie bee enterteined and observed equally and indifferently; why demaund not I of you Romans what you did after the winning of Capua? Seeing you wil have us Achaeans, to make account unto you, what we did to the Lacedaemonians whom we conquered by warre? Set case that we caused some of them to be killed. What of that? Commaunded not you (I pray) that the Senatours  of Capua should leese their heads? Wee have demolished the wals indeed, but yee have not only ruinated their wals, but wholly turned them out of citie and territorie. But (you will say) the consederation in behalfe of the Achaeans is equall and indifferent in outward apparence, and in truth and effect their libertie dependeth upon the good will and pleasure of the Romans, who indeed have the preeminence of the seignorie and dominion besides. I know it Appius, as well as you can tell me, yea, and (although it behoveth me not so to be) I am not overmuch offended and discontented therwith. But this I beseech you, let there be as great ods and difference as ye will betweene us Achaeans and you Romanes: provide this only, that your enemies and outs be not with you in as good regard and account, nay that they be not in a better degree and condition, than  we graunted them our own laws, in that we admitted them to be incorporat in the generall Diet of the Achaean State and communaltie. But will yee have the truth? the conquered have not sufficient to content and satisfie the conquerours: enemies demaundmore than allies have and enjoy; and those things which are confirmed by oth, ratified and consecrated by monuments and instruments of writings, cut and engraven in stone, for a perpetuall memorie to all posteritie, they would force and wrest from us even with our perjurie. True it is, o Romanes, we honour and reverence you; yea and if you will needs have it so, wee dread and feare you also: but yet so, as we both honour and also feare the immortall gods more than you. Audience hee had with the accord and consent of the greater part: and all men judged, that hee had spoken like a magistrate indeed, and for the dignitie and majestie of his place: in such sort, as it was easily  seene, that they were never able to hold their dignitie and mainteine their authoritie with the Romanes, in case they went coldly to worke and proceeded in mild tearmes with them. Then Appius answered and said, That he would gladly advise and persuade them, all that he possibly could, to be reconciled unto the Lacedaemonians, whiles they might doe it with full contentment; for fear least soone after they should be constrained and forced to seek unto them against

their wills and maugre their hearts. At this word they all sighed and groned againe; but affraid  they were and durst not refuse to doe that which they were commaunded. This petition onely they made unto the Romanes, that as touching the Lacedaemonians they would chaunge and alter what they thought good; and not force the Achaeans to sinne against their conscience, in disanulling those things which they had established and ratified with a solemne oth. So the sentence of condemnation onely (lately passed against Areus and Alcibiades) was reversed.
In the beginning of this yeere (when at Rome they had sitten in consultation about the provinces of Consuls and Pretours) Liguria was assigned unto the Consuls for their charge and government, because there was no warre in any other place. Then the Pretours cast lots for theirs. To C. Decimius Flavus fell the jurisdiction of the citie: and to P. Cornelius Cethegus that other betweene citizens and forreiners: C. Sempronius had the government of Sicilie, and Q.Naevius  Matho of Sardinia; with commission also to sit upon the inquisition in case of poysoning. A.Terentius Varro was deputed L. governor of high Spain, and P. Sempronius Longus of the low. Out of those 2 provinces it fell out so, that there came much about the same time two lieutenants, L. Iuventius Talva and T. Quintilius Varus; who having related before the Senat how great a war was now dispatched and finished in Spaine, required withall, that there should be rendred praise and thanks to the immortall gods for the happie successe in the wars, and likewise that the Pretors might be permitted to bring away their armies. So ther was a solemn procession ordained to be holden two dayes: but as touching the reducing of the armies, they gave order to refer it wholly to be debated, at what time as there should be question about the armies of Consuls and Pretours togither. Some few dayes after, it was ordained, that the Consuls should have with them  into Liguria, two legions apeece, which Ap. Claudius and M. Sempronius had the conduct of. As touching the Spanish forces, great contention there was betweene the new Pretours and the friends of Calpurnius and Quintius in their absence. Both sides had Tribunes and both had Consuls to take part with them. The Tribunes threatned to crosse the act of the Senat, if they ordained that the armies should be brought home. The Consuls againe protested, that if the Tribunes thus opposed their negative, they would not suffer any other decree and ordinaunce to passe. In conclusion, the respect of those that were absent, was of lesse importance: and an act of the Senate was entred, That the Pretours should enroll 4000 footmen of Romanes, and foure hundred horsemen: likewise five thousand foot and as many horse of Latine allies, to conduct with them into Spaine. And when they had thus enrolled these foure full legions, looke what  surplusage there remained over and above five thousand foot and three hundred horse in a legion, they should give them their congie and dismisse them of souldierie; first as many as had served out their full time, and then those who had borne themselves most valiantly in the warre under Calpurnius and Quintius.
After this debate and variance was appeased, there arose another in the necke of it, occasioned by the death of P. Decimius the Pretour. Cn. Licinius and L. Puppius (who had been Aediles the last yeere before) likewise C. Valerius the Flamine of Iupiter, and Q.Fulvius Flaccus, laboured to be in his roume late deceased. As for the last of these rehearsed (because hee was Aedile Curule) he shewed not himselfe in his white robe; but he made more meanes and laboured above all the rest, having to his adversarie and concurrent the Flamine abovesaid. At the  first he seemed equall only unto him in the suite, but afterwards when he began to have the better of him, certaine Tribunes of the Commons stood upon this point, and alledged, That his name was not to be accepted as eligible; for that one and the selfesame person might neither take not exercise at one time, the function of two magistracies; and namely, both Curule or of State. Others againe said, that it was meet and reason that hee were dispensed with and exempt from the lawes in that behalfe, to the end, that the people might be at libertie to elect whome they would for Pretor. L. Porcius the Consull was first of this resolution, not to admit his name: and afterwards, because he would seeme to do by warrant and authoritie of the Senat, he assembled the LL. togither, and said, that he propounded and put to question before them, That for as much as an Aedile elect, sued to be Pretour without all right, or any precedent tollerable in  a free-state; for his owne part he was minded (unlesse they were of a contrarie opinion) to hold the generall assembly for the election, according to law. Then the LL. gave their advise, that L. Porcius the Consull, should commune and treat with Q.Fulvius, that hee would be no hinderance, but that the assembly for the substitution of a Pretour in the roume of C. Decimius departed,

 might be holden by order of law. As the Consull was thus in hand with him according to the act of the Senat, Flaccus made answer, That he would do nothing unsitting his own person. By this doubtfull and indifferent answer of his, he put those in good hope (who expounded and construed as they would have it) that he would accommodate and apply himselfe to the authoritie of the LL. of the Senat: but at the time of the election he sued more earnestly than before; complaining of the Consull and Senat, That they wrung and wrested out of his hands the benefit of the people of Rome intended unto him; and to bring him into ill will and obloquie of the people, they made much ado about two offices and a double dignitie: as if all the world law not, that after he were declared and pronounced Pretor, he would incontinently resigne up the Aedileship. The Consull perceiving both him fully resolute and set upon a pitch in the suite, and also  the favor and affection of the people enclinedmore and more toward him, brake up the assembly aforesaid, and called a Senat: where, in a frequent session of Senators it was ordained, That for as much as Flaccus was little or nothing mooved with the authoritie of the LL. of that honourable court, he was to be dealt withall in a generall assembly before the bodie of the people. When the people were met togither at the summons of the Consull, hee proposed the matter unto him before them. Flaccus relented never a jote, but persisted still in his opinion, and gave the people of Rome thankes for their favour, in that they shewed themselves willing to elect him Pretour, so often as they had time and place wherein they might testifie and declare their love to him: which affectionate kindnesse of his fellow citizens, he never meant to reject and abandon. This constant and resolute speech of his, kindled and enflamed so great love and affection  in them toward him, that past all peradventure he had been chosen Pretour out of hand, in case the Consull would have received his name. Much strife and debate there was amongst the Tribunes, one against another; yea and between them and the Consull, untill at length the Consull held a Senat, and there a decree passed in this wise, That forasmuch as the w^^^^ull stubbornnesse of Q.Flaccus of one side, and the inordinate affection of men on another side, was such, as the solemne assembly for subelecting of a Pretour in the place of the deceased, could not be holden according to the lawes, the Senat agreed and resolved, that there were alreadie Pretours enough, and that P. Cornelius should administer and execute both jurisdictions in the citie, and exhibite the playes and games in the honour of Apollo.
After this troublesome debate about the election, was by the sage wisdome and valorous  courage of the Senat suppressed, there arose another far greater, by how much the thing was of weightier importaunce, and the persons agents therin more in number, and for qualitie and place mightier. There stood in election to be Censors (and that with earnest endeavour and exceeding heat of contention) L. Valerius Flaccus, P. and L. both Scipions; Cn. Manlius Veljo, and L. Furius Purpureo, all Patritij. And of commoners, M. Porcius Cato, M. Fulvius Nobilior, T. and Marcus both Sempronij, the one surnamed Longus, the other Tuditanus. But M. Purcius over-went them all by many degrees, as well those of the Patricians as also of the commons, notwithstanding they were come of most noble families. This man caried with him so vigorous a spirit and pregnant wit, that howsoever he were borne and descended,The commendation of M. Porcius Cato. it seemed he was able to make way of himselfe to advancement and honour. He wanted no Art and skill meet and requisite  for the managing either of private busines of his owne, or publicke affaires of state: cunning he was in country husbandrie, as wel as in civill pollicie. Some are advanced to the highest dignities and most honourable places, by their deepe knowledge in the law: others attaine to promotion by eloquence: and therefore be againe, who have risen and become great through martiall prowesse and feats of armes. But this man was by nature so trainable and pilant to all alike, that whatsoever he addicted and gave himselfe unto, a man would have said, he had bene borne and framed even from his mothers wombe to it and to nothing else. In war, a most hardie and valiant souldiour: and in many soughten fields highly renowmed. Being mounted once to high places of honorable calling, a right excellent commander he proved, and Generall of an armie. In peace again, for sound councell in the civill law, passing well learned: for pleading at the bar and  making orations, most eloquent. Neither carried he himselfe so, that his tongue flourished only whiles hee lived, as leaving no monument behind him of his singular eloquence; but it liveth, nay it flowreth still, immortalized as it were and recommended to posteritie in all kind of writing. Orations of his there be extant many, which he penned and pronounced as well in his own cause as for the defence of his friends, yea and invectives also against others: for able he was to put down

and wearie his adversaries, not onely by declaiming and accusing them, but also by pleading  his own cause. Factious quarels and enmities there were exceeding many, that tormented him; and he plagued others with as many: and hard it is to say or set downe, whether hee were urged and pressed upon by the nobilitie, or himselfe coursed and baited them more. Doubtlesse, by nature he was austere and rigorous, his speech was sharpe, biting, and beyond measure plaine and free: but he carried a mind with him that stouped to no desires and lusts whatsoever: his life so severe and precise, as it was untouched and without all spot of blame: despising all fawning favours, and contemning earthly riches. In thrift and frugalitie, in sobrietie, in patience, in sufferance of travaile and daunger, his bodie was steele to the verie backe. And as for his mind and courage, it was such, as verie age and time (which abateth and consumeth all things els) was not able to breake and daunt: when hee was fourescore yeeres old and sixe, hee pleaded at the batte  for others: he made orations for his owne defence, and wrote bookes: and in the nintieth yeere of his age, he convented Sergius Galba before the people, to receive his judgement by them. As all his life time before, the nobilitie was set against him, so when hee stood now to be Censor, they pressed hard upon him: insomuch as all his competitours (excepting L. Flaccus, who had been his colleague in the Consulship) complotted togither, how they might give him the repulse and put him besides the quishion: not only for that their owne teeth watered, and they were desirous themselves rather of that honour; nor because they repined to see a new risen gentleman, and one of the first head to be a Censor: but also because they looked for no other but that his Censorship would be rigorous and prejudiciall to the name and reputation of divers men; considering how he had been crossed and hurt by very many, and was desirous himselfe to  wait them a shreud turne, and be meet with them againe. For even then, whiles he laboured and sued for the place, hee used minatorie speeches, and gave out, that they onely were opposed against him, who feared they should have a Censorship sharply exercised without partiality and respect of persons. And herewith hee maintained and upheld the suite of L. Valerius with him, saying, that if hee had but him of all others to be his colleague, hee should be able to represse the wicked enormities newly come up and rise in the citie, and to bring in request againe the ancient manners and fashions of the old world. Men were much mooved in these respects and considerations; and so maugre the heads of the nobilitie, they not onely created him Censor, but also adjoyned unto him L. Valerius for his companion in that government.
After the election of Censors was ended, the Consuls and Pretours tooke their journies into  their severall provinces, all save Q.Naevius; who before that hee could goe into Sardinia, was staied behind no lesse than foure moneths, about certein inquisitions of poysoning: whereof, he fate upon many without the citie of Rome, in corporate burroughes, market townes and places of great resort, for that he thought that manner of proceeding more convenient. And if wee list to beleeve Val. Antias, he condemned two thousand persons.
Semblably, L. Posthumius the Pretour, (unto whome the government of Tarentum by lot fell) did good justice upon great conspiracies made by certain grasiers; and with great care and diligence followed the enquest of the Bacchanals, and dispatched the reliques thereof quite  and cleane. Many of them who were adjourned and made not appearance, but gave the slip and left in the lurch their sureties bound bodie and goods for them, and lurked in that quarter of Italy;  he either judged and condemned as guiltie and convicted, or caused them to be apprehended and sent to Rome unto the Senate; who were all cast in prison by P. Cornelius.
In the farther part of Spaine all was quiet, by reason that the Lusitanes were in the last warre subdued: but in the hither part, A. Terentius forced Corbio a towne of the Suessetanes, which he assaulted with mantilets and other fabricks of warre, and sold all the prisoners: which done, he passed the winter peaceably in that higher part of Spain also.
The old Pretours, C. Calpurnius Piso and L. Quintius returned to Rome; and both of them were with great accord and consent of the LL. of the Senat allowed to triumph. And first C. Calpurnius triumphed over the Portugals and Celtiberians. In which triumph, hee carried in shew 83 coronets of gold, and 12000 pound of silver. Within few dayes after, L. Quintius triumphed  over the same Portugals and Celtiberians. In which solemnitie, there was represented in shew, as much gold and silver as in the former.
The Censors, M. Porcius and L. Valerius, whiles men hung in suspence betweene feare and hope what they would doe, held a review and a new choise of the Senate. Seven Senatours they

 displaced and deposed from that dignitie: amongst whome, there was one of marke, for his nobilitie of birth and honorable offices which he had borne, namely L. Quintius Flamthinus who had been Consull. An auncient order (they say) it was intime of our forefathers, That when the Censors had put any out of the Senate, they should note them directly for those faults which they had committed: and at this day, extant there be divers sharpe orations of Cato, against them whome either he cassed and displaced out of Senate, or from whome he tooke away horses of service: but of all others, the fourest and bitterest is that of his, against this L. Quintius; which if he had pronounced as an accuser before he had noted him with that disgrace, and not as Censor after the said note, his very owne brother T. Quintius (if he had been then Censor) could not possibly have kept L. Quintius in the state of a Senator. Among other grievous matters,  hee articledagainst him, That hee had trained with him from Rome into his province of Fraunce (in hope of many great rewards) one This Philip I take to be no Carthaginian. The name soundeth not like others of that nation: but bothis and Paenus are Romane proper names. Philippus Paenus, a notorious and costly Ganymede. This boy, as he was fooling and playing the wanton with the said Quintius then Consul, used to upbraid him with this, That he was had away from Rome, against the very time that the shew of sword-players at utterance was to bee exhibited: and this hee said, to shew how readie hee was to satisfie the pleasure of him his lover. Now it chaunced as they were making good cheere togither, and having taken their wine liberally were well heat therewith, newes came and reported it was in the banket time, That a certain noble man of the Boians was arrived, with his children, as a renegate from the adverse part; and was desirous to speake with the Consull, for to have assurance from his mouth of safe-conduct: who being brought into the pavilion, began to parlie  with the Consull by a truchman or interpreter. And in the mids of his speech; How saith thou (quoth Quintius to that wanton deintie, his Catamite) because thou hast missed and lost the sight of those sword-players at Rome, wilt thou fee presently here this Frenchman die in the place before thee? He made not any great semblance unto him in good earnest of his desire that way: but the Consull at the first beck of that beastly filth and baggage, caught the naked sword which hung over his head, and first gave the poore Gaule a wound in his sconce as he was speaking unto him, and afterwards as he made shift to flie from him and called upon the protection of the people of Rome and the assistance of those that were present, Quintius ran him quite through the sides. Valerius Antias, who never had read the oration of Cato, but gave credit to a flying fable only, without any head or author, telleth the tale with some other circumstance, howbeit much like  in substance of matter, as touching his lecherous lust and bloudie crueltie. He writeth, that Quintius whiles he abode at Plaisance, sent for a famous courtisan (upon whom he was enamored) to a banket; and as he courted and made love to this strumpet, vaunting himselfe unto her, among other discourses he recounted with what rigor he had followed certein inquisitions; what a number of prisoners he had in yrons condemned to death; and how many of their heads hee minded to chop off. Then this harlotry sitting next beneth him, said, That she had never in al her life seen any man to cut ones head of, and it was a sight that of al other she would sainest see. Wherupon, this kind amorous knight, to gratifie the quean, caused one of those poor soules condemned to die, to be set out of prison into the banketting roume, and presently to be beheaded before her face. A cruell fact it was and inhumane, whether it were committed as Cato hath objected in his  Oration, or as Valerius hath written in his storie, that any human creature should be thus massacred like a sacrifice, and the table bespreint with his bloud, amid the cups standing full of wine and the dishes furnished with viands, where and when the manner and custome was to tast and take the first sey in the honour of the gods, and that devoutly with grace and good praiers; and alto content and feed the eie of a wanton and shamelesse callor, lying in the bosome of the Consull. In the end of Cato his Oration, this condition was offered unto Quintius, That if hee would plead unguiltie, and denie this fact and others which he charged him with, then hee should put in a reall caution, and stand to his defence and triall: but if he confessed himselfe guiltie, then he willed him to consider whether he thought any man would greeve and be sorrie at the ignominie which he was to receive, who being transported and caried beside his understanding with wine and  women, made but a sport and pastime to shed mens bloud at a very banket. In taking a review of the Cavallerie or gentlemen of Rome, L. Scipio Asiaticus had his great horse of service taken from him. This Censureship was likewise executed with severitie and rigor to all sorts and degrees, and namely in the prising and valuation of their goods. For Cato commanded the sergeants to take a note of all the ornaments, jewels, and apparrell of women, also of their chariots and coaches

if they amounted to the sum of 15000 asses, and to enroll the same in the Censors booke. Item, all  bondslaves under twentie years of age, sold after the last tax of assessment for ten thousand asses or upward, that they should bee valued at an higher price by ten fold than they were esteemed worth: and that for all these thinges they should pay and contribute to the citie chamber after three in the thousand. These Censors cut off all water either running out of any common stream into a priuat house, or derived into particular fields and grounds. And all hovses either built by privat persons upon common ground, or any waies encroching and leaning to publike places they caused to be demolished and pulled downe within thirtie dayes. After this they set out divers peeces of worke to be wrought at a price, of that money which was ordeyned to that purpose, namely to pave certaine pooles with stone, to skoure and clense the draughts and sinks wher need was: and in the mount Aventine and other parts where none were alredy to make new. And  particularly of themselves Flaccus caused the causey or wharse to bee made against the waters called Neptuniae, that the people might passe too and fro that way: and also a street way through Formianum. And Cato for his part built two galleries, Moenium and Titium, in the Mineries; and bought foure shops for the citie: he built there also the stately hall or pallace called Porcia. As for the citie revenues, they did set and let them foorth to fermers, at an exceeding racked rent: but al the city works they put out to undertakers by the great, at as low a reckoning as they could. These leases and bargains aforesaid being once cancelled by order from the Senate, and new made at the importunat suit and that with outcries and teares of the Publicanes, as well farmers as vndertakers: then the Censors by proclamation commaunded those to avoid farre from the subhastation, who had disanulled the former leases and bargains, and with some little abatement  and easing of the former rents, they demised the same profits and revenues again to others. This was a censureship of great note, full of repine, ill will, and heartburning, which troubled and molested M. Porcius as long as he had a day to live, for that he was reputed and held to bee the author of that severitie and rigor exercised therein.
The same yeare two Colonies were erected and inhabitants sent from Rome, to wit Pollentia into the Picene territorie, and Pisaurum into the Gauls countrie. Six acres of land were assigned to every one of the coloners. And the same Triumvirs, namely Q.Fabius Labio, M. Fulvius Flaccus, and Q.Fulvius Nobilior, were they that both parted the sayd lands, and also had the leading and planting of the foresaid Colonies.
The Consuls that yeare atchieved no memorable exploit at all, neither at home in citie nor  abroad in warre. Against the yeare following they created Consuls M. Claudius Marcellus and Q.Falius, who upon the fifteenth of March, on which day they entred into their government, put to question as concerning the provinces, as well their own as the Pretours. For there had ben chosen Pretours C. Valerius the Flamin of Iupiter (who also the yeare before was in election for the place) Sp. Posthumius Albinus, and P. Cornelius Sisenna, also L. Puppius, L. Iulius, and Cn. Suinius. Vnto the Consuls was assigned the province Liguria, togither with the charge of the same armies which P. Claudius and M. Porcius had conducted. As for both the provinces in Spaine [as well beyond as on this side Iberus] they were reserved with their ordinarie forces, for the Pretours of the former yeare by speciall commission without casting any lots at all therefore. The new Pretours were enjoyned for to dispose and part their governments, that C. Valerius the Flamine  of Iupiter might exercise one of the jurisdictions of Rome. So he was L. chiefe justice for the forreiners, and Sisenna Cornelius over the citizens. Vnto Sp. Posthumius fell Sicilie, to L. Puppius Apulia, to L. Iulius Gallia, and to Cn. Sicinius Sardinia. As for L. Iulius hee was enjoined to make hast and set forward on his journey: for the Transalpine Gauls (beyond the mountains) had passed over by the streights of the forrests and waies unknowne before time, into Italie, as hath bene beforesaid, and were building them a towne in that territorie, which at this day is called Aquiliensis. This Pretour had in charge to impeach them in that enterprise, so far foorth as hee might possibly without warre and force of arms: and if there were no other remedie but that they must of necessitie use violence, then to certifie the Consuls thereof: for agreed it was that one of them should lead the Legions against the Gauls. In the end of the former yeare there was a generall  assemblie holden for the chusing of an Augur: wherin Sp. Posthumius Albinus was created in the joume of Cn. Cornelius Lentulus late deceased. But in the beginning of this present yeare P. Licinius Crassus the arch-Pontifie departed our of this world, in whose place M. Sempronius Tuduanu, was invested for the bishop. But C. Seruilius Ceminus was created the archprelat or high priest

 aforesaid. In the honor of P. Licinius at his funerals, there was given a dole of flesh; and a shew exhibited of 120 sword-fensers fighting at sharp: likewise there were represented funerall plaies and games, which continned three dayes: and after that solemnitie, a least was holden; during which, when the tables were set and spred accordingly all over the grand-place of the cittie, sodainly there arose a tempest with great stormes, which forced most men to erect tents and booths there: but after a while when the weather was faire againe, they were taken down and had away: and men commonly gave out and said, That whereas the prophets and wisards had foretold among other their fatall presages, that they should be forced to quarter and pitch tents in the market place of Rome; now that prophesie was fulfilled, and they were freed and excused from farther danger. And no sooner were they eased and delivered of that scruple, but they were  troubled with another; for that it had rained blood two daies in the court-yard of Vulcane: and the Decemvirs published a solemne supplication for the expiation of that prodigious signe.
Before that the Consuls departed into their provinces, they brought into the Senate for to have audience, the embassages come from beyond sea. And never before that day were so many men of those forrein parts seene at Rome. For from the time that the bruit was blown abroad amongst the nations bordering upon Macedonie, that the Romanes gave no dease eare to the complaints and accusations commensed against Philip, and that many had sped well by complaining; every citie and State in their owne behalfe, yea and many privat persons in particular (for an ill neighbour he was to them all) repaired to Rome, in hope either to be righted and eased of their wrongs, or to discharge their stomacks and be moned and comforted for their miserie.  Likewise from king Eumenes there arrived an embassage accompanied with his owne brother Athenaeus to make complaint, as finding themselves grieved that the garrisons were not with drawen out of Thracia: as also to enforme that Philip had sent certein aids into Bithynia to Prusias who made war upon Eumenes. Now Demetrius (Philip his sonne) at that time a very yong gentleman, was to answer to all these challenges: and an easie peece of worke it was not, either to beare in mind all the matters objected, or to thinke upon the points of every answer accordingly. For over and besides, that the articles were many in number, most of them were of very small consequence and importance; namely, strife about limits and land-marks, about carying away men and ravishing women; of driving of cattell, of ministring justice partially and with affection, or els of none ministred at all: of sentences given and judgements passed in causes either by force  or for favour. The Senat perceiving that neither Demetrius could speak to these points and give them good evidence, nor themselves be wel enformed and cleerly instructed by him; being moved also and grieved to see the youth so raw a scholler in these affairs, and therwith much troubled in spirit, gave order to enquire and demand of him, Whether he had received any notes in writing from his father, as touching the premisses? And when hee answered and said, Yea, they thought the first and principall thing for them to do was, to see and heare what were the answers of the king to every specialtie and particular. And therupon they presently called for that booke of his fathers, and then permitted him to read the contents thereof. Now therein were set downe certein briefe abstracts of pleas and defenses, to ech severall point; shewing, Imprimis, that some things he had done according to the decrees and awards of the Roman Delegates and commissioners. Item, Whereas hee had left somwhat undone, the default was not in him, but in the very parties that accused him. Hee had interlaced between, certeine grievances and complaints, as touching the iniquitie and hard penning of those decrees; and how matters were not scannedand debated before Caecilius with that indifferencie and equitie as was meet and requisite: and namely, that without desert of his part, all men were set against him and insulted over him. The Senat collected hereby good arguments, how the hart of Philip was wounded and galled against the Romans. But when the yong prince excused some of these matters, and for the rest promised and undertooke, that all should be done to the uttermost as it pleased the Senat to order and set down; then it was thought good to deliver this answer unto him, That his father had in nothing done better, nor more to the contentment of the Senat, than that he seemed willing (howsoever matters  were passed already) to make satisfation to the Romans by the means of his son Demetrius. As for the Senate, they could dissimule, forget, put up and endure many things done and past; yea and were persuaded verily in their hearts, that they might beleeve and trust Demetrius; as knowing assuredly, that although they sent his body again to his father Philip, yet they had his heart and affection with them still, as a sure pledge and hostage: and that hee was a friend

to the people of Rome, so farre forth as his reverent dutie to his father would permit and give  him leave: letting him withall to understand, that for to doe him honour, they would send embassadours into Macedonie; to the end, that if ought had not beene so fully effectuated as it should have beene, it might be done yet in good time, without imputation of fault and blame, or poenall satisfaction to be made for any thing hitherto omitted: yea and desirous they were, that Philip should understand, that by the mediation of Demetrius and for his sake, he stood yet in good tearmes of peace and friendship with the people of Rome. These things intended and done for the increase of credit and reputation, presently turned to the displeasure of the young gentleman, and in the end to his utter ruine and overthrow.
Then were the Lacedaemonians admitted to audience in the Senate. They mooved many pettie matters and trifling controversies; but those that principally touched the maine point  were these; to wit, Whether they should be restored againe whome the Achaeans had condemned, or no? Item, Whether they were justly or unjustly killed, whome they murdered? Moreover, they put to question, Whether the Lacedaemonians were to be comprised within the generall assembly and counsell of Achaea; or, that this State (as before-time) should have their rights and franchises apart by themselves from all others in Peloponnesus? The Senate ordained and awarded; Imprimis, That they should be restored. Item, That the sentences pronounced against them, should be reversed. Item, That Lacedaemon should doe service to that high court and publicke Diet of Achaea: and finally, that this accord and award should be engrossed, subscribed, and signed as well by the Lacedaemonians as Achaeans.
Q.Martius was sent embassadour into Macedonie: who also had direction and order given  him by the same commission, to visite the state of the allies in Peloponnesus: for there also remained some troubles after the old quarrels and variance; yea and the Messenians refused to appeare at the generall councell of Achaea. Now if I would set in hand to record the causes and circumstances of that warte, I should forget my purpose in the beginning of my worke, wherein I resolved not to touch at all any discourse of forein histories, no farther than they wer linked to the Romane affaires. Howbeit one memorable occurrence there hapned, which I cannot passe by, namely, that albeit the Achaeans had the better hand in warre, yet it chaunced that Philopoemen their Pretour was taken prisoner by the Messenians, as he made an expedition to seize upon Corone by prevention, which the enemies were desirous to be masters of. Surprised hee was in a valley of great disadvantage, and some few horsmen with him. It is reported, that by the help  of the Thracians and Candiots, he might have fled and escaped: but for very shame to abandon those men of armes, which were the noblest gentlemen of that nation, and whome hee lately had made choise of, he had not the power to doe otherwise, but stay to see the last. For whiles he came himselfe behind in the rereward, because he was desirous to make meanes for their evasion through the streights of that passe, and to that purpose valiantly received the charge of the enemies, his horse fell and cast him at once; so as with his owne fall and his horse lying upon him, he had like to have gone away in a swoune: a man now threescore yeeres old and ten; and withall, newly crept abroad and recovered of a long and lingering disease, which had mightily wasted and consumed the strength of his bodie. Well, thus lay he along, and the enemies ran over him; and so soone as they knew who he was, they reared him upon his feet from under his horse, no lesse respective than if he had been their owne Generall, in regard of a reverence they bare unto the man, and in remembrance of his noble exploits: they brought him again to himselfe, and forth of that by-valley standing out of the passe, they carried him into the high way: and were so farre possessed and overcome with joy so unexpected, that they could not well beleeve their owne eyes that they had gotten him. Some dispatched vaunt courriers to Messene with the newes hereof; namely, that the warre was brought to an end, considering that Philopoemen was taken and a comming as prisoner. At first the ridings seemed so incredible, that the formost messenger was held not only for a vaine lyar, but also for one not well in his wits: but after that there came one after another, and all with one voice verefied and affirmed the same, at length it was beleeved. And then, see what they did! before they knew for certaine that he approached neere  unto the citie, they all ran forth of the gates by heaps to see the man: all (I say) bond as well as free, women and children one with another. In so much, as the gates were choked up with the thrust and throng of the prease: for no man could beleeve assuredly it was true, the thing was so straunge, unlesse he might see him with his owne eyes. They that had the charge of bringing

 him, found much adoe to put by the multitude whome they encountred, and to enter in at the gate: and so thicke they stood in the prease, that they tooke up all the wayes besides, so as hee could not be brought foorth to be seene. Now because the most part of the people might not possibly have a sight of him, they gat up all at once into the Theatre, which stood neere unto the way, and pestered it full; and with one voice they cryed aloud, That he might be brought thither and presented unto the vieu of the whole people. The magistrates and principall citizens, fearing least the compassion that mought arise in mens hearts upon the beholding of so worthie a personage, would raise some trouble and commotion; whiles some comparing the reverence of his former authoritie and majestie, with this present condition and calamitie: and others calling to remembrance his manifold deserts and passing good turnes, mought haply be touched  with pitie; set him a far off in the open sight of them all, and then at once tooke him hastily out of their vieu: for their Pretor Dinocrates gave out openly and said, That the magistrats were to enquire and demaund certaine points of him as touching the maine summe of the totall warre. Then hee was brought into their councell-chamber, where their Senate assembled and began to consult about him. It was now well toward evening; and so far off they were from resolving in other matters, that they could not be thinke themselves and agree, in what place they might keepe him that one night in safeguard. Astonied they were and amased, to consider and thinke upon the greatnes of his estate past, and of his noble vertue and valour: and no man durst receive the charge and custodie of him in his owne house, nor trust any one besides with his keeping. At length some there were, that put them in mind of the publicke treasurie of the  citie, vaulted under the ground like a dungeon, and walled al about with strong square stone. Into it was he let down bound as he was, and a mightie huge stone (being the cover of the vault) was by an engin laid over, to enclose him sure. Thus reposing more trust for his safe custodie in that place than in any person, they waited and attended the next morning. When morrow day was come, the whole entier multitude in generall, recommending the benefits and good turns done of old by him to their citie, were of mind to pardon and spare him, and by his meanes and mediation, to seeke for remedies and redresse of their present distresses and calamities. But those persons by whose motive and enducement the Messenians had revolted (and such were they as ruled all the common-weale) consulted apart in secret, and concluded with one consent to put him to death: only the doubt and question was, whether they should do the thing with speed,  or by delay. But those prevailed in the end, who were more greedie of present revenge, and so they sent one unto him with a draught of poison. When he had taken the cup in his hand (by report) he gave not a word, but only asked, whether Lycortas (the other Generall of the Achaeans) were espaped alive, and the foresaid horsmen safe? When answer was made, that they were in safetie; That is happie, (quoth he) and therewith drunke off every drop in the cup right heartily, and a while after yeelded up his vitall breath. But long joyed they not of his death who were the bloudie authors of this crueltie: for the citie of Messene being conquered by force of arms, among other capitulations, delivered these malefactors into the hands of the Achaens, who demaunded presently to have them. The bones and reliques of Philopaemen were likewise rendred unto them, and interred he was by the generall councell of all Achaea, in such solemne wife, that in  heaping upon him all honours that could be devised for an earthly man, they forbare not also to adore him as a god immortall. The Historiographers, as well Greeke as Latine, attribute so much unto this man, that some of them have recommended to posteritie (as a memorable thing of all others that happened this yeere:) to wit, that in this one yeere there dyed three renowmed captaines, Philopaemen, Anniball, and P. Scipio. See how they have matched him in equalitie with the greatest warriours and noblest Generals of the two most puissant nations in the whole world!
Then came T. Quintius Flamininus in embassage to king Prusias, whom the Romanes had in suspition and jelousie, both for that he had received Anniball after the flight of Antiochus, and also because hee made warre upon Eumenes. Now, were it that among other matters Flamininus  charged Prusias, that hee entertained in his court the most spightfull enemie of all men living, unto the people of Rome; who first sollicited his own native countrey to take armes against the Romanes, and after the force and power there of was abated and defeited, persuaded king Antiochus to doe the like: or rather that Prusias of his owne accord to gratifie Flamininus there present, and to doe the Romanes a pleasure, had a meaning and intent either to kill Anniball, or

to deliver him alive into their hands. I wot not how it came about, but upon the first communication  and conference betweene them, there were souldiours sent incontinently to be set and guard his house. Anniball evermore forecast in mind some such issue and end of his life, seeing the deadly and inexpiable hatred that the Romanes bare unto him; reposing besides no confidence at all in the fidelitie of these kings, and having withall some experience alreadie of the inconstancie and levitie of king Prusias. Moreover, hee had in horrour this comming of Flamininus, as fatall unto him, and a meane to worke his finall destruction. To the end therefore hee might bee ever provided aforehand against those inconveniences and daungers, wherewith on all sides hee was encombeted, and have a readie way of evasion to save himselfe, he had devised and caused to be made seven dores for egresse out of his house, whereof some were very privie and secret vaults, because they should not bee environned with guards.  But kings commaundements are of that force, that whatsoever they would have to bee searched out and discovered, cannot lie long hidden. For the guards so compassed and enclosed the whole circuit of the house, that it was unpossible for any to get forth and make an escape. Anniball being advertised that the kings souldiours were at the gate, assaied to steale away at a postern, which stood furthest out of the way, and where of the conveiance was most secret, but perceiving that the souldiours had be set it too, and lay for to encounter and receive him that way, and that every place was invested with a set guard, he called for the poison which he had of long time before readie prepared for all such occurrent occasions, and uttered these words withall, Let us rid these Romanes of this their continuall feare and paine wherein they have been all this while, since that they thinke it so long to stay for the death of one old man. Flamininus shall obtain no great  nor memorable victorie of me, disarmed thus as I am, and betraied into his hands. But this very day shall prove and testifie, how farre the people of Rome are degenerate and chaunged from their ancient manners. Their forefathers (qd. he) advertised king Pyrrhus their enemie armed in field, and lying with an hoast of men against them in Italie, they gave him warning I say to take heed of poison: but these living at this day, have sent their embassadour, even one that hath born the dignitie of a Consull, to advise and counsell Prusias wickedly to take the life away of his owne guest. Then after he had cursed the person of Prusias and his whole realme, and called upon the gods, protectors of the law of hospitalitie, to beare witnesse how hee had violated his faith and broken promise with him, he set the cup of poyson to his mouth, and dranke it of. This was the end of Anniball. Polybius and Rutilius write,
that Scipio also died this yeere. But I, accord neither  with them not with Valerius. From them I square, because I find, that when M. Porcius and L. Valerius were Censours, the same L. Valerius being Censor, was elected President of the Senat, wheras Affricanus had been President for ten yeeres space together, during the time of two reviewes by Censours next before. And so long as the said Affricanus lived, there would have beene no other chosen President in his roume, unlesse himselfe were to have beene cassed and deprived of the Senatours dignitie, of which disgrace and note of infamie, there is not one that maketh any mention. And as for Valerius Antias hee is sufficiently refuted by M. Naevius a Tribune of the Commons, against whom there is an Oration extant, and the same penned by P. Affricanus, and bearing his name. This Naevius is recorded in the rols and registers of magistrates,
by the title of Tribune ofthe Commons, in that yeere when P. Clodius and L. Porcius were Consuls, but hee  entred into his office during the Consulship of App. Claudius and M. Sempronius, the tenth of December. From which time to the fifteenth of March are three months, upon which day Pab. Clodius and L. Procius began their Consulship. So, it seemeth that he was living during the Tribuneship of Naevius, and that he might well commense an action against him, and call him to his answer, but he departed this life before that L. Cato and M. Porcius were Censors. But in my conceit the death of these three (the most renowmed personages each one of their owne nation) are not to be compared one with the other, in this regard, that they happened at just at one time, more than for this, that none of them at had an end correspondent and answerable to the portly state and glorious lustre of his life. For first and for most in
this they all jumped together, that they neither died nor were enterred in their native countrey. Againe Anniball and Philopaemen were  both poysoned. Anniball was banished and betraied by his owne friend and host, Philopamen was taken prisoner, and left his life in prison and yrons. As for Scipio, although hee was neither exiled not condemned, yet making default of apparance at the day assigned nnto him, and being cited to his answere in his absence, willingly banished not himselfe onely for his life time, but his

 corps and funerals also after his death.
Whiles those affaires passed in Peloponnesus (from whence our pen hath a little di^^ted and digressed) the returne of Demetrius and the embassadors into Macedonie, diversly wrought in mens minds, and amused them some in one thing, and some in another. The common people of Macedonie, who were mightily afraid that the Romanes would make warre upon them, highly affected Demetrius, and cast a favourable aspect upon him as the authour of peace, and withall they destined him without all doubt to the kingdome, after the decease of his father. For albeit he were younger than his brother Perseus, yet men thought and spake, that hee was begotten in matrimonie by Philip of his lawfull wife, whereas hee had Perseus by a concubine, who caried no token and marke of a certaine father, as having to his mother a woman that was nought of her  bodie and common. Whereas Demetrius resembled his father Philip, and was as like him as might be Moreover, men said, That the Romanes would place and establish Demetrius in the ro iall throne of his father, but Perseus was in no credit and reputation among them. Thus folke stucke not to give out abrod in their common talke. Whereupon not onely Perseus was in care and doubt, that the preeminence of age onely would little boot and advauntage him, considering in all respects els hee was inferiour to his brother, but Philip also himselfe, supposing verily that it would hardly lie in his power to leave the inheritance of the crowne to whom he pleased, thought that his younger sonne was a mote in his eie, and troubled him more than was for his ease. Offended otherwhiles he was, that the Macedonians resorted unto him so much as they did, and highly displeased that there should be any more toiall courts than one in his realme, during  his life. And to speake a truth, the young prince himselfe returned from Rome more pussed up, no doubt, with pride, than was be seeming; as who presumed and grounted much upon the opinion that the Senate had of him, perceiving that they had graunted those things to him which had been denied unto his father before: but looke how much favor and honour (in respect of the Romanes) he woon among the rest of the Macedonians, so much envie and ill will hee procured himselfe thereby not onely with his brother, but with his father also: and especially after that other Romane embassadours were arrived, and that Philip was forced to part with Thracia and withdraw his garrisons, and to doe other things either by vertue of the old award of the first commissioners, or by a new ordinance of the Senate. Well, he performed all, but with an heavie heart and many a deepe sigh and grone, and so much the rather, because hee observed and saw  how his sonne Demetrius conversed more with the embassadours, and frequented their companie oftener than his. How be it he obeied, and did whatsoever was enjoined him by the Romans, because he would minister unto them no occasion of levying war against him our of hand. And supposing it was good pollicie to avert their minds from all suspition that hee minded any such designes tending that way, hee led his armie into the middest of Thracia against the Odrysians, Danthelets, and Bessians. He woon the citie Philippopolis, abandoned by the inhabitants who were sled, and had retired themselves with their whole families to the high mountaines next adjoining: and after hee had wasted the lands and territories of the Barbarians that inhabited the champaine countrey, hee received them under his subjection by composition. Afterwards, having left a garrison at Philippopolis, which soone after was chased and expelled by the Odrysians, ,he determined to build a towne in Deuriopus, a region of Paeonia neerer the river Erigonus, which issueth out of Illyricum, and keeping his course through Paeonia, dischargeth it selfe, and falleth into the river Axius. Not farre from Stobae the old citie, he built a new, and caused it to be called Perseis, thereby to doe honour to his eldest sonne Persius.
During the traine of these affaires in Macedonie, the Consuls tooke their journey into their severall provinces. Marcellus sent a messenger before him to L. Porcius the Proconsull, to give him to understand that he should present his legions before the new towne of the Gaules. But at the first approach of the Consull, the Frenchmen yeelded the place. Twelve thousand they were that bare armes, and most of them had by force gotten their armour out of their countrie villages, which was taken from them maugre their hearts, with all things else, that either they had  gotten out of the countrie by pilling and robbing, or brought with them of their owne. Whereupon they addressed their Embassadours to Rome, for to make complaint of these abuses and wrongs: who having audience given in the Senat by C. Valerius the Pretour, declared, how by occasion that Gaule was surcharged with a multitude of people, they were constreined as wel for want of ground and possessions, as also for need and povertie, to passe over the Alpes and seeke

themselves some place of habitation. And where they saw any quarters for let, defart, and unpeopled, there they had planted themselves, without offering injurie to any person: where also they had begun to build a towne, which might be a good proofe and argument, that they came not to doe violence upon any citie or countrie village. And now of late M. Claudius had sent unto them a message, that unlesse they submitted and yeelded, he would warre upon them: whereupon they preferring certaine peace (although it were lesse honorable) before the doubtfull hazards and adventures of warre, surrendred, rather to be in the protection and safeguard, than under the subjection of the people of Rome. But a fewe daies after, they were commaunded to quit both cittie and countrie. And thereupon resolved in their mind to depart in silence and saying neuer a word, into what place soever they could, there to seeke their fortune: but then they were disarmed, yea and spoiled and stript of all that ever they had, and nothing left, that  either they drave before them, or carried about them. In regard whereof, they were humble suppliants to the Senate and people of Rome, that they would not proceed in more rigour and crueltie against them, harmelesse persons as they were, and submitting themselves unto them, than against prosessed enemies. To this Oration of complaint the Senate caused this aunswere to be returned: That neither they had done well in comming into Italie, and presuming to build them a cittie upon other mens territories, without permission of the soveraigne Romane magistrate, who had the government of those parts: nor yet the Senate was well pleased, that they should be thus despoiled, considering they had yeelded. And therfore minded they were to send with them their Embassadours to the Consuls, to commaund them in their name, to see that all their owne goods should be restored againe unto them, so that they made returne thither  from whence they came: who also should go forward immediatly over the Alpes, to give the States of France warning to keepe in their people with them, and hold them in their native countrie: for as much as the Alpes were the frontier limits standing in the mids to confine between them, and therfore those mountains neither ought nor might be passed of one side or the other: and to make account of this, that they should speed no better now in transgressing their bounds, than at what time as they first made a way and passage over them into Italie. The Embassadours emploied about this businesse, were L. Furius Purpurio, I. Minutius, and L. Manlius Acidinus. Thus the French, after restitution made unto them of all that was their owne by good right, and without wrong of others, departed out of Italie. Now when these Romane Legates were come, they had good words and courteous answeres from the Transalpine nations. And those amongst them that were more auncient than the rest, blamed the people of Rome for their overmuch lenitie, in that they let those persons goe, who without warrant from the whole State, durst bee so bold as to take a voyage to settle upon any landes belonging to the Signorie of Rome, and were so hardy as thereon to builde a towne. For surely they deserved not lesse than to abide greevous smart for their rash demeanure. Moreover and besides, whereas the Romans have given them their owne goods againe, they feared much that so great indulgencie of theirs, would enduce and encouraged others to enterprise the like. So they friendly entertained and as kindly accompanied the embassadors, yea and liberally presented them with rewards.
M. Claudius the Consull having thus expelled the Gaules out of his province, began to lay  the ground of the Istricke warre, and for this purpose wrate his letters unto the Senate, for a warrant and commission to passe with his legions into Istria. The Senat was therewith contented. But whereas they were in question and consultation about conducting a Colonie to inhabite Aquileia, they could not agree whom to send, whether Latines or Romane citizens. But in conclusion the LL. thought it better to plant there a Colonie of Latines. The Triumvirs for to effect this, were created P. Scipio Nasica, C. Flamininus, and L. Manlius Acidinus.
The same yeere were two Colonies of Romane citizens erected at Mutina and Parma: and two thousand persons were to either place translated out of the territorie which lately was occupied by the Boians, and before time had bene in the tenour of the Tuscans. They of Parma were endued with eight acres of land, and those of Mutina with five a peece. The Triumvir-Commissioners  who had the disposing and mannaging of this businesse, were M. Aemylius Lepidus, T. Ebutius Carus, and L. Quintius Crispinus. Likewise the colonie Saturnia consisting of Romane cittizens, was brought into the territorie of Caletra, by the conduct of Q.Fabius Labco, C. Asranius Stellio, and T. Sempronius Gracchus, deputed Triumvits therefore: who set out for

 every man ten acres of ground.
The same yeere A. Terentius the Pro-pretour, not farre from the river Iberus in the Ausetanes countrie, fought fortunatly against the Celtiberians, and forced certaine townes which they had fortified. Base Spaine beyond Iberus was quiet this yeere, because both P. Sempronius the Propretour lay sicke of a long disease, and also the Lusitanians (as good hap was) rested still and quiet, as being by no man provoked to stirre. Neither was there any memorable exploit atchieved in Liguria by Q.Fabius the Consull. M. Marcellus was called home out of Istria: and after he had discharged his armie, returned to Rome for to hold the election of the magistrates. For Consuls he created Cn. Babius Tamphilus and L. Aemylius Paulus. This man had bene Aedile Curule together with M. Aemylius Lepidus, who was Consull five yeeres before; and yet the same Lepidus  suffered the repulse twise ere he was created Consull. Then were Pretours chosen, to wit, Q.Fulvius Flaccus, M. Valerius Laevinus, L. Manlius the second time, M. Ogulnius Gallus, L. Cacilius Denter, and C. Terentius Istra. In the very end of the yeere there was a solemne supplication holden by occasion of certain prodigies: for men beleeved verily that in the court-yard of the goddesse Concordia it rained bloud for the space of two daies: and reported it was not far from Sicilie, that a new Iland was discovered out of the sea, where never any was before seene. Valerius Antias writeth, that Anniball died this yeere: and that to compasse and worke his death, there were sent in embassage to Prusias, L. Scipio Asiatticus, and P. Scipio Nasica, besides T. Quintius Flamininus, who in that action is named most.


 THE XL. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the fortieth Booke.
WHen Philip had given commandement to make streight search for the children of those whom he kept in prison (and personages they were of most noble birth) for to put them to death: The oxena feaving the king his malicious intent and wicked lust, in the behalfe as well of her owne children, as of her sisters, litle ones (God wot) and very young infants, brought foorth and offered unto the said children naked keene swords, and a cup of deadly poyson, persuading with them to avoid the imminent shame and dishonour, by present death: which after shee had obtained and seene effected,  fore likewise plaied her owne part, and flew her owne selfe. Moreover, in this booke are related the debate and variance betweene Perseus und Demetrius, the two sounes of Philip king of Macedonie: and how Demetrius came to his death by poison, through the mischievous practise of his brother Perseus: who devised false crimes and raised slanders against him: and principally among the rest, charged him that he intented to kill his owne father, and meant to usurpe the kingdome, and last of all, because he was a friend to the people of Rome: by which meanes after the death of Philip, Persous obtained the crowne. Also it containeth the happie exploits atchieved by many and divers commaunders in Liguria, and in Spaine against the Celtiberians. The bookes of Numa Pompilius were by certaine husbandmen as they laboured in the ground of L. Petilius a Notarie, under the Ianiculum, found enclosed within a coffer of stone, and written both in Latine and Greeke. And when the Pretour of the cittie, to whome the bookes were brought, had perused them and sound therein many points tending to overthrow religion and the divine service of the gods, he sware before the Senate, that it was  daungerous for the State and common-wealth, that they should be red and preserved: in such sort, that by an Act of the State, they were burned within the Comitium or Hall of publick assemblies. The Colom
e Aquileia was now erected. Philip exceedingly displeased with himselfe, and pricked with remorse of conscience, for that he had caused his sonne Demetrius to be poisoned, upon the false suggestions and accusations of his other sonne framed against him, devised to punish Perseus, and rather to conserve the kingdome upon Antigonus his friend than that his sonne should succed him: but in this designement and purpose of his he suddainly died: and so Perseus tooke the crowne and kingdome upon him.

IN the beginning of the yeere next ensuing, the Consuls and Pretours cast  lots for their severall governments. As for the Consuls, there was no other province to employ them in, but Liguria. The civile jurisdiction among citizens fell to M. Ogalnius Gallus; and the forrein over strangers to M. Valerius. High Spaine was assigned unto Q.Fulvius Flaceus; and the nether-land thereof to P. Manlius. L. Cecilius Denter had the governance of Sicilie, and C. Terentius Istra of Sardinia. The Consuls were enjoyned to take musters: for Q.Fabius had written out of Liguria, that the Appuans inclined to rebellion, and greatly to be feared it was, that they would breake out and make rodes into the territorie of Pisa. And well they knew alreadie, that of the two provinces of Spain, the higher parts  were in armes, and the war with the Celtiberians was still in traine: and as for the lower, the militarie discipline there, was cleane corrupt and gone, by reason of riotous pleasures and idlenes, where unto the souldiours were wholly given, by occasion that the Pretour lay so long sicke. For these causes thought good it was, that new armies should be levied and enrolled; to wit, four legions for Liguria, and every one of them to containe 5200 foote and 300 horse: unto which, there was an addition of fifteene thousand footmen and nine hundred men of armes from our of the Latine allies. And these two armies were to serve the Consuls. But over and besides, they were commaunded to enroll seven thousand foot and sixe hundred horsemen of Latine allies, and them to send into Fraunce to M. Marcellus, who was to continue still in place of commaund, after the tearme of his Consulship expired. Likewise they had in charge to levie of Romane citizens 4000 footmen and 200 horse, and of allies 7000 of the one, and 300 of the other to be  conducted into both provinces of Spain. And Q.Fabius Labeo had his commission of government renewed
for one yeere longer, with the charge of that armie which he had in Liguria.
The spring season that yeere was very stormie and tempestuous. On the19 of Apri^: (...) even of the feast Palilia about noontide, sodainly there arose a mightie blustring wind, which overthrew many edisices as well sacred as prosane. It cast downe the brasen statues and images in the Capitoll: it caught up the wicket of the dore belonging to the temple of theL^^^a. Moone, (which is in the Aventine) caried it away and set it fast to the backe wall of the temple of Ceres. It overturned and laid along other statues in the great cirque of shew-place called Circus maximus, togither with the pillars upon which they stood. The lanternes and pinnacles it rent and tare after a strange  sort, from the rouse and top of certain churches, and carried them clean away. And therfore this tempest was held for a prodigious token, and the Aruspices gave order for the expiation and satisfaction thereof. Likewise the same provision was made in regard of a report from Reate, that a mule was soled with three feet: and from Formiae, that the chappell of Apollo (and namely at Cajera) was stricken with lightning. For these prodigies, there were twentie greater beasts killed for sacrifice; and a supplication holden one whole day. And about the same time, intelligence was given by letters from A. Terentius the Pretour, that P. Sempronius having continued above a yeere sicke, was departed this life, in the farther province of Spaine; which was the cause that the Pretours were willed to make more hast, and so much the sooner to passe into Spaine.
After this, the embassages from beyond the sea had audience given them in the Senat. The  first was that, of the two KK. Eumenes and Pharnaces, and also of the Rhodians; who complained for the great losse and overthrow by the Sinopians received. And about the same instant arrived also embassadors from Philip, from the Achaeans and Lacedaemonians, who had their answer and dispatch, after a speech made by Martius, who had been sent to visite the estate and affaires of Greece and Macedonie. But as touching the foresaid kings of Asia, and the Rhodians, this stood for their answer; namely, That the Senat would sent their embassadors and commissioners to take knowledge and see to all things there in place. But as concerning Philip, Martius had so told his tale, that he put the LL. of the Senate in more feare and perplexitie: for in his declaration he confessed, that Philip indeed had accomplished the will and pleasure of the Senate, but in such sort, as it was evident to be seene, that he would doe so no longer than hee  were held thereto and compelled of necessitie; for apparant it was, that he minded to make war againe, considering that whatsoever he either did or said, tended to no other end. For first and formost hee caused all the multitude to be remooved and translated (with their whole families) out of the cities by the sea-coast, into that quarter which now is calledPeus^^dia. Emathia, and in

 times past was named Paeonia; and gave those cities aforesaid to the Thracians and other barbarous nations to inhabit; supposing that this kind of people would be more fast and faithfull unto him in his wars against the Rom. And verily this deed of his bred a great discontentment and murmuring throughout all Macedonia: insomuch, as few there were of them, who thus left their native habitations togither with their wives and children, that could bite in and contain their secret griefe and heart-burning, and say nothing: but being pricked and nestled more to anger than curbed and bridled with feare, they brake out, and were heard to curse and cry out upon the king, as they went along the way in troupes and companies. Hereupon his fell stomacke by nature was so galled, that he had all men in jealousie, and no time nor place there was, but hee suspected. In the end, he began to give it out openly, that he could not make account to be in safetie  and securitie, unlesse he apprehended andkept in prison the children of those persons whom he had before time killed, for to dispatch and make away them also (in time) one after another. This crueltie in it selfe hainous enough and enormious, the calamitie and wofull miserie of one house made more odious and detestable. Murdered hee had many yeeres before Herodicus, a noble man and a prince of the Thessalians: and some time after, he flew also his sonnes in law, who had married his daughters. These gentlewomen being left widowes, had each of then by their husbands a little sonne: and the names of these women were Theoxena and Archo. As for Theoxena she would in no wise marrie againe, albeit shee had many suiters that woed her: but Archo was wedded to one Poris, the verie principall and noblest personage of the Aenean nation: and when she had borne him many children, she dyed, and lest them all very young. Then afterwards Theoxena likewise was married to the foresaid Pori
s, to the end, that she might have the bringing up of those her sisters children with her owne hands: and in truth shee was not more kind to her owne prettie sonne than to those her sisters children; but so tenderly regarded them all alike, as if shee had borne them of her owne bodie. Now when shee heard once of the kings edict and proclamation which was gone forth, for the apprehension of all those infants whose fathers before had ben put to death; supposing that these children should be exposed not only to the abuse and scornefull mockerie of the king, but also to the lust and vilanie of his guard, the conceived in her mind an horrible designment: yea and she stuck not to say, That with her owne hand shee would rid them of their lives, rather than they should come within the clutches of Philip. But Poris her husband (who abhorred the very naming of so abominable a fact) said,  that he would conveigh them out of the way as farre as Athens, to certein trustie friends of his there, and would himselfe in proper person accompanie themall the way thither, and take part with them of that exile and banishment. So they put themselves in their journey all togither [he and his wife and children] from Thessalonica toward Aenea, unto a solemne sacrifice and feast which yeerly they use to celebrate with much ceremonious pompe, in the honor of Aeneas their first founder. Now when they had spent that day in feasting full solemnly, about the third watch of the night (when all others were sound asleepe) they were embarked in a ship prepared aforehand by Poris; making semblance, as if they would returne to Thessalonica; but indeed purposing to cut over to Euboea. But when they had laboured and wrought to no purpose upon the wind, which was full against them, they were overtaken and prevented by the day-light before  they were farre from the land, and past sight. And beeing discovered by the kings officers who had the charge and keeping of the haven,
there was a pinnace of foist (well appointed with armed men) set out to fetch in that vessell, with expresse commaundement (as they would answer to the contratie at their utter perill) not to come againe without it. Now as they approached neere, Poris verily for his part was verie earnest with the towers, mariners, and failers, to plietheir businesse and make way from them; otherwhiles stretching out his hands up to heaven, calling and praying unto the gods to helpe them in this their hard distresse. But the courageous ladie his wise, all the while (turning againe to execute that designment of hers long before purposed) tempered and mixed a potion of poison, and brought forth certain swords withall. Now when she had set the poisoned cup before the children in their very eye, and drawen the swords  naked: Death (q d.she) is the only means we haue to save our libertie; lo here the waies that lead to death: now as every ones heart standeth to his or that, take thereto, and avoid the crueltie and pride of the king. Come on lads and jolly striplings, lead you the way first thatare the bigger and elder; take sword in hand, fall thereupon and worke the feat at once: or if yee list rather to belong a dying, drinke here of this cup. What should they doe? the enemies were fast upon

them readie to bourd their vessell, their mother on the other side, encouraging them instantly  to take their death. In such wise, that to conclude, some dying the one way and some the other, were all cast headlong over shipbourd, when they were but halfe dead. Then shee for her part embracing her husband about the middle (because she would die with him for company) threw herselfe and him both togither into the sea. Thus the kings men seized upon the ship, when the masters thereof were gone.
The horrible example of this fact kindled more coales, and set the malice and hatred kindled against the king as it were on a light and flaming fire anew, insomuch as now commonly in al places they fell to open cursing of him and his children. Which maledictions and execrations, it was not long but all the gods listened and gave eare unto, and caused that he likewise exercised crueltie even upon his owne flesh and bloud. For Perseus seeing his brother Demetrius to arise every  day more than other in favour, greatnesse, and reputation with the whole Macedonian people, and to grow also in credite and grace among the Romanes, supposing with himselfe how hee had no other hope left him of attaining to the crowne, but by the meanes of some wicked practise, bent all his thoughts and studies that way, and aimed onely at that marke. But beleeving verily that he was not strong ynough and sufficient alone, to execute and bring forth so much only, as within that unmanly and womanish mind of his he had devised and conceived, he practised with his fathers friends, and eftsoones sounded their hearts one by one apart, casting out ambiguous and doubtfull speeches. And at the first verily some of them shewed countenance, as if they could not abide to heare of any such thing, because they reposed more hope in Demetrius. But afterwards, as the hatred of Philip grew daily greater against the Romans, which Perseus still fostered  and maintained, whereas Demetrius with all his might laboured against it; they foreseeing in their mind the unhappie end of Demetrius, who lay too open and was not heedfull ynough to guard himselfe against the fraudulent and mischeevous plots of his brother, sided with Perseus; making this account in policie, to set that agoing and helpe it forward, which in the end would take effect, and namely to entertain and advance the hope of the mightier. For the execution of the rest they reserved every thing to a meet
and convenient time therfore. As for the present, the best course they thought upon was this, to incense the king all that ever possibly they could against the Romanes, to induce and put him forward still to thinke of nothing but warre, whereto of his owne accord his mind stood well ynough and was enclined. And withall (to the end that Demetrius might be from day to day more and more suspected) they entred of purpose (as before  they were agreed) into speech, as touching the hope and great port of the Romanes: where at when some of them would seeme againe in scornefull wise to elevate and debase their manners and fashions, others to deprave their deeds and acts, some scoffing in generall at the very forme and making of their cittie, how it was not yet embelished and beautified either with stately edifices in publicke places, or with faire houses of private men; others mocking and having in derision the principall and cheefe personages of the citie in particular; the inconsiderat yong gentleman, carried away as well with an affectionate love to the Romanes, as with a desire to crosse his brother, would answere to all those points in the defence and maintenance of the Romanes: by which meanes hee brought himselfe both into more jelousie with his father, and also to be subject and exposed to slanderous imputations. Whereupon his father acquainted him no  more with any counsell as touching the Roman affairs, but wholly relied upon Perseus, and with him conferred therabout, imparting unto him both day and night al his projects and designs whatsoever. By this time were they returned, whom he chaunced to send to the Basternes for to levie succours and aid-souldiours, and brought they had with them from thence certaine noble yong gentlemen, and some among of roiall bloud. One of them promised to give his sister in marriage to one of Philips sonnes, insomuch as the association by way of affinitie with that nation, set the kings heart also
alost. But Perseus brake out into these words: What serves all this for (qd. he) since we have not so much help and safetie by aids from abroad, as harme and daunger by a mischeefe and maladie at home. We keep here and foster in our bosome, I dare not say a traitor, but I assure you a very dangerous spie and no better; whose bodie verily the Romans have sent us again, but his heart and soule they are possessed of, ever since he was an hostage at Rome. All the Macedonians in a maner have their eies upon him set, him they court, and give out in plain terms, that they will no other king than whom the Romans shall set up. Old Philip was of himselfe badly ynough affected in his mind, but upon these suggestions buzzed into his head, hee was the worse, and more

 disquieted and set out of frame: hee entertained these surmises, and set them neerer to his heart than hee made faire in outward shew and countenance. Now it fortuned that the time was come of the ordinarie review of his armie, the solemnitie whereof was usually performed in this manner. They cut a dog overthwart the middest in two halfes, the head and foreparts together with the entrals were set on th^ ^^^ht hand of the high way; the hindparts on the left. Betweene this sacrifice thus divided, the companies in their armour passed in a shew. Before the front of the vauntguard were carried the coats of armes and roiall ensignes of all the Macedonian kings that ever had been from the beginning. Then followed the king himselfe in person with his children. Next marched the kings guard and cohort, with the squires of his bodie. And last of all, in the reregard behind came the rest of the multitude and commons of the Macedonians. of either  side of the king went his sons, two lustiegentlemen. Perseus was about thirtie yeeres old, and Demetrius five yeeres yonger; the one in the mids and best of his age and strength, and the other in the very prime and flour therof. An happie father had he ben for so fair issue, seeing this proofe, this maturitie and perfection of theirs, if the grace of God had gone withal, and that they had ben well disposed and affected in mind. The maner and custome of this review and solemn sight was (after the sacrifice duly accomplished) for the whole armie to joust and tourney in this wise, that being divided into two battailons, they should one charge the other, and represent the shew of a very conflict and set field. And who should be the cheefe leaders and captaines in this brave pastime, but the kings two sonnes? But beleeve me they jested never a whit, nor made a vaine shew for disport, but went to it roundly in good earnest, as if they would determine now who should bee king another  day? Foule worke the
y made with their wodden wasters and headlesse pikes; many were wounded, and nothing wanted there but sharpe yron, of a very bloudie battell indeed. That regiment which Demetrius commaunded, had the upper hand by ods. Perseus shewed himselfe highly displeased and angrie thereat; but contrariwise his friends and favourites of the wiser sort, rejoiced at it, and made remonstrance, That this was the onely thing to minister just occasion unto him for to challenge and accuse his younger brother. Now the same day, the one as well as the other feasted their companions, who had thus performed the jousts and tournaments of either side with them. Perseus was invited by his brother to supper, but he refused and denied to come. Howbeit such was the good fellowship amongst them, and so merrie were the young gallants and lustie Cavaliers, that they passed the feastivall day in all joy and mirth, either part with their captaine,  and plied the wine full liberally. Then in their cups they fell to discoursing freely of their running and pastime, and began to cast out merrie conceits and broad jests at their adversaries of the contrarie side, insomuch as they forbare not to glaunce at the very cheefetaines themselves. Now had Perseus sent a privie spie, one of his guests, to listen what good talke there was at his brothers bourd, but he demeaning himselfe and walking not so circumspectly as he should, was encountred by certaine youths, that chaunced to come forth of the hall or parlor where they sate at supper, and was evill entreated and well beaten for his labour. Demetrius nothing ware thereof, among other table talke, Why goe we not (quoth he) and banket with my brother? and if there remaine any anger and displeasure behind after our jousting in jest, appease and mitigate the same in simplicitie of hart and mirth making? Mary, no better, cried they all againe with  one voice, save onely those that feared to be met withall presently, and se
rved alike for misusing and knocking the foresaid spie. Demetrius would needs draw even them also with him; wherupon they carried weapons hidden under their apparell, for feare of the worst, that they might ^efend themselves, if any violence were offred. But what can be caried so secret, but out it wil, where ther is intestine discord in one familie? All was full of spies and false knaves, as well in the one house as the other. For there ran a pick thanke and tale carier before unto Persius, and declared unto him that there were comming with Demetrius foure young men with privie skeines by their sides. And albeit hee wist well ynough what was the cause thereof (for hee had heard that one of his guests was by them beaten) yet to aggravate the matter and make it more odious, he commanded the dore to be fast locked, and from the upper roumes and losts of the house and out of the  windowes to the street side, he kept off and repelled those (that came to banket and bee merrie with him) from approching the dore, as if their comming were for no other purpose but to murder him. Demetrius after hee had for a time cried out in the street and taken on for this disgrace and indignitie, saying it was long of the wine and nothing els that hee was thus excluded, returned againe to his own house to make an end of the banket there: and all this while knew nothing

what the matter was. The morrow after, Perseus, so soone as ever he thought hee might  have accesse to the speech of his father, came to the court; and in the sight of the king, stood afar off with a troubled countenance and heavie cheere, and not a word with him. How now (quoth his father) what is amisse with you? is not all well? Ah, my good lord and father (quoth hee) I would you knew, that it is the faire gift and grace of God that I am livesman at this houre. That brother of mine, goeth not about us any more by way of secret practises and hidden ambushes: for the night that was, he came with armed men to set upon me in mine owne house, and to take away my life. I was driven (father) to shut the doores against him, and to save my selfe from his furious rage, within the defence of the wals thereof. When hee had thus possessed his father with feare and astonishment together; Nay (quoth he) I will prove all plainly before your face, that you shall know it is a trueth that I say, if your grace can be content to give mee audience. Audience? (quoth he) yes marie will I, and that with patience: and immediatly he commanded Demetrius to be called before him. And withall, he sent for two of his old friends to assist him, and to take their advise, to wit, Lysimachus and Onomastus, who wist nothing of the quarrell and variance betweene the two brethren, for that they had beene straungers a long time at the court. In the meane while, he walked up and downe alone, attending their comming, coursing and discoursing many matters in his head, and his son Perseus stood still aloufe. After word was brought that the parties were come, he retired aside with those two friends, and as many of his guard, into an inner roume, and permitted his sonnes to bring with them into the place, three friends a peece unarmed. And when he was set, thus began he to speake.
Here sit I a most wretched father,The speech of Philip to his two sonnes. to be a judge betweene my two sonnes, the one plaintife, the other defendant in the case of parricide; and to find among those of mine owne house and bloud, the foule staine of that fellonious crime, either falsely forged, or in deed committed. Certes, long ago I feared such a storme and tempest toward, and I saw it rising afar off, when I perceived your unbrotherly lookes one toward another,Vulta saepe (...). when I over-heard some unhappie words to passe betweene you. Yet other whiles I was in good hope, that the heat of your anger might evaporate and flake, and the suspicions and jealousies be cleered and passe away considering that even professed and mortall enemies, have laid downe armes, concluded peace, and become friends at last: yea and great quarrels and enmities betweene private persons have had their end. I hoped that one time or other, ye would remember how yee were naturall brethren, that yee would call to mind, how yee were little children together, and had conversed with all  simplicitie and singlenesse of heart familiarlie in your infancie: and finally, that yee would thinke upon my good lessons and precepts unto you, which now I feare me much, that I have sounded to your deafe eares in vaine. How often haue I blamed and detested in your presence and hearing, the examples of brethren at discord and variance, recounting unto you the stories of the fearfull sequel and horrible issue therof? namely, how they have thereby undone themselves and their race, overthrowne their owne houses, yea and utterly subverted whole kingdomes? On the other side, I laid before you better patternes and precedents to follow, and namely of the concord, agreement, and unitie betweene the Lacedaemonian KK. that raigned two by two together, to their owne good and the publicke weale of their countrie for many hundred yeeres: but the same cittie
fell soone to decay and ruine, when the fashion once was taken up, to usurpe the tyrannie and soveraigne rule every man for himselfe alone. Moreover, I set before your ^^^s these two brethren hereby, Eumenes and Attalus, who at the first began with so little, that they were in manner abashed and ashamed to take upon them the title and style of kings: and at this day are equall in graundeur of dominion to my selfe, to Antiochus, and to any kings of this age living: and that by no other means in the world, more than by brotherly love and mutuall concord. Nay, I staid not so, but discoursed unto you and recited sundrie examples of certaine Romans, which either I had learned by heare-say, or observed by mine own eie-sight and experience: and namely, the two Quinty, T. and L. who warred both against me. The Scipioes likewise, P. and L. who vanquished and subdued Antiochus: their fathers also and uncles, who were brethren, and whose concord and unitie all their life long was such, as it was not disjoyned  in their verie death. But neither the wickednesse of those first recited, and a semblable end correspondent to their ungracious life, was able to skare you from outragious discord; nor yet the good hart and meaning of the later sort, togither with their happie fortune, draw and induce you to be wise. During my natural life, whiles my breath is within my bodie, both twaine of you, seduced

 by foolish hope and disordinate desire, are readie to take possession of my kingdome over my head. And so long onely would yee have mee to live, untill that I surviving the one of you, might presently by my death put all out of question, and make the other (as sole heire apparant) undoubted king. Sicke yee are I see well of father and brother, yee can abide neither the one nor the other. Ther is no goodnes in you at all: nothing is there that ye hold deere, nothing that you count holy and inviolable: but in lieu and steed of all, there is crept and entred into you an unsatiable desire to raigne, and that hath wholly possessed your hearts. Come on therfore now, greeve and wound your fathers eares with your ungracious tales and wicked words; debate and dispute the matter with reciprocall accusations, you that shortly will decide and determine it by dent of sword: say on and spare not; speake out all, that either you can alleage truly,  or list to devise and invent falsly. Mine eares are now wide open, but shall hereafter for ever be close shut, against al secret slanders that ye shal whisper and report one against the other. When he had breathed out these words with great indignation, the assistants there, began al to weepe a good and shed teares, and for a good time there was sad cheere and not a word; untill at length Perseus began and said:The accusaterie Oration of Perseus against his brother Demetrius. I should be like have opened the dore in the night that I should, and received into my house armed guests to banquet with me, yea and held out my throat unto them for to be cut: since that nothing is beleeved, unlesse the deed had beene done and dispatched: since that the same is said unto me (who have bene forlaid, and whose life hath bene sought) which were more beseeming to speake unto a wood-kerne and robber by the high-way side: It is not for nought I see well, that these heere, give out abroad an
d say, That you have no  more sonnes but Demetrius, and call me a bastard, and a supposed sonne of yours, as begotten of a concubine. For if you held and avowed me legitimate, if you vouchsafed me the place, the degree and love of a sonne, you would never fare and storme against me so as you doe, for discovering the ambush set for me, and complaining thereof; but against him rather that laid in wait to surprise me: neither would you set so light and make so small account of my life, as to be mooved neither for the danger past wherein I was, nor at the perill to come, if such wait-laiers may escape unpunished. Now, if there be no remedie, but that we must die and say nothing, let us hold our tongue and be mute: let us onely pray to the gods before, that this intended mischiefe begun in me, may also take an end in me alone, and that you be not he, who is to be wounded and pierced through my bodie. But in case (like as by the verie instinct and suggestion of nature, they  that are assailed and set upon in a desart wildernesse, be taught to implore and call for mens helpe and succour, although they neither saw nor knew of any before) in case (I say) it bee lawfull for me likewise to open my mouth and speake, when I see the naked sword drawne upon me: then I beseech you for your owne loue, even for the love of your good selfe, and the name of a father (which whether of us twain have more esteemed and regarded, you have full well known long agoe) to give me audience, and to hear me, as if you had bene awakened at my crie and pittifull lamentation in the last nights roiot, and came in the way where I was forced to call, Help, Help: and as if you had taken Demetrius in the manner, within my gate, in the verie entrie of my dore, accompanied with armed men, at an undecent and undue houre of this night past. Those plaints and mones which then I would have uttered by way of disordered and confused cries, in that  suddaine affright of mine
upon the deed dooing; the same I now make the morrow after. Ah brother, wee have lived now a good while, not (ywis) as breethren that should banket and make merry one with another. It is the crowne that you looke after, that is certain and past peradventure: but your hope to attain unto it, is crossed divers waies. My birthright and mine eldership is a blocke in your way, between you and it; the law of nations is against it; the auncient custome of the Macedonians checketh it; and finally, the will, pleasure, and judgement of our father is opposite unto it. Mount you cannot possibly so high, but by the effusion of my heart bloud. You goe to worke, you assay all meanes, you leave no stone unrolled, and nothing unattempted to effect that: but to this day, either mine own warie diligence or happy fortune hath guarded me, and withstood your wicked parricide. Even yesterday, during the time of the solemne revieu and  purging of the army, during the time of running at tilt and jousting, in time of the shew and pastime resembling a skirmish, you missed very little of making a bloudie battaile of it and a deadly conflict indeed; and nothing else saved me from death, but this, that I suffered my selfe and my men to goe by the worse and be overcome. From this martiall combat, as if it had been no more but a game and sport among brethren, you would needs have trained and drawen me to a supper.

Why? thinke you father, that I should have supped among those guests unarmed, who came  in armes to banket with me? Doe you beleeve, that I should have beene in no daunger of their naked swords of steele at night; who in the day time and within your sight, laid on such lode with (...) wooden swords and bastons, that they had like to have killed me? To what end else came you, brother, at that time of the night? why came you as an enemie, considering I was in choller and my blood was up? or, wherefore came you accompanied with tall fellowes, privily armed and with short swords under their garments? I durst not venture to sit at supper with you: should I have received you then, comming as you did with armed men to banquet with me? Father, if the dore had been opened; whereas you heare me now to make my complaints, you should have ben by this time busied about my winding-sheet, herse, and funerals. I lay not forth and urge matters in slaunderous manner, after the fashion of these accusers at the barre; neither collect I bare  conjecturall presumptions to enforce and conclude any doubtfull points: for what need I so to do? Denyeth he that he approched my dore with a troupe of men? or that he had in his traine a companie, such as ware weapons covertly under their apparell? Do but send for them whom I shall name. But in faith, what will not they dare to doe, that can doe this? and yet I trow, they will never be so hardie and shamelesse as to denie it. If I had taken them in the manner with their weapons about them within mine entrie, and so brought them before you, then you would say, it were a plaine case and out of all doubt. If then, they confesse as much with their mouth, hold them as culpable as if they had been surprised in the act doing. Now curse (and spare not) the greedie appetite and thirst after a kingdome; now fall to raise and call up the furies out of hell to set brethren togither by the eares: but, good father, let not your cur
ses and execrations thus flie  at blind randon: make some distinction yet and difference, between him that lyeth in a wait, and the partie who is forelaid. Let him be holden guiltie that sought to kill his brother, let him feele withall the gods of his father to be his enemies and angrie against him. But as for him who was in daunger to loose his life through his brothers mischievous practise, let him have his refuge and recourse to the mercie and justice of his father. For alas, whether els should I flie for succour? seeing that neither the solemne revieu and purging of your armie, nor the running and jousting of the men at armes, neither mine owne house nor my table, ne yet the very night season (which nature hath given to mankind for covert and repose) affourdeth me safetie and securitie? If I goe to my brother (being bidden to supper) die I shall: if I receive my brother within my dores (comming to banquer) die I must. So that whether I go or stay, all is one; I cannot avoid  but fall into traines and ambushes, laid for to take away my life. To what place shall I retire and betake my selfe? None have I regarded, nothing have I relied upon, but the gods and your good selfe, father. As for the Romans, I stand in no such tearms with them of grace and favour, as to trust upon their succour: nay they all wish me hanged, because I take the wrongs done unto you by them, to the heart; because I shew my selfe discontented and touched with the indignitie, that so many cities, so many nations are plucked from you; and namely, that of late they have despoiled and bereaved you of all the maritime parts and sea coasts of Thrace: and so long as either you or I live, they never looke to enjoy Macedonie. But if by the mischievous practise of my brother, I might once be rid out of the way; and withall, if old age had made an end of you, yea and peradventure before that day came, (which they would never stay so long for) then  they know w
ell and make full account, that both the king and kingdome of Macedonie, will be theirs sure enough. Indeed if the Romanes had spared any piece at all without Macedonie, I should have thought and made reckoning, that it had been a place of retreat and refuge left for me. But what need that, so long as I have strength enough among the very Macedonians. You saw your selfe yesterday how violently the souldiours charged upon me: what wanted they but the sharpe sword and edged weapons? well, that which they failed and missed of in the day time, my brothers banquetters met with in the night. For what should I speake of the greater part of the nobilitie? they have grounded and built all their hopes of dignitie, promotion, and advancement, in the Romanes, and namely in him who now can doe all in all with them, and is of greatest reputation. And certes, to speake a truth, him they preferre not onely before me his  elder brother, but also they go within a very little to set him before your selfe, his liege king and naturall father. For this is he, for whose love and in favour of whome, the Senate hath remitted and pardoned you that penaltie which you had incurred. This is hee, who now protecteth you from the force of Romane armies: who deemeth it meet and reason that your old age should be

 obliged and beholden to his youth. For him stand all the Romanes: with him take part all those cities which are delivered and free from your subjection: of him hold the Macedonians that wish peace with the Romans, and take contentment therein. Now for me, father, what hope or helpe can I have elsewhere, but in you alone? Whereto thinke you tend those letters of Quintius sent lately unto you; wherein hee writeth, That you did passing well for your owne estate, in sending Demetrius to Rome: and exhorteth you withall, to send him againe the second time, accompanied with more embassadours, and those the very principall and best of all the Macedonians? This T. Quintius (if you will needs know the reason) is the man, who leadeth, induceth, and directeth him at this present, in all things: he is his counsellour and schoole-master. And Demetrius hath rejected and cast you off his owne father, and hath put him in your stead. There  it is, where all these privie plots have heretofore been first contrived and set a hatching: and at this present in willing you to send more in embassage, and those the chiefe personages of the Macedonians with him, he seeketh nought els but helpers and assistants to put those designs in execution. As many as go from hence to Rome, be they never so sound and uncorrupt at their setting out, be they loiall subjects and acknowledging no other but Philip for their king, returne from thence tainted and infected with the alluring enticements of the Romanes. Demetrius alone is altogether in their bookes. They are all for him, and passe for none els. Him they call their king, during the life of his owne father. Now, if I seeme to bee touched, offended, and greeved herewith, by and by I am sure to have it charged reprochfully on both sides of mine eares, not onely from others, but also from your mouth father, that I aspire and seeke to be king. For mine own  part, I would both they and you knew, that if t
he diademe and crowne were here set betweene us both, I would none of it. For who is he, that I should need to undermine and supplant, for to step into his place and succeed? None there is at all but my father before me, and long may he so be, I pray God, and I wish to survive him no otherwise, but if I be worthie and deserve that he should likewise desire the same. If my father will make me his heire and inheritour of the kingdom, I will accept thereof. Hee indeed coveteth to be a king, yea, and ungraciously covereth it, who hasteneth to make pace forward, and to step before the course of nature, the order of age, the custome of the Macedonians, and the law of nations. But what imagineth Demetrius, suppose ye? Mine elder brother (thinketh he) stands in my way between me and home; to him appertaineth the kingdome by right and by my fathers will: Let us rid him out of the world. What? I am not the first  that sought to be a king by murder of a brother. As for my father, he is aged, he is desolate, and bereaved of a sonne; hee will have more care to looke to his owne person, than mind to revenge the death of his sonne. The Romanes, they will rejoice, they will approve and mainteine my fact. These be nice points, and these bee ticklish and doubtfull hopes, but beleeve me father, they are not altogether vaine and frivolous. For thus stands the case, and this is the sum of all: Well may you preserve me out of danger, now whiles I am alive, by inflicting punishment upon those who take weapon in hand to kill me; but let their enterprise speed once, and take effect, you shall never be able to pursue them to the purpose and revenge my death.
When Perseus had made an end of his speech, they that were present in place cast their eies wistly upon Demetrius, as if he would have made answere immediatly, and so were all silent a  long time, and said not a word; for they perceived evidently that hee could not for weeping open his mouth: but in the end hee was urged by them to speake, and then after that necessitie had surmounted his greefe,The oration of Demetrius in his owne defense, before his father. thus hee began, My father, all those meanes of helpe which were ever wont to serve the defendant in good steed, I am prevented and disappointed of, by the plaintife my accuser. By those false and fained teares of his, wrung out and shed to worke the ruine and undoing of another, he hath made my true tears suspected, which gushing out of mine eies, proceed from a melting and wounded heart within. And whereas himselfe hath not ceased, (ever since that I returned from Rome) to practise se
cretly with his consorts and complices both night and day to lay wait for my life, now he begins first with me, and will needs put upon me the visor, and have the world beleeve that I play the part not onely of a secret and cunning  wait-laier, but of an open theese and a notorious murderer and cut-throte. Hee seemeth to fright you with his owne daunger, that he might make even you the very meanes and instrument to hasten forward the death of his innocent brother. He saith that he hath no place of refuge in the whole world: to the end that I might have no par^^ll at all of hope left, so much as in you. Thus circumvented as I am, left alone, forlorn, destitute and void of all succour, he chargeth me

with being in favour and grace with forraine strangers; a thing ywis, that doth mee more harme  than good. Moreover, see how he proceedeth like a practised and cunning barrister, in that hee inserteth and mingleth the last nights worke together with the blame of my former life; to the end that he might make more supitious by the course of mine other yeeres passed, this criminous matter also (the simple truth whereof you shall know anone) and withall confirme and mainteine this vain surmise and slander, of my hopes, my will, and entended designs, by this subtile invention of his, by the sained and forged fable I say of that which was pretended the night that was. He hath not failed moreover to make you beleeve that this accusation of his was not premeditate and studied upon beforehand, but framed ex tempore, and occasioned only upon the suddaine fright and trouble overnight. But in good faith, Perseus, if I had been a traitour to the king my father and the realme, if I had complottedwith the Romanes and other of my fathers enemies, me thinkes  you should not have waited for this nights devised fable, but you ought to have accused me before this time, of treason. And if that imputation were vaine and frivolous without this surmise, and served to discover and bewray your envie and spight which you bear against me, more than it detecteth any crime which is in me; yet you should have let me alone and forborne this day, or put it off untill another time; that it might have beene cleerely seene whether of us twaine laid wait for the other, you or I, upon a straunge and extraordinarie manner of hatred. As for me (so far forth as I possible can, in this suddaine trouble of my spirits) I will endevour to speake severally of each point, which you have heaped up together so disorderly, and reveale I will the ambushes and trains of this night, yours or mine, fall out as it shall. He would have it thought that I practised to kill him, for this intent for
sooth, that when mine elder brother were once made away, unto whom  the inheritance of the crowne appertained by the law of nations, by the custome of the Macedonians, and also, as he saith, by your judgement; I the younger might step into his place, and succeed him whom I had killed. What meaneth then, and wherto serveth that other part of his Oration, wherein he saith, that I have been so respective to the Romanes, and that upon the affiance that I have in them, I hoped to be king? For if I were persuaded thus of the Romanes, that they could set up whom they pleased to be king of Macedonie, and if withall I presumed so much of their good grace and favor to me ward, what need had I then to commit a parricide? Was it because I had a mind to weare a diademe embrued with my brothers bloud by mee murdered? and was I desirous to make my selfe odious and execrable among them, with whome either for mine honestie indeed, or at leastwaies for a counterfeit shew thereof, I have woon some credit, such as it is, if haply it be anie at all? Vnlesse perhaps, you thinke that T. Quintius (by whose vertue and counsell, you reproch mee that I am ruled) advised mee to kill my brother, Quintius, I say, who is so kind unto his owne brother, and liveth with him so lovingly. This plaintife and accuser of mine, hath collected not onely the affection of the Romans which they beare unto mee, but also the opinion which the Macedonians have of mee, yea, and in manner the consent of all gods and men in my behalfe; in which regards all, hee tooke himselfe not able to match mee in this quarrell and difference about the kingdome: and yet see, how the same man laieth to my charge, that as if I were in all other respects inferiour unto him, I was saine to have recourse to this last shift of practising mischeefe and wickednesse. Will you have this to bee the case? Will you bee content to joine issue in this point? That whether of us twaine  feared the other to
bee reputed worthier of the kingdome, hee should be judged and condemned to have sought and contrived the death of his brother? But let us discusse and examine in some sort or other, the order and manner of this pretended and devised crime. Hee hath burdened me, that I have laid for him many and sundrie waies; yet hath hee knit up all these meanes and couched them together in one daies worke. I purposed to kill him (saith hee) in the open day-light, after the solemne revieu and assoiling of the armie, even when wee jousted togither, and seemed to charge one another in battell-wise: yea upon the very day (God hee knoweth) of the said solemnitie. I intended ywis (beleeve him if you will) when I invited him to supper, to make him away with a cup of poison. I would have stabbed him (what els?) or run him through with my sword, when I came to banket with him, and was accompanied with some of my  train armed and having weapons about them. You see, father, what proper and choise opportunities I had picked out to commit this pretended murder; namely, the very day of disports, the time of supper, of banket and collation. As for the day, let us examine it and the maner thereof: was it any other than that, wherein the armie was surveied and solemnely purged? when

 betweene a sacrifice cut in twaine, the royall coats of all the armes of Macedonian kings that ever had beene, were carried alost in a stately shew; and wee alone your two sonnes (father) matched on either side of you before the rest, and the whole Macedonian armie followed after. When I was thus cleansed and purified by this expiatorie sacrifice (if haply I had committed any sinne before that deserved expiation) and especially at the very same instant when I beheld before mine eyes (on either side of the way) the parcels of the beast sacrificed: entertained I then in my thoughts the practise of poison, and the handling of swords prepared aforehand against the banket, to performe a parricide? that afterwards I might with some other sacrifices expiat and cleanse my conscience thus stained and defiled with all kind of wickednesse? A like matter surely. But a spirit corrupt and blinded with the humour of slaundering  another, upon a desire to gather matter and make all suspicious, careth not to huddle one thing upon another confusedly. For if I meant to have poisoned you at supper, what was there more unfit to set forward that designement, than to provoke you to anger, by running so eagerly upon you and fighting with you so toughlie, that thereby you might take good and just occasion (as you did) to refuse being requested, for to come to supper? And when in your choller you had once denied to suppe with me, was it not the next way for me then, to endevour how to appease you, and seeke some other opportunitie and occasion, since I had prepared the poison for that present only? But I must leape straightwaies from that designment to another, even to the killing of you by the sword, and that upon the very same day, under a pretence of banquetting with you? If I thought that for feare of death you forbare my table at supper time, how comes it that  I imagined not semblably, that for the said feare you would avoid my companie at banquet aft
er supper? There is no cause why I should be ashamed and blush, Father; if upon such a festivall day as it was I dranke wine liberally, and tooke perhaps a cup too much among my companions. Nay I would it might please your majestie to enquire with what mirth, pastime, and meriment I feasted yesterday at home in my house, and this joy (undecent happily you will say and unseemely) set us the farther out, because in that skirmish and warlike pastime of lustie youths, our side went not by the worse. But this miserie and unhappie fear upon that our mirth and jolitie, hath well delaied and cooled the wine; spent it hath the strength thereof suming up into our heads: which if it had not come betweene, we as great laiers await as we were, had to this houre lien fast and sound asleep in our beds. Well, if I had minded to assaile and force your house, and that done, to  murder you the master therof, would I not think you, have for born for my part one day to bib and quaffe wine so freely? and likewise kept my soldiours from drinking drunke? But because I should not alone plead my simplicitie and make my excuse thereby, this my good brother also, who God wot is none of these naughtie and suspitious creatures, comes in with his vie and saith, I know nothing, I charge no bodie, neither wot I what to say els, but that they came armed to banquet with me. If I might be so bold as to aske how you came to that knowledge, you cannot chuse but confesse that either my house was full of your spies, or those armed men of my traine tooke their weapons so openly, that everie one saw them. And because hee would have you beleeve o father, that neither himselfe made any enquirie before, nor at this time pursueth the matter with any accusatorie spirit, he willed you to demaund of them whom he named, whether they  had not their swords about them? to the end that after you had sought into it as a matter doubtfull, and found them to confesse it, they might thereby be held c
onvicted. But why rather will you not, that examination should bee taken in this manner; whether they tooke their swords with them to kill you or no? And whether they did so by my warrant, direction, and privity? For this is it that you (brother) would make the world believe, this is it which you would have to appeare, and not that which my men confesse. But the case is plain and evident, yea, and they will bee knowne no other, than that they were armed in their owne defence. Whether it were well or ill done, they are of age to make account and render a reason of their doings. Doe not you mingle my cause with that action of theirs, which interesseth it nothing at all. But rather declare and make it plaine, whether we meant to assaile you openly or secretly? If openly, why  were we not all armed? why was there none of us besides those persons that did beat your spie? If secretly, what was the train and order of the execution of that designe? After the banket ended, and I the setter of the banket retired from thence, should those four have staid behind to fal upon you when you were asleep? How could they have caried it so close as not to be spied (strangers as they were and my men besides, and above all other most suspected) for that a litle before, they had

been seen in a braul? And say, they had killed you; by what means could they escape and save themselves? Was it possible that your house should be forced and kept with four swords? Fie, fie Perseus, speak no more for shame of this night, but come again to that rather which galleth you at the heart, which kindleth your envie, and setteth you on fire. How commeth it to passe, o Demetrius, that men speake abroad that you shall be king? why should you be deemed of some more worthie than my selfe, to succeed the roiall estate of my father? How is it that I am in doubt and feare of my hope, which, but for you, were sure and certaine? These are the secret thoughts of Perseus, although he saith nothing: these make him of a brother to become an enemie: these cause him to be mine accuser: these conceits they be that fill your pallace, your court, and your realme, with surmises, slaunders, and suspicions. But for mine owne part, father, like as I ought neither to hope for your roiall crowne, nor at any time peradventure, to make words and dispute about it; because I am the younger, and because it is your will and pleasure, that I should  give place unto mine elder brother: so, it became me not heretofore, neither doth it become me yet, to demeane and carrie my selfe so in any action, that I should seeme unworthie to have you for my father, but to bee capable of all dignities whatsoever. The one point I should attain unto by indirect courses and wicked vices, in not yeelding unto him, as right and reason would: but the other, by my good carriage and sober behaviour. You reproach me with the Romans, brother; and those things which in right ought to turne to my praise and glorie, you blame and reprove me for. It was no seeking of mine, that I was delivered to the Romanes as an hostage, or sent to Rome as embassadour: but when I was appointed by you, father, I refused not to goe. At both times, such was my dealing and demeanour, that I had an ei
e still and good regard, not to discredit either your highnesse, or your kingdome, or the Macedonian nation. And therefore you  were the cause, father, of that amitie and friendship which I have with the Romanes. As long as you and they are at peace, I shall be well affected to them: begin warre once; I that was an hostage and embassadour among them, and (though I say it) not unprofitable for you my father, even I, will become a most spitefull and mortall enemie unto them. Neither doe I at this day require, that the favour I have among the Romanes might steed mee any way; onely I beseech you, that it may not prejudice and harme me. It began not by occasion of warre, neither is it reserved for the time of warre. For assurance of peace, I was a pledge and hostage: for maintenance of peace, I was emploied in embassage. Content will I be, by the one and the other, in case I neither purchase fame nor incur blame. If I have committed any impietie against you father, if I have done or designed any wicked part against my brother, I refuse no punishment, I  crave no pardon or favor. If I be innocent, I desire only and humblie beseech your grace, that I be not overweighed with the heavie load of envie and ill will, since I can be overthrowne by no crime justly objected unto me. This is not the first day, that my brother hath accused me: but this is the first day, that he is seene to be my accuser: and full little have I deserved it at his hands. If my father had bene displeased and angrie with me, I would have thought that you of all others, being the elder brother, should have bene a mediatour and intercessor for mee (the younger) to my father, and a meanes to purchase a pardon for my follie and the error of tender youth: but see! where my succour and refuge should haue bene, there contrariwise is my ruine and overthrow. From my feasting and banquetting, from my mirth and good cheere, by his means have I bene  haled hither not halfe waked, bu
t with mine eies full of sleepe, to aunswere in the case of parricide: and forced I am to plead mine own cause without my counsell, without my proctor or advocate. If I had bene to speak in the defence of another, I would have taken time to studie, premeditate and frame an oration. And yet, what was I to hazard there, but the reputation of wit and lerning. Insteed therof I, not knowing for what cause I was sent for, heard your majesty first (wroth and angry as you were) to command us to plead our causes: and then my brother, who hath stood up to accuse me. As for him, he hath pronounced an Oration studied for, and devised long before hand: but I was allowed no longer time (than whiles I heard my selfe accused) to bethinke mee what to plead, or to examine and take knowledge of the matter that he hath laid forth against me. In that present moment of time, could I, thinke you (so sodainly taken as I was) either give eare to  my accuser, or consider and thinke duly of mine own plea? astonied so I was, with that sodain trouble and unexpected occurrent, that much ado I had, to understand what I was charged with: so far was I from devising what to speake in mine own defence, What hope should I have now? and in what case were I, if I had not my father for my judge? at whose hands (albeit I am not so well

 beloved as mine elder brother is, yet since I am the partie defendant, I ought at leastwise to find as much pittie and compassion. For I beseech you (o father) to save mee, in regard of my selfe and you: but he requireth you to take away my life, onely for his own assurance and better securitie. And what will hee do against me thinke you, after you have made over the crowne and scepter into his hands; who now alreadie thinketh it meet and reason, to dispose of my bloud at his good pleasure? In uttering of these words, the teares gushed forth so aboundantly, that they stoppped his mouth so, as uneth hee could either speake or draw his breath. Then Philip after hee had commaunded them to go apart, and communed a while with his friends, spake and said, That he wold not decide their cause upon these words of theirs, nor upon one hours debating, but by enquirie into both their lives, and observing their behaviour in deed and word, as well in  great matters as in small. Hereby they all saw well enough, that the accusation of the precedent nights act, was sufficiently refuted and evicted, and the only thing in Demetrius to be suspected, was the over-great favour that the Romanes bare toward him. This was the verie seed of the Macedonian warre, sowed as one would say, during the life of Philip, but the warre was after to bee waged most of all against Perseus.
The two Consuls tooke their journie into Liguria, the sole consular province of them both; and because they had atchieved their exploits fortunately there, ordained there was a solemne procession for one day. It fortuned that there came two thousand Ligurians or thereabout, to the utmost frontier of the province of Gaule, where Marcellus lay in leaguer, requesting to bee received under his protection. Marcellus after hee had commaunded the said Ligurians to give  attendance upon him in the same place, required by his letters the advise of the Senat. The Senate gave order to M. Ogulnius the lord chiefe justice of the cittie, to write backe againe unto Marcellus to this effect, That it was more meete that the Consuls, unto whom that government appertained, should give order and determine (as touching the Ligurians who yeelded and submitted) what was expedient for the common weale in that behalfe, than the Senate. As for them; if they were to give their opinion, they thought it not good to accept of the Ligurians surrender: and being once received, then to be disarmed: but they were of this mind and advise, that it was requisit they should be sent and referred over to the Consuls.
The Pretours at the same time arrived in their provinces, to wit P. Manlius in base Spaine, where he had bene governour before during his former Pretourship; and Q.Fulvius Flaccus in  the higher: where he received the armie of Terentius; for, that other side of Spaine beyond Iberus, had bene left without a lord Deputie, by occasion of the death of P. Sempronius the Pro. pretour. Whiles Fulvius Flaccus assaulted a towne in Spaine named Vrbicula, the Celtiberians made head and came upon him; where many and sundrie hote skirmishes passed, and wherein many Romane souldiours were both hurt and slaine. How beit Fulvius held still his resolution, and by no forcible meanes whatsoever, could be brought to levie the siege. The Celtiberians toiled out of heart with divers combats, retired and departed. The cittie then seeing their succours dislodged and gone, within few daies was forced and ransacked; and the Pretour gave the pillage thereof to his souldiours. Thus Fulvius after hee had gained this towne, and P. Manlius, when hee had retired and rallied his forces into one place, which had beene dispearsed;  without any other memorable act performed, brought their armies within the wintering harbours. And these were the exploits in Spaine, during that summer season. Terentius who was departed out of that province before, entred the cittie of Rome in a pettie triumph, by way of ovation. He carried before him in shew, eight thousand three hundred and twentie pound weight of silver, and fourescore of gold: besides two golden coronets weighing 67. pound.
The same yeare the Romanes were chosen Arbitratours betweene the people of Carthage and king Masanissa, as touching their territories: and came personally to see the place in controversie. And thus stood the case: Gala the father of this Masanissa, had woon the ground in question from the Carthaginians. Syphax afterward disseized Gala thereof: and consequently to gratifie Asdruball, his wives father, freely gave the same to the Carthaginians, and set them in  possession again. Now last of al, even this very yeer, Masanissa had dispossessed the Carthaginians of the same. This matter was debated by the parties of both sides in the presence of the Romans, with no lesse courage and servencie of spirit, than at other times when they tried the issue by dent of sword in open field. The Carthaginians laid claime and put in their plea, For that first it appertained to their ancestors in right of inheritance, and afterwards was conveighed to them by the

free gift and donation of Syphax. Masanissa counterpleaded againe and alledged, that hee had  both recovered the said territorie, as parcell of his fathers realme, and also held it by the law of nations: and that the case was cleere on his side, in regard as well of the just title as also of the present possession wherein he was; saying, that in this cause he doubted nothing else but that the modestie of the Romans should prejudice him, for feare least they might be thought to be partiall in the cause and respective to him, a king their allie and good friend, and in favour of him to give up their award against the common enemies both to him and them. The commissioners and arbitrators would not infringe and alienate the right of possession, but left all as they found it, and referred the entire decision of the matter to the Senat of Rome.
Nothing was there done after this, in Liguria: for first, the enemies were retired for safetie into their wilds and forrests out of the way; and afterwards they cassed their armie, and slipt away  everie man to their owne villages and castles. The Consuls likewise were willing to breakup and dismisse their forces; and thereupon sent to the LL. of the Senat to know their pleasure in that point: who advised the one of them to discharge his owne regiments, and repaire to Rome for the election of magistrates the next yeere: and the other, with his legions, to winter at Pisae. Armour there ran, that the Transalpine French put their youth and serviceable men in armes: but it was not knowen what quarter of Italie this multitude thus levied, would invade. But the Consuls thus agreed togither, that Cn. Baebius should be present at the generall assembly at Rome, for the election aforesaid, because M. Baebius his brother sued to be Consull. Then was the assembly holden for the creation of Consuls, and elected there were, P. Cornelius Lentulus, and M. Baebius Tamphilus. This done, the Pretours also were chosen, namely the two Quintij Fabii, the  one Maximus, and the other Buteo; T. Claudius Nero, I. Petilius Spurinus, M. Pinarius Posea, and L. Duronius. When these were entred into their magistracie, the provinces were by lot after this manner disposed. The Ligurians fell to the Consuls: as for the Pretours, Q.Petilius was lord chiefe Iustice for the citizens pleas, and Q.Fabius Maximus for the strangers: Q.Fabius Buteo had the government of Gaule, T. Claudius Nero of Sicilia, M. Pinarius of Sardinia, L. Duronius of Apulia togither with the Istrians; for that the Tarentines and Brundusines had given intelligence, that the sea-coasts were much troubled and annoied by the robberies of pirats and men of war from beyond-sea: and the like complaints were made by the Massilians, of the Ligurian navie. For these ca
uses order was given, and warrants went out for to levie armies: that the Consuls should have four legions betweene them, conteining in every one 5200 Romane footmen  and 300 horse: also to enroll 15000 footmen and eight hundred horsemen of Latine allies. In the provinces of Spaine (both the one and the other) the old Pretours continued still in their government, with the charge of those armies which they had alreadie: and for a supplement to reenforce and make up their broken companies, there were appointed three thousand foot and two hundred horse of Romane citizens, togither with sixe thousand of the one and three hundred of the other, from out of the Latine nation. All this while they forgat not their navie at sea. And the Consuls had in charge to chuse for that purpose, two wardens called Duumvirs, who after they had out of the Arsenall thou into the sea twentie ships, and set them a slote, should furnish them with mariners, and those Romane citizens, such as had been slaves and were enfranchised: and that naturall Romanes free-borne, should onely be captaines and have the conduct  of the said vessels. These two Duumvirs so parted and ordered betwixt them the defense of the maritime coasts, with ten ships apeece; that the cape of Minerva should be as it were the middle point and marke between them: so as the one should guard that part on the right hand as far as to Massilia; and the other the left side, even to Barium.
This yeere were seene at Rome and reported from forrein parts many uncouth and straunge prodigies. In the church-yards belonging to Vulcan and Concordia, it rained sheere bloud: and the bishops made relation, that the speares [of Mars] shooke and mooved of their owne accord. Also at Lanuvium the image of Iuno Sospita shed tears. Moreover, the plague reigned so hote in the countrey villages, market townes, marts and places of frequent resort, yea and within the city of Rome, that they were not able to furnish the funerals accordingly and enterre the dead. The LL. of the Senat, being in great anguish and trouble, in regard of those fearefull tokens and the losse of their people, ordained, That as well the Consull should kill greater beasts for sacrifice unto what gods they thought good, as also the Decemvirs should visit and peruse the propheticall bookes of Sibylla. And by vertue of their decree, there was a publick supplication

 proclaimed at Rome for one whole day, at all the altars and shrines of the gods and goddesses. By their counsell also and direction, both the Senate advised and the Consuls also published throughout all Italie for three daies space, solemne litanies and devout holydaies. The rage of this pestilence was so great, that whereas there passed an act by the Senate to enroll 8000 footmen and three hundred horse from out of the Latines (in regard that the Ilanders of Corsica were revolted and the Iolians up in arms within Sardinia) with which power M. Pinarius the Pretour was to saile over into Sardinia: the Consuls made report againe unto them, that such numbers of people were dead alreadie, and so many lay sicke, that it was not possible to levie that proportion of fighting men. So the Pretour had commission to furnish out that defect of souldiours, with a supply which he was to receive of Cn. Baebius the Proconsull, who then wintered at  Pisae; and from thence directly totake the seas and passe over into Sardinia.
L. Duronius the Pretour (unto whome the province of Apulia was allotted) had a commission besides to make inquisition for the Bacchanals; for there remained yet some seedes of the former enormities, which began alreadie the former yeere to sprout and bud forth. But L. Puppius the Pretour last before, had entred into the enquirie and search of the matter, rather than effected ought and brought it to a finall end: and therefore the LL. gave order to this new Pretour to cut off this mischiefe in the spring and breeding thereof, before it gat more head a second time, and upon growth spred farther. Moreover, the Consuls by the advise and authoritie of the Senat, preferred certaine lawes unto the people, as touching theLex de ambi^u. inordinate suite and ambitious seeking after offices of government. After all this, they brought into the Senate the forreine  embassages; and gave audience first to them that came from the KK. to wit, Eumenes, Ariarates the Cappadocian, and Pharnaces of Pontus. But no other dispatch and answer they had than this, That they would send certaine Delegates and commissioners, to heare, decide, and determine their controversies. After them, the Embassadors of the Lacedaemonian exiles, and of the Achaeans, were admitted into the Senat house. The banished persons aforesaid were put in some good hope, that the Senate would write their letters to the Achaeans, for their restauration. The Achaeans declared as touching the recoverie of Messene and the pacification of all troubles there, with the great contentment of the LL. of the Senate. There arrived moreover two Embassadors from Philip king of the Macedonians, namely Philocles and Apelles, about no suit that they had to the Senat, but sent rather as spies to under-prie and to learne somwhat  as touching those points that Perseus had charged Demetrius with, and namely, of certaine speeches that he should have with the Romanes, an
d especially with T. Quintius, against his brother about succession in the kingdome. These twaine were chosen by the king as indifferent persons, and nothing affectionate either to the one brother or the other: howbeit they were the ministers, consorts, and complices of Perseus, in his intended mischievous plot against his brother. Demetrius (as one ignorant of all designments against him, but onely of the late wicked pranke of Perseus which last brake out) at the first, was neither in great hope, nor yet in utter despaire, to be reconciled unto his father. But afterwards, he had lesse confidence every day than other in the good affection of his father toward him, seeing his brother continually to buz into  his eares many matters, and possesse his head with tales against him. And therefore hee looked circumspectly about him that he trode not awrie, and namely, that hee let no words fall, or did anything that might be offensive and breed more jealousie; and above all, hee wholly forbare conference and commerce with the Romans; in such sort, that he would not have them so much as to write any letters unto him: knowing full well, that his fathers heart would be exasperated against him, by such imputations and informations especially.
Philip, because he would provide that his soldiors and men of action shold not pair and wax worse through idlenes and disuse of arms, and that under one he might avert from himself al suspition that he intended any war against the Romans, appointed the cittie Stobi for the Rendez vous of his armie, and marched into the quarters of Maedica. A great desire he had, to mount up the crest and top of the hilCatena mund^, or, Monte argentato. Aemus, because there was an opinion commonly received, and which he had given  credit unto, that from thence a man might discover within one prospect, theMar. maiore. Portick and Adriatik seas, the riverDanubius, Donaw. Ister also and the Alpes: for thus he thought, that the vieu of these places would stand him in no small stead in projecting and plotting the war against the Romans. When after diligent inquirie of them that knew those quarters well, as touching the ascent of that mountaine, he had learned and fonnd it cleere and certaine, that there was no way at all for to conduct

an armie thither, and that a few men, and those deliver and lightly appointed, should find ynough  to doe and exceeding much difficultie to passe, he taketh his younger sonne apart, whom hee was resolved not to have with him in that expedition; and because he would seeme to dulce and mollifie his discontented mind with some familiar and private speech, first hee demaunded of him, considering so great difficulties of the journey presented unto them, whether hee were better to hold on the way still and follow his designe, or give over? But if I should goe forward (qd. he) I cannot forget that which befell to Antigonus in the like case, who being upon a time much tossed at sea in a boisterous tempest, and having with him in the same ship all those that were of his bloud, is reported to have given this good advertisement and lesson to his children, that they should alwaies remember, and also give their posteritie warning, never to venture al their goods in one bottome, not to engage themselves together with their whole race and off-spring in  any perill and danger. Remembring therfore (qd. he) this good precept and counsell of his, I will not hazard both my sons at once in this present jeopardie which I see before mine eies: but for as much as I propose to take mine elder son with me, I wil send my yonger backe into Macedonie, for to uphold and maintain the hope of my posterity, and for the defence of my kingdome in the mean while. Demetrius found him streight, and wist wel ynough that he was sent away for no other intent but that he should not be present in counsel, when upon the view of those places abovesaid, he was to devise and consult in what coast lay the neerest and shortest way to the Adriatick sea and to Italie, and what course they should plot for the management of the warre. But there was no remedie; he must not onely then obey his father, but also sooth him up and seeme to approove and like well of that which hee said
, for feare least it might bee thought, that it went against his  stomacke to yeeld obedience unto him, and so bee held in more jelousie and suspition than before. Howbeit, to the end that he might passe into Macedonie with safety, Didas one of the kings Deputies and L. governor under him of Paeonia, was commanded to accompanie and conduct him with a meane guard and convoy. Now was this Didas one of those conspiratours that had sworne the death of Demetrius; whom Persius had made sure to his part, like as he had many other of his fathers friends, ever since that men began to make no doubt, unto whom Philip in affection was enclined, and whom he meant to make the heire apparent of the crowne. And at this verie instant Perseus had charged him and given him instructions, by all obsequious services to insummate and wind himselfe into most familiar talke, and to come so neere within him, that he might draw from him all his secrets, and discover the very inward and hidden thoughts of his heart. Thus departed Demetrius attended with a traine about him more daungerous to his person, than if he had travelled alone without any companie. Philip first passed through Maedica, and then forward over the deserts lying betweene Maedica and Aemus, and at the seventh daies gifte was come as farre as to the foot of the mountaine. Where after hee had rested and staied one day, to make choise of those whom he minded to take up with him; the morrow after he set forth and put himselfe in his way. At the first, the labour was not great, nor the paines much to overcome the nethermost hils; but the farther they went and the higher that they advanced, the more wild and woodie still they found everie place; yea, and they met with many that had no passage at all. At length they were mounted to a passe or way so shadowed and darke, that for the trees standing so thicke together, and their boughes plaited and interlaced one within another, unneth  or hardly could a man see the skie through them. But when they approched once the pitch and crest of the mountaine, behold (a thing not lightly seene in other parts) they light upon so grosse and thicke a mist, which overspread and covered all, that they had as much ado to march forward, as if they had travelled in the darke and mirke night. At last by the third daies end, they gained the verie top of the mountaine. Now when they were come downe from thence againe, they made no lesse report thereof than the common opinion was that went of it; which I beleeve leeve verily they did of purpose, because they would not bee mocked and scorned for this their foolish and vaine voiage, rather than for that they could indeed within the same prospect and from one place, view seas, mountaines, and rivers, situate and distant so farre asunder. Much moiled they were all, and sore toiled in this untoward way; but the king above the rest, by reason that  he was farre stept in age, and unweldie of bodie. Well, after hee had done sacrifice there upon two altars consecrated to Iupiter and the Sunne, he descended in two daies, wheras he had made three of it in ascending: and that which hee feared most, was the cold nights, which there in the beginning of the dog-daies were like to those of midwinter in other places. Many difficulties he

 wrestled and strove with all during those daies, and being returned into his camp, he found no better. Nothing was there but extreame want and penurie, as being pitched in a place compassed about on everie side with desarts and wildernesse. And therefore when hee had staied there but one only day to rest and repose his men, whom he had taken with him in that journey, he hastened away, and in a running march, as if hee had fled in rout, entered the countrey of the Denthelets. These Dentheletes were his owne confederat allies, but the Macedonians (such was their need and necessitie) pilled and spoiled their confines, no lesse than if they had ben professed enemies. For first they wasted and destroied their holts, graunges, and farme houses, afterwards certaine wicks and villages also, robbing and rifling as they went, to the great dishonour of the king; who could not chuse but heare the pitteous complaints and mones of his associates, crying to the gods, patrones  of alliances, and calling upon his name for help, but could have no meed and remedie. When he was purveyed of corne from thence, and returned into the countrey Maedica, he began to assaile a citie which they call Petra. Himselfe in person lay encamped in the avenue and readie way upon the plaines, but hee sent his sonne Perseus with a small companie to fetch a compasse and give the assault from the higher places that commaunded the towne. The townesmen thus hard bested with terror on every side, for the present yeelded upon composition, and gave hostages; but after the armie was retired, they forgetting their pledges, abandoned the citie, and fled for refuge into certaine forts, fenced places, and high mountains. Philip having wearied his soldiours with all manner of travell to no effect, and withall entertained more jelousie and suspition of his sonne Demetrius, by the leaud practise and false suggestions of Didas (the governour of Paeonia)  returned into Macedo
nie. This Didas (as hath been said before) sent to conduct Demetrius home, abused the simplicitie of the young gentleman, who was nothing circumspect and warie, but seemed discontented and complained to him (as good cause hee had) of those that were neerest in nature and bloud unto him; he, I say, by flattering, by soothing him up, and seeming withal to bee offended and greeved for his part at such hard usage, laid snares and grinns, and set traps for him; and in conclusion, by his double diligence, and offering his voluntarie service to doe him pleasure, protesting also to be true and fast unto him, yea, and to keepe his counsell, fetched out of him the very secrets of his heart. Now had Demetrius a purpose with himselfe to flie to Rome, and to effectuate this designement of his, hee was persuaded, that of a speciall grace and favour the gods had sent and offered unto him this Didas the Pretour of Paeonia to be his helper and assistant;  for through his province he conceived some hope to passe and escape with securitie. This intent and plot of his was both immediately disclosed to his brother Perseus, and also by him declared to his father. And first were letters hereof brought unto him, whiles he lay at the siege of Petra. Afterwards Herodorus (the principal friend that Demetrius had) was committed to ward, and withall, order was taken to watch and observe Demetrius that he started not aside; but all underhand and close, without semblance of any such matter. These occurrents above all others, caused the king to have a dolorous and heavie returne into Macedonie. These new accusations thus presented, troubled him much: howbeit hee thought good to expect the returne of those whom he had sent to Rome as spies to heare all and find out the truth. In the anguish and agonie of these cares and perplexities, when the king had continued certaine months, in the end those  embassadours came home; who at first ere they set foot out of Macedonie, had devised and framed before hand what reports they would make from Rome. These messengers, to make up the full measure of all their wicked and divellish practises, delivered also into the kings hand a false and forged letter, sealed with a counterfeit signe of T. Quintius. The said letter was endited to this tenour and effect, That Quintius should seeme for his owne excuse to say, that albeit young Demetrius, caried away with an inordinat desire to be king, had slipped a little, and treated with him about some such matter, yet would he doe nothing to prejudice any one about K. Philip, neither would he be thought or found a man, to give any ungodly and ungracious counsel. These letters struck it dead sure, and made the king beleeve, that all the former imputations fastened upon Demetrius were true and past al peradventure. Wherupon Herodorus presently was put to the rack and  examined, but after he had endured intollerable paines a long time, and confessed nothing, he died in the end under the tormentors hand. Perseus accused Demetrius againe before his father, for that he entended and provided to take his flight through Paeonia. And there came forth certain to testifie against him, saying, that hee had corrupted, inveagled, and enduced them to accompanie him in that journey. But that which made most of all against him, was that same devised

letter of T. Quintius. Howbeit there was no greevous sentence pronounced openly against him, to the end, that rather by some covert and cautelous practise, hee might come to his death: and this, not for any feare that hee had of him, but doubting least some ouvert punishment executed upon him, might reveale and discover his secret designement, of making war upon the Romanes.
Philip himselfe taking his journie from Thessalonica to come to Demetrias, sent Demetrius his sonne to Ae^^reum, a citie in Paeonia, and the same Didas still to accompanie him: but Perseus he addressed to Amphipolis, for to receive the hostages of the Thracians. Now it is reported, that when Didas tooke his leave of him and departed, the king gave him in charge to kill his sonne Demetrius. Didas then, either purposing indeed or making semblance to sacrifice, invited Demetrius to the celebration and feast thereof, whereupon he came from Aestreum to Heraclea. And  (as men say) at this supper he met with a cup of poyson. He had no sooner drunke it, but immediately hee felt that hee was sped; for within a while it began to worke extreamely, and for very dolour and paine, he was forced to rise from the table and retire into his bed-chamber: where hee pitiously complained of the hard heart and crueltie of his father, of the murderous mind of the parricide his brother,Demetrius (...). and of the trecherous vilanie of Didas: and all this while endured deadly wrings and torments in his bellie. But afterwards there were sent into the chamber, one Thyrsis a Stuberaean, and Alexander of Berrhaea, who enwrapped his head and throat with the bed-cloathes, carpets and counterpoints of tapistrie, and and held them so hard, that they throtled and smodered him, and in the end stopped his breath that he died. Thus was this poore innocent young man piteously made away; whose enemies one single kind of death could  not content and satisfie, but needs they must kill and murder him twise.
Whiles these things hapned in Macedonie, L. Aemylius Paulus, who continued still in governement after his Consulship expired, marched with his armie against the Ligurians Ingaunes in the beginning of the spring. So soone as he was entred into the confines of his enemies countrie, and there encamped, there came Embassadours unto him under colour of seeking peace, but in deed onely to eskout and spie. Paulus made them aunswere, That hee could contract no accord with them, unlesse they yeelded first: which they seemed not so much to refuse, but said, That they needed some time to persuade their nation unto it, being a rude and uncivill kind of people. And when they had ten daies truce allowed to effect this, they requested moreover, that the Romane souldiours might not passe over the next hils adjoyning, either for  sewell or forage, for as much as those lands were the onely tilled and well manured grounds of their appertinances and territorie. When they had obtained so much, they assembled all their forces on that side of the hils, from whence they had averted the enemies, and suddainly with a mightie multitude charged upon the Romane campe, and assaulted all the avenues and gates thereof at once. With all forcible meanes they continued the assault in such sort, as the Romans had not so much as either time enough to set forth and display their ensignes, or roume sufficient to put their armie in order of battaile: but were compelled to defend their campe more by standing thick thronged together against the enemies in the very gates, than otherwise by hardie fighting. But about the going downe of the sunne, when the enemies were retired, Paulus dispatched two light horsemen with letters to M. Baebius the Consull, as farre as Pisae, that hee  should come away with all speed to succour him, being in time of truce besieged. But Baebius had delivered up his armie before to M. Pinarius the Pretour, as hee went into Sardinia. Howbeit he both certified the Senat by his letters, that L. Aemylius was invested by the Ligurians, and he wrate also to M. Cl. Marcellus, whose province was next adjoyning, to bring over his forces (if he thought so good) out of Gaule into Liguria, and deliver L. Aemylius from siege. But alas, these succours should have come all too late: for the Ligurians the very next day returned and advanced against the campe. Aemylius albeit he not onely knew that they would come, but also might have brought his power forth into the field and ranged them in array, yet he kept himselfe so close within the strength of his rampiar, minding to hold off and not to fight, untill Baebius might with his armie come from Pisae. Now the letters of Baebius caused great fear at Rome: and so much the more, for that Marcellus being returned to the citie, some few daies after he had made over his armie unto Fabius, put them out of all hope, that the armie which was in France, could not possibly passe into Liguria, by reason of the war with the Istrians, who impeached the planting of the colonie at Aquileia; against whom Fabius was gone, and might not possibly retire

 from thence, now that the warre was once begun. The onely hope they had therefore of aiding Aemylius was this, (and yet the same seemed to bee with the latest, considering the urgent necessitie of the time) in case the Consuls made hast to goe into their provinces: which to doe, all the LL. of the Senat called aloud and earnestly unto them. But the Consuls denied flatly to sturre one foot, before the levie of souldiours was fully finished; alleaging that it was not their slacknesse, but the violence of the plague, which caused it to bee so late ere it were performed. Yet for all this, such was the general accord and consent of the Senat, that they could neither will nor chuse but go forth of the cittie in their rich coates of armes, and by proclamation to assigne a certaine day, upon which all the souldiours whom they had enrolled should shew at Pisae: and commission they had to take up subitarie souldiers, all the countrie over as they went, to prest  them foorth presently and have them away. Moreover the Pretours, Q. Petilius and Q. Fabius were both of them commaunded, the one, namely Petilius, to enrol in hast two tumultuarie legions of Romane citizens, and tender the militarie oth to all that were not above fiftie yeeres old: and Fabius, to levie of the Latine allies, fifteene thousand foot, and eight hundred horsemen. The two Duumvirs or Wardens for the navie and the ports were created, namely C. Matienus and C. Lucretius: who were soone provided of ships readie rigged, trimmed and furnished to their hands. And Matienus, who had the charge of the coasts upon the gulfe of Gaule, was commaunded to bring his fleet with all speed possible along, to the tract of the Ligurians, if happily he might any way steed L. Aemylius and his armie. Aemylius after he perceived that no aid appeared from any place, supposing verily that the two horsemen above-said, were intercepted  and staid by the way, thought good to put off no longer, but alone with his owne forces to trie the fortune of a fight. And thereupon before the enemies came (who now alreadie began more coldly and heavily to assaile them than before) hee put his men in battaile array at the foure gates of the campe, to the end that upon the signall given, they should at once from all parts sallie foorth. To the foure extraordinarie cohorts, hee adjoyned two other, under the conduct of M. Valerius a Lieutenant, and commanded them to breake forth at the false posterne gate called Extraordinaria: within the gate Principalis on the right hand, he embattailed the Hastati or Iavelineres of the first legion, and the Principes of the same legion in the arrierguard to second them, commanded both by M. Servilius and L. Sulpitius, Kn. marshals, or Tribunes militarie. The third legion hee marshalled full against the other gate Principalis on the left hand. This  chaunge onely was here, for that the Principes were set in the front, and the Hastati behind in the taile of them. Sex. Iulius Caesar and L. Aurelius Cotta, two militarie Tribunes had the leading of this legion. Q. Fulvius Flaccus a Lieutenant having the conduct of the right wing, was placed at the gate Questoria. Two cohorts and the Triarij of two legions had commaundement to stay behind for the defence of the campe. The Generall himselfe in person rode all about from gate to gate, exhorting and encouraging his men: using all the forcible meanes hee possibly could devise, to provoke and whet the stomackes of his souldiours, and to give a poinant edge to their courage and choler: one while reproching his enemies for their falshood and treacherie, who having craved peace and obtained truce; during the time of the said truce, against all law of nations  were come to assaile the campe: another while shewing and declaring unto them what shame and indignitie it was for the Roman armie to be besieged by the Ligurians,
who more truly may be accounted theeves and robbers, than go for warlike enemies. If (quoth he) you should escape from hence, not by your owne vertue and valour, but through the helpe and succour of others, with what face shall any of you be able to meet, I say, not those souldiours who have vanquished Anniball, diffeated Philip, and subdued Antiochus, the mightiest kings and greatest commaunders of our age: but even them who many a time have hunted and chased the very same Ligurians like bruite beasts, over the wilds and forrests as they fled, and hewed them a peeces in the end? That which the Spaniards, that which the Gaules, that which the Macedonians and Carthaginians dare not enterprise, namely to approach and enter upon the rampier of the Roman campe; shall a Ligurian enemie adventure to do? shall he of his owne accord presume to besiege  and assail our camp, whom heretofore when we beat all the blind bushes, by-woods, and thickets, to start him out, we had much a do to find, he lay so close and lurked so covertly? At these words the souldiers set up a consonant crie in token of applause, and answered him with a general shout, saying: There was no fault on their part, seeing that no man had given them the signall to yssue foorth and make a sallie. For let him once but say the word to sound the trumpet, hee

should see and find, that both Romanes and Ligurians were the same still, as before-time. Now the Ligurians kept two campes on the neere side of the mountaines affront the Romane leaguer; from whence (for the first daies so soone as the sun was up) they used to advance their ensignes and march forward, well armed and raunged in battell array: but then, they put no armours upon their backs, nor tooke weapon in hand, before they had filled their bellies well with meat and their nolles with wine: they came forth (I say) dispearsed and out of order; as who hoped and trusted assuredly, that the enemies would not march under their ensigns without their rampier. Against them (comming thus in disarray) the Romanes issued forth at once, out of all the gates in one instant with a mightie shout, which not onely they who were within the campe set up, but also the lackies, scullions, launders, and other drudges that follow the campe redoubled. This was such an unlooked for occurrent to the Ligurians, that they were set in as great an affright therewith, as if they had been surprised and beset all about with sodaine ambushments. For a small while there was some shew of a conflict, such as it was; but anon they tooke their heeles and fled for life; but as they fled, they left their lives behind them in every place. Then the men of armes had the signall given to mount on horsebacke, to pursue them and not suffer one to escape alive: and so in this fearefull rout they were driven to take their campe for safetie: but in the end were disseized and turned out of it also. That day were slaine of the Ligurians not so few as fifteen thousand, and 2500 taken prisoners. Within three daies after, the whole nation of the Ligurian Ingaunes, yeelded absolutely, and put in their hostages. A search was made for all the pilots and mariners, who had exercised pyracie on the sea, and they were all laid up fast in prison. Semblably C. Matienus one of the Duumvirs or warden
s of the navie, met with two  and thirtie ships of that sort, belonging to men of warre upon the coast of Liguria, and bourded them. To carie these newes to Rome, and letters to the Senate, L. Aurelius Cotta, and C. Sulpitius Cotta were sent to Rome: who also were to require that L. Aemylius (when his time was expired) might depart out of his province, and bring his souldiors from thence with him, and so discharge them of service. Both these demaunds were graunted by the Senate, and a solemne procession besides was ordeined in all churches and chappels, and at every shrine and altar for three daies space. The Pretors also were commaunded, Petilius, to casse and dismisse the legions of the citie; and Fabius, to remit the Latine allies the levying and mustering of their souldiours. Also there was order given to the Pretor of the citie, for to write unto the Consuls and give them to understand, that the Senat thought it meet and reason, that the subitarie souldiors (who were  enrolled in hast for the sodaine tumult and alarme) should with all speed be licensed to depart.
The same yeere the colonie of Gravisca was planted in the territorie of Tuscane, which in times past had been conquered from the Tarquinians; and five acres of land was set out to everie man. The Triumvirs who had the charge thereof to distribute these lands, were C. Calpurnius Piso, P. Claudius Pulcher, and C. Terentius Istra. A yeere it was of note, in regard of the drought that happened, and the dearth of corn and all other fruits of the earth. For recorded it is, that in sixe moneths space it never rained one drop.
The same yeere it fortuned, that as certaine plow-men and labourers plowed and digged somewhat deepe within the ground, in the lands of L. Petilius a secretarie, (which lands lay under the hill Ianiculum) there were found two coffers of stone, each of them about eight foot  long and foure foot broad, the lids and covers wherof were bound and soudered with lead. Both these chests had a superscription upon them in Greeke and Latine letters to this effect, That in the one of them lay buried Numa Pompilius the sonne of Pompo, sometime king of Rome: and in the other, were bestowed the bookes of the said Numa. The owner of this ground opened these coffers by the advise and counsell of his friends: and that which carried the title and inscription of the kings sepulture, was found emptie, without any shew or token of the reliques of a mans body or anything els, by reason the bones and all were rotten and consumed, in continuance of time after so many yeers past. In the other were found two fardels, wrapped within waxe candles (or ceare-clothes) conteining either of them seven bookes; which were not only whole and sound, but also seemed very fresh and new. One seven of them were written in Latin, as touching the Pontificiall law: the other seven in Greeke, entituled, The discipline or doctrine of Philosophie, such as those daies might affourd. Valerius Antias saith moreover, That they were the bookes of Pythagoras; according to the common received opinion of Numa, that he was the disciple of Pythagoras; herein giving credit to a probable lie, resembling a truth. These

 books were first read by those friends of his who were present at the place where the chests were opened; but afterwards as they came into more mens hands to be read, it chaunced that Q. Petilius the lord cheefe justice of the citie, desirous to peruse those bookes, borrowed them of L. Petilius, with whom he was familiarly acquainted, by reason that the abovenamed Quintus Petilius had chosen the foresaid Lucius into the decurie of the Scribes and Secretaries. Who after he had read the titles with the summaries and contents of every chapter, and finding the most part thereof, tending directly to abolish the state of religion then established, said unto L. Petilius, that he purposed to fling those bookes into the fire; but before hee did so, hee would permit him to use what meanes hee thought by order of law or otherwise would serve his turne to recover the said bookes out of his hands, and good leave hee should have to take that course  without his displeasure, or any breach of friendship betweene them. The Scribe or notarie aforesaid goeth to the Tribunes for their assistance, the Tribunes put the matter over to the Senat, before whom the Pretour said plainely, That he was readie to take his corporall oth, if he were put to it, that those bookes ought neither to be read nor kept. Whereupon the Senate judged, that for such a matter the offer onely of the Pretors oth was sufficient, and that the bookes should be burned with all speed possible in the open place of assemblies called Comitium: but they awarded withall, that there should bee paied unto Q. Petilius the right owner as much money for the bookes, as the Pretour and the more part of the Tribunes of the Commons esteemed them worth. The Scribe would touch none of the money: but his bookes were burnt in the foresaid place before all the people in a light fire, made by the ordinarie servitours attending upon the  sacrificers.
The same summer there arose suddainely a great warre in higher Spaine. The Celtiberians had gathered a power of five and thirtie thousand men, a number more than lightly at any time before they had levied. Now as Q. Fulvius Flaccus lord Deputie of that province. Hee for his part, because he was advertised that the Celtiberians put their youth in armes, had raised and assembled as great aids of the confederates, as he could, but nothing came hee neere to the enemie in numbers of souldiours. In the beginning of the Spring hee led his armie into Carpetania, and encamped before the towne Ebura, after hee had planted a meane garrison within it. A few daies after the Celtiberians pitched their tents within two miles from thence, under a little hill. When the Romane Pretour perceived they were come, he sent his brother Marcus Fulvius with two companies of the horsemen of allies in espiall, to view the enemies campe, willing him to approach as neere to the trench and rampier as hee could, and to see what compasse the campe tooke, but to forbeare skirmish, and in any hand to retire, in case he perceived the Cavallerie of the enemies made out against him. According to this direction, hee did in every respect. And so for certaine daies together, there was nothing done, but onely these two companies of horsemen shewing first, and afterwards retiring backe, so soone as the Cavallerie of the enemies issued out of their campe. At length the Celtiberians also came forth and advaunced forward with all their power, as well horse as foot, and having set them in ordinance of battell, staied as it were in the middes betweene. The whole ground was a smooth and even plaine, fit to joyne a battaile in. There, stood the Spaniards (I say) expecting their enemies  but the Romane Pretour kept his men within the rampier foure dayes togither; and they likewise of the other side held the same place still in battaile array. The Romanes all that while st
irred not a foot. The Celtiberians then, seeing the enemies refused fight, held themselves quiet also within their camp: onely the horsemen rid forth, and they kept a corps de guard, to be in readines if peradventure the enemies should be busie and come abroad. Both of the one side and the other, they went out at the back-side of their camp to purvey forage and fewel, and impeached not one another. The Roman Pretor, supposing now, that after so many daies rest, the enemies were borne in hand and hoped fully, that hee would never begin first, commanded L. Actlius to take with him the left wing of the cavallerie, and six thousand of the provinciall auxiliaries, and to fetch a compasse about the hill which stood behind the enemies; and from thence, so soone as they  heard a crie, to run downe a maine and charge upon their campe. And because they might not be dscovered, in the night time they departed. Flaccus the next morning by peepe of day, sent out C. Scribonius (a colonell of the allies) against the enemies campe, with the extraordinarie horsmen of the left wing: whom when the Celtiberians beheld both approaching neere toward them, and also more in number than uually they had bene, they put forth all their Cavallerie at

once out of the gates: and withal, gave the signal to the Infanterie also to come abroad. Scritonius, according to the direction given him, so soon as ever he heard the first noise and shout of the horsmen, turned the head of his horse, and retired back full upon the campe: therwith the enemies followed more freely: first the horsemen, and within a while the footmen also, making full account to be masters of the Roman leaguer that day, and verily now were they not past halfe a mile When Flaccus supposed that they were trained farre enough from their owne camp, for succouring it, he issued forth at once in three places, with his armie arraunged before in order of battell withinforth, and caused them to set up a mightie crie, not onely to animate the souldiours to the combate, but also that their fellowes behind the hill might heare it. Who made no stay, but presently ran downe and set upon the enemies camp as they had in charge, where there were left in guard not above five hundred armed men. By reason therefore, that they within were so few, the  enemies without so many, and the enterprise so suddaine and unlooked for, they were mightily terrified, and so in manner without any skirmish and resistance at all, their hold was forced and woon. Actlius set on fire that part also, which might easiest be seene of them that were fighting in the plaine. Now the Celtiberians which stood behind in the reregard, were the first that discovered the flame, but afterwards it was noised and went currant through the maine battell, that their campe was lost and all on a light fire. The enemies hereby were greatly amated, but the Romans much more animated. For now they might heare the shout of their fellowes, having the upper hand; now might they see the tents of their enimies burning with bright flames. The Celtiberians for a while stood in suspence, doubtfull what to doe; but afterwards, perceiving they had no place of safe retreat, if upon their di
scomfiture they should fall to running away, they saw  no other hope but in fighting it out, and so they began to renew the medley afresh, with more resolution than before. Fiercely they were encountered and charged in the middest of their battell tell by the fift legion: but against the left flanke and wing, where they saw the souldiours of their owne nation raunged (who came to aid the Romanes) they made head, and advaunced their ensignes with more boldnesse and confidence. And verily that left wing of the Romanes was at the point to have reculed, but that the seventh legion seconded and succoured them: and withall, they that were left within Ebura in garison, came from the town in the very middest and hotest of the conflict; and Actlius from another part plaid on their backs. Down went the Celtiberians along time, and were cut in peeces betweene. As many as remained, made shift to flie and escape on all hands into every quarter. The Cavallerie was sent out after them two waies in severall  bands; who also committed a great carnage and execution. That day were slaine of the enemies about 23000, 4800 taken prisoners, with 500 horse and above; besides fourescore and eight militarie ensignes gotten from them and caried away. A great victorie this was, but not without bloudshed of the Romanes part: for of two legions there dyed somewhat more than two hundred, but of Latine allies 830; of forrein aids, much about 2400 lost their lives in the field. The Pretour then retired with his victorious armie into his owne campe. Acilius was commaunded to abide still in that of the enemies, which he had forced and woon. The next morrow they fell to gather up the spoiles of their enemies: and those who had borne themselves valiantly in that service above the rest, were rewarded with gifts in a full and frequent assembly of the whole armie. After this, when the hurt and maimed were brought backe into the towne Ebura, the legions  were led thr
ough the countrey Carpetania, towards Contrebia. This citie when it was once besieged, sent to the Celtiberians for succour; but they came not in time: not for any slacknesse of their part, but because after they were departed from home, and had entred on their journey, the foule wayes hindred and staied them, which they were not able to passe for the continuall raine that fell: over and besides, the waters were out and the rivers swelled so high, that possibly they could not come forward: whereupon the besieged inhabitants being in despaire of help, from their friends, rendered the towne. Flaccus likewise was forced by the storme and tempestuous weather to put his armie within the same cittie. Now the Celtiberians, who were on foot in their journey, and not ware that their friends had surrendered, at length having passed over the rivers (when the raine gave over and the weather tooke up) came to Contrebia; but seeing no  campe without the walls, and supposing that either it was removed to the other side, or the enemies dislodged and gone, they approched the towne, and marched losely and retchlesly forward in disarray. The Romanes sallied out upon them at two gates, fell upon them (disbanded as they were) and put them to the rout. But see what happened! that thing which hindred them

 that they could not make head, resist, and settle themselves to begin fight (namely, because they came not together in one entire band, not yet by great companies about their colours) the same stood them in good steed to save many of their lives that fled. For they ran so scattering, and were so spread all over the plaines, that in no place could the enemie meet with them in any number thicke together, to compasse them about on every side. Howbeit twelve thousand of them were killed, and above five thousand taken prisoners, besides four hundred horse, and threescore and two ensignes of warre woon from them. Those who after their straggling flight retired homeward, met with another troupe of Celtiberians comming forward, unto whome they recounted the yeelding up of Contrebia and their owne misfortune: by which meanes they caused them to turne and goe backe againe, who immediately slipt away into their villages and forts.  Then Flaccus departed from Contrebia, and conducted his legions through Celtiberia, wasting and spoiling as he went: where he forced many castles, untill the greater part of that countrey was reduced under his obedience. These affaires passed in high Spaine that yeare. As for the lower province, Manlius the Pretour fought fortunately in certaine battels against the Portugales.
The same yeare a Colonie of Latines was planted in Aquileia, within the territorie of the Gauls, and thither were conducted three thousand footmen, and every one of them were endowed with fiftie acres of land. The Centurions besides had a hundred, and the horsemen a hundred and fortie acres apeece given unto them. And the Commissioners for this conduct and distribution were P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, C. Flaminius and L. Manlius Acidinus. In which yeare also  two temples were dedicated, the one to Venus Erycina neere the gate Collina (which L. Porcius Licinius the sonne of Lucius dedicated, being a Duumvir deputed for that purpose, and had ben vowed before by L. Porcius the Consull in the Ligurian warre) the other to the goddesse Pietie, in the hearbe market: and of this chappell M. Acilius Glabrio the other Duumvir, had the dedication; where, hee erected and set up in the honour of his father Glabrio, a guilt statue, which was the first gilden image that ever was made in Italie. This Glabrio the father was hee, who had vowed to edifie the said temple that very day on which hee fought the battell against K. Antiochus, at Thermopylae, and by warrant from the Senate, had bargained for the building thereof at a price. In those daies wherein these holie houses were consecrated, L. Acmylius Paulus the Proconsull, triumphed over the Ligurian Ingaunes. He had borne before him in shew five and  twentie golden Coronets, and besides them there was no gold or silver els caried in that triumph. But many principall Ligurians, men of marke, whome hee tooke captive, were led before his chare. He dealt among his souldiors, three hundred Asses apeece.
The fame of this triumph of his, was much more renowmed by this occasion, that the Ligurian embassadours craved to have a perpetuall peace with the Romans; saying, That their whole nation were resolved, never to take armes againe, but by commandement and licence of the people of Rome. Q. Fabius the Pretour, returned this answer unto them by the advise of the Senate, That it was no newes to heare this language from the Ligurians; but it stood them upon and was beseeming rather, to carrie a new mind, and the same agreeable to their speech: and therefore they should go to the Consuls, and doe that which by them they were enjoyned; forasmuch as the Senat would beleeve  none but the word onely of the Consuls in the behalfe of the Ligurians, as touching their true and sincere meaning to observe peace. Thus was peace concluded with the Ligurians: but there was a battell fought in Corsica with the Islanders there; in which M. Pinarius the Pretour slew 2000 of them in the field: which diffeature compelled them to give hostages, and besides, 100000 pound weight of waxe.
From thence the armie was conducted into Sardinia, where passed some fortunate battailes against the Ilians, a nation at this day not fully quieted and appeased. In this very yeere also were the hundred hostages rendred backe againe to the Carthaginians; with whome the people of Rome made and maintained peace, as well for their owne part as in the behalfe of K. Masanissa, who at that time with an armed garison, held the possession of that territorie which had been in question. The Consuls in their province sat still and had nothing  to doe. M. Boebius was sent for to Rome, against the generall assembly for the election of magistrates: who created Consuls, A. Posthumius Albinus Luscus, and C. Calpurnius Piso. After this were elected Pretors Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, A. Posthumius Albinus, P. Cornel. Mamercus, T. Minutius Mollicubus, A. Hostilius Mancinus, and C. Maenius; and they all entred into their magistracie upon the 15 day of March.
In the beginning of that yeere wherein A. Posthumius Albinus, and C. Calpurnius Piso were  Consuls: A. Posthumius the Consull brought into the Senat those persons who were come from Q. Fulvius Flaccus out of the hither province of Spaine; to wit, L. Minutius his Lieutenant generall, and the two Colonels, T. Maenius and L. Massaliota. These men after they had made report of two fields fortunatly fought against the Celtiberians, of their countrie yelded and brought under subjection, and that the tearme of government in that province was expired, and no more left to be done there; so as there was no need either of the ordinarie money which was wont to be sent for souldiours pay, or of corne to bee carried unto the armie for that yeere: requested of the Senate first in regard of their happie successe, to yeeld honour and praise to the immortall gods: and then, that Q. Fulvius might depart and come his waies out of the province, and bring with him that armie of his from thence, whose valiant service, both himselfe and also many Pretors before him had used: which (say they) was not only meet and convenient, but also requisite  and needfull in a maner to be done: for as much as the soldiors were so stiffenecked and obstinat, that it seemed unpossible to hold them any longer in that province, but that they would be gone and depart without licence, if they were not dismissed: or else breake out into some daungerous fire of a mutinie, if a man should goe about to keepe and hold them backe by strong hand. The Senate gave order that Liguria should bee the province for both Consuls: which done, the Pretours also cast lots for theirs. To A. Hostilius fell the civill jurisdiction over the citizens: and to Minutius over the forrainers. P. Cornelius had the government of Sicilie: C. Maenius of Sardinia. Vnto L. Postrunius was alotted the farther part of Spaine, and to Tib. Sempronius the hither. This Sempronius (because hee was to succeed Q. Fulvius) fearing that his province should be left naked and disfurnished of the old souldiours, I demaund (qd. he) of you, o L. Minutius, since you bring word, that there is no more trouble behind in that province, whether you thinke that the Celtiberians will continue fast in their alleageance forever, so as, that province may be protected and held in obedience without any armie at all? And if you cannot undertake to assure us of the faith and loyaltie of these Barbarians, and doe advise us in any hand to maintaine an armie in those parts, whether you will give counsell to the Senate, for to send a supply into Spaine, that they onely should be cassed and discharged, who have served out their full yeeres required by law, and so that new and raw souldiours bee mingled with the rest of the old? or that the old legions should full and whole be removed out of the province, and new levied, enrolled, and sent thither in their steed? considering that the small account that usually is made of such fresh and untrained souldiers, were enough to induce and moove even the more  quiet and peaceable sort of Barbarians to rebell and make warre againe? Soone said it is, but not so easilie done, to have made an end of all troubles in such a province, especially where the people are naturally inclined to warre, and prone ever and anone to make insurrections. Some fewe cities, as far as I can heare, and namely those which being neere unto the souldiours lying in winter garison, were by them held in awe and kept down, have yeelded and are become subject: but they that are farther off, be in armes still and have weapon in hand. Which being so, I tell you (my L.L.) even now before hand, that I will performe my service to the Commonweale, with the help of that armie which is there alreadie at this present: but in case Flaccus bring away those legions with him: I will chuse thuse quarters which are in peace, to winter in, and not hazard my yong and new soldiors among them, to be presented to the devotion and mercie of most  fierce and warlike enemies. The Lieutenant aunswered to these demaunds in this manner, That neither himselfe nor any man else was able for his life, to divine and foredeeme what was in the heart of the Celtiberians now, and what they would mind and intend to do hereafter: and there fore he could not denie, but the better pollicie it was to send an armie among these Barbarians (peaceable though they seemed to be at this present) because as yet they are not inured to government, and cannot well skill of being subjects. But whither it be more expedient to employ new forces, or the old, it is for him to speake and set downe, who upon his knowledge can say, how loyally the Celtiberians will carrie themselves in time of peace; and is withall assured, that the souldiours will hold them content and keepe quiet, if they bee detained any longer in the province. But if a man may conjecture and give a guesse what they thinke in their heart, eirlier by  their grumbling words secretly one to another; or their speeches uttered in the presence and hearing of their Generall, when hee maketh orations to them in publike audience: I tell you truly, they have cried out with open mouth, that either they will keep their Generall with them in the

 province, or home they will with him into Italie. This debate betweene the Pretour and the Lieutenant, was interrupted and broken off, by a new matter propounded before the Senate by the Consuls, who thought it meet and reasonable, that order should be taken for their owne furniture and setting forth with men, money, and munition to their provinces, before any thing were spoken or treated of as touching the Pretor his armie. So, ordained it was, that the Coss. should have their entire armie of new souldiours, to wit, ech of them two legions of Romane cittizens with their cavallerie, together with the usuall and accustomed number at all other times of Latine allies, namely 15000 foot and 800 horse. And with this power they had in charge to make warre against the Ligurian Apuans. As for P. Cornelius and M. Baebius, they continued still in place of commaund: and were willed to hold their provinces, untill the Consuls were thither  come. Then they were commaunded to discharge the armie which they had, and so to returne to Rome. After this, speech there was concerning the armie of Tib. Sempronius; and the Consuls had warrant to enroll one new legion, consisting of five thousand and two hundred foote, and foure hundred horse: over and besides, one thousand footmen, and fiftie horsemen of Romane cittizens. Likewise the Latine nation was charged with a levie of seven thousand foot, and three hundred horse. With which armie it was thought good, that Tib. Sempronius should go into the higher province of Spaine. As for Q. Fulvius, he was permitted to bring back with him (if he thought well thereof) all those souldiours, as well Romanes as allies, which had bene transported over into Spaine before the Consulship of Sp. Posthumius and Q. Martius: and more than that (after a new supply was come) the surplusage in two legions above ten thousand and  foure hundred foot, and sixe hundred horse; and the over-deale of twelve thousa
nd footmen of Latines, and sixe hundred horsemen; and namely those whose valorous service C. Furvius had tried and found in two battailes against the Celtiberians. Moreover, solemne processions and thanksgivings were by authoritie ordained, for his happie managing of the affaires of the common weale; and then the rest of the Pretours were sent into their provinces, Q.Fabius Butio had his commission renewed to governe Gallia still. Thus it was agreed in the Senate-house, that there should be eight legions maintained and kept in pay that yeere, over and above the old armie in Liguria, which was in good hope shortly to bee dismissed. Howbeit even these forces (being no greater than they were) hardly could be made full and compleat, by reason of the pestilence which now three yeeres had raigned, and dispeopled the cittie of Rome and all Italie. During  which plague the Pretour Q. Minutius, and not long after him, the Consull C. Calpurnius died: with many other brave and famous persons of ech degree and qualitie. So as, at length these men began to hold this depopulation and calamitie for a prodigious token and straunge wonder. Wherupon C. Servilius the Arch-bishop was charged, to search out means for to appease the wrath and anger of the gods; and the Decemvirs likewise to peruse the bookes of Sibylia: the Cos. also to vow certaine presents and oblations, to Dan Apollo, Aesculapius and LadieHealth. Sulus, and to set up their images garnished with gold: which he vowed and erected accordingly. The Decemvirs proclaimed supplications and praiers two daies together for the health of the people, throughout the cittie, and in all market townes and places of frequent resort and assembly. All above twelve yeeres of age, ware chaplets and garlands of floures upon their heads, and bare  braunches of lawrell in their hands, whiles they were at their praiers and devotions. Moreover, there was crept into mens heads a suspici
on that some devilish and wicked hand might bee the cause of all this. Whereuon by an Act of the Senate, a commission was graunted out unto C. Claudius the Pretour (who was substituted and chosen in the roume of T. Minutius) to make search and diligent inquisition after all confections of poison, and the practisers thereof, within the cittie, and for the compasse of ten miles about it every way: In like manner, to C. Maenius, for to sit in the enquirie thereof (before he crossed over-sea into his province Sardinia) in all the mart-townes and places of assembly which were more than ten miles off, from Rome. Of all others, the Consull his death was most suspected. For given out it was, that Quarta Hostilia his wise, had murdred him: but when it was seene once that her owne sonne Q. Fulvius Flaccus, was  declared Consull in place of his father in law and mothers husband, the death of Piso the Consull began to bee more infamous and suspicious a great deale than before. And witnesses came forth readie to depose, that after Albinus and Piso were pronounced Consuls (in which election the said Flaccus was re^ected and suffered a repulse) his mother reproched him therwith, and laid it in his dish, that this was the third time that he had sued for the Consulship and gone without:

adding moreover, and willing him to be readie to stand for it againe, for that shee would  worke and bring it about, that within two moneths he should be Consull. Among other testimonies and depositions making for the cause and tending to the same, that speech of hers also, taking effect too truly and so just within the time, was thought sufficient to condemn Hostilia.
In the beginning of this spring, whiles the levie of soldiors staied the new Consuls at Rome, whiles the death of the one and the choosing of the other into his place, caused all things there to goe more slowly forward; in the meantime P. Cornelius and M. Baebius who had done nothing worthy of remembrance during their Consulship, led their armies against the Ligurian Apuans. These Ligurians, who before the comming of the Consuls into the province looked for no warre, were surprized at unawares, and to the number of 12000 of them yeelded: whome Cornelius and Baebius resolved (upon advise had first with the Senat by letters) to transplant from  the mountains, into the plains and champion country from their owne home; to the end they should have no more hope to returne, for otherwise they supposed the Ligurian war would never have an end. Now there was in the Samnites countrey a certaine territorie belonging in common to the people of Rome, which sometime had been in the tenure and possession of the Taurasines. In which place they being desirous to plant the Ligurian Apuans, published an edict, That they should descend downe the mountaines Anidos, togither with their wives and children, and bring away with them all that ever they had. But the Ligurians sent their embassadors oftentimes to intreat, that they might not be forced to abandon their domesticall gods, the place of their nativitie, and the sepulchres of their auncestors: and there with promised to deliver up their armor, and to put in hostages. Howbeit, seeing they could not prevaile, and having  not strength and power enough to wage warre againe, they obeyed the edict and proclamation. So there were translated from thence at the publicke charges of the citie, to the number of four thousand persons free-borne, togither with their women and children: and unto them was allowance made of 150000 Sesterces, toward the building of new houses. And for to distribute and devide l
and among them, the same men (to wit, Cornelius and Baebius) had commission; who also removed them into those parts. Howbeit at the request of these twaine, there were Quinquevirs or five commissioners assistants graunted unto them by the Senate, by whose advise they might manage all. These affairs being finished, after they had brought with them to Rome their old armie, they obtained of the Senat a graunt to triumph. And these were the first that ever triumphed and made no warre before. Only the enemies were led in shew before their chariot; for  nothing had they gained and woon for to be caried or led in pompe; neither was there ought to be seene in their triumphs, which might be dealt and given among the souldiors.
The same yeere Fulvius Flaccus the Pretor in Spaine, by occasion that his successour stayed long ere hee came into the province, brought foorth his armie into the field out of his wintering campe, and began to wast and spoise the farther parts and territories of Celtiberia; from whence the inhabitants came not in to submit and doe their homage and fealtie. By which deed of his, he rather provoked and angred the barbarous people, than terrified them: for when they had secretly gathered togither certaine forces and companies, they beset and barred the passage Manlianum, by which they were assured that the Roman armie would passe. As L. Posthumius Albinus was upon his journey into the nether province of Spaine, Gracchus his colleague  charged him, to advertise Quintus Fabius for to bring his armie to Tarracon, for that he purposed there to discharge his old soldiors, to distribute the supply which he brought, and to raunge in order all his armie by companies. Notice also was given to Flaccus of the very day (which was neere at hand) upon which his successour would come. This new occurent caused Flaccus to lay aside those enterprises which he intended, and in all hast to withdraw his forces out of Celtiberia. The barbarous people knowing not the cause hereof, but supposing that hee had some inkling of their revolt and how they had in secret taken arms, and that therupon he was sore affraid, guarded and stopped the passage so much more streightly. Now so soone as the Romane armie was entred into the passe, one morning betimes at the break of day, the enemies arose sodainly at once out of two parts, and charged the Romans: which when Flaccus perceived, he gave commaundement  by the ministerie of the Centurians, that every man should keepe his place and stand his ground, and to have his arms and weapons in readinesse; by which means he appealed the first tumult and affright in his hoast. Then after he had brought all his lab
ouring beasts with the baggage, unto one place, he embattailed and put in array all his bands and companies, partly

 by himselfe in person, and partly by his lieutenants and colonels, according as the ground and the time required, shewing no signe at all of feare, but putting his men in mind of the enemies, in these tearmes: Yee have (quoth hee) to doe with those that twice alreadie have yeelded unto us, who are inured and practised still in wickednesse and perjurie; not bettered in vertue and courage: those (I say) who are like to make our return home honorable and glorious, which otherwise would have been obscure and nothing memorable: so as we shall carrie to Rome for a triumph, our swords all bloudie and newly bathed in the greene wounds and fresh massacre of our enemies; and beare away the spoiles of their bodies, all embrued and still dropping with their bloud. Time would not permit him to say anymore, for now the enemies advaunced forward, and the charge was alreadie given in the utmost skirts of the armie, and anon the main battailes  encountred and joyned conflict. The fight was hore and cruell alike in all parts, but the fortune divers: for the Roman legions in the main battell fought right valiantly; and the two wings of either hand did their devoir as bravely. The auxiliarie straungers had to deale with enemies armed in deed at all points like to themselves, but better souldiours by ods than they were; in such sort, as they were over-charged by them, and could not make good their ground. The Celtiberians perceiving they were not able to match the legions in raunged battaile and close hand-fight, cast their companies into a pointed and coin-formed battaillon, for to pierce perforce and enter upon their enemies: in which maner of fight they are so strong, that it is not possible to withstand them, wheresoever they give their violent charge. And then the legions also were put in disarray, and the whole maine battaile after a sort, was disbanded and broken. Which disorder and  fearfull trouble when Flaccus perceived, he
rode a gallop to the legionarie men of arms: What? (quoth he unto them) Is there no helpe at all in you? and shall this armie here be thus diffeated utterly and come to nought? Wherat they cryed on all hands to him, to give direction and speake only the word what he would have done, and he should see how they would bestirre themselves in the execution of his commaund. Mary (quoth hee) double your troupes, you that are the horsemen of two legions, and run your horses with full carriere against that wedge-formed battaillon of the enemies, wherewith they presse upon our men; and this shall you performe with the more violence of your horses, if you disbridle them and let them have full head, and so set spurs and rush in among them: which we have read in stories, that the Romans many a time have practised to their great praise and honour. No sooner said, but done it was; pluckt were the bridles  over their horse heads; twise they ran through the mids of them too and fro from one side to another, brake all their launces upon the enemies, overthrew them, and made foule worke and carnage among them. When this pointed battaillon of the Celtiberians was once broken, (even the whole and onely hope they had;) then they began to feare and tremble, then were they at the point to quit the fight, and to looke about them which way to take their flight. The extraordinarie Cavallerie in the out wings (seeing so brave a service performed by the Romane horsmen) were enkindled and incensed by their valorous example, and of their own accord also without attendance of any mans commaundement, charged upon their enemies, thus disordered and in disarray alreadie. Then the Celtiberians ran away and fled on all hands. The Romane Generall seeing them once turne backe and shew their hin-parts, vowed to build a chappell to Fortuna equestris, and to exhibit games in the honor of Iup. Opt. Max. The Celtiberians, thus disbanded and scattered in the rout all
over the length of the streight passage, were killed and cut in pieces. It is recorded, that there died that day seuenteene thousand enemies, and were taken prisoners alive more than three thousand, togither with 277 field ensignes, and well-neere eleven hundred horses. For that day, the victorious armie lodged within no camp at all: yet was not this victorie so cleere, but it cost them the losse of some soldiors: for of Romans were slaine, four hundred seventie and two; of allies (and namely of Latins) 1019; and togither with them, aidsouldiors three thousand. Thus the armie having by this good hand recovered their auncient honour and glorie, was conducted to Tarracon. Tib. Sempronius the Pretor, (who was arrived two dayes before) went out to meet Fulvius in the way as he came, and shewed how he rejoyced  on his behalfe, for this good managing and happie atchieving the affaires of the commonweale: which done, they agreed togither with great accord as touching the souldiours, namely, whome to casse and send away, and whome to reteine still in service. Then Fulvius having shipped the souldiors that were discharged, tooke his journey to Rome: and Sempronius conducted the legions into Celtiberia.

Both the Consuls led their forces into Liguria, and entred the countrey in two divers quarters. Posthumius with the first legion and the third, beset and invested the two mountaines, Balista and Suismontium, and so streightly hee kept the narrow passes of those parts with his garrisons, that he cut them off from all victuals, and tamed them with extreame scarsitie and want of all things. Fulvius with the second legion and the fourth, after hee had assailed the Apuan Ligurians from the coast of Pisae, received submission and homage of as many of them as inhabited about the river Macra; and when he had embarked upon seven thousand of them, hee sent them over to Naples, coasting along the Tuscane sea. From whence they were brought into the Samnites countrey, and a certaine territorie assigned them to inhabit among the rest of their countreymen. As for A. Posthumius, he cut downe the vineyards, and burnt the Corne of the Ligurian mountainers, so long untill they were driven by all manner of calamities following war, to come  in and submit, yea, and to deliver up their armour and weapons. From thence Posthumius departed and tooke the sea, because he would visite the coasts of the Ligurian Ingaunes and Intemelians. Now, before that these Consuls came to the armie which was appointed to meet at Pisae, it chaunced that A. Posthumius and M. Fulvius Nobilior, the brother of Q. Fulvius, were the commaunders, and had the conduct thereof. This Fulvius was a Colonell of the second legion, who during the time of those moneths, wherein by turne he had the commaund and charge therof, dismissed that legion, having bound the Centurions by an oth, that they should make paiment backe of their wage money well and truly to the Questors in the chamber and treasurie of Rome. Notice hereof being given to Au. Posthumius at Placentia; (for thither it happened that hee was gone) hee rode after those cassed souldiours, and pursued them wi
th a companie of light horsemen. As many of them as hee could overtake, after he had checked and rebuked them for their fault, he brought to Pisae; of the rest he gave information to the Consull. Who put the matter to question, and after it had beene debated in counsell, an act of the Senate passed against the said M. Fulvius, that he should be confined and sent into Spaine beyond new Carthage. And letters he had given him to carie from the Consull to P. Manlius into the farther province of Spaine. As for the souldiours, they were commaunded to returne againe to their colours, and for an ignominious disgrace of that legion, ordained it was, that for a full yeares pay they should be content and take up with sixe moneths wages; And looke what souldiour repaired not to the armie accordingly, the Consull had warrant and commission to make sale of him and all that hee had.
The same yeare L. Duronius, who was returned with ten ships to Brundusium from out of Illyricum (where he sat as Pretor the former year) leaving his ships there in the rode, came to Rome: where, in discoursing of the acts by him done, he laid the whole fault of all the roverie and piracie at sea upon Gentius the king of the Illyrians, saying, that all the ships which had lien upon the coast of the Adriaticke sea, came out of his realme. For which he had sent embassadors to complaine, but they could never find meanes to speake with the king about it. Now there were embassadours arrived at Rome from Gentius, who avouched, that when the Romanes came for to parle with the king, he happened to be sicke in the most remote parts of his kingdome: and therefore Gentius their king and maister requested the Senate, not to give credite to those false accusations and forged slaunders which his enemies had raised and enformed against him. But Darenius alleadged moreover, that divers and sundrie persons, as well citizens of Rome as Latine allies within his dominion, had received many wrongs: yea, and by report certaine Romane cittizens were staied and detained at Corryta. Wherupon it was in counsell thought good that they should all be brought to Rome, and that C. Claudius the Pretour should have the hearing of the matter, before which time no answere would be given unto king Gentius or his embassadors.
Among many others that the plague this yeare consumed, certaine priests and prelates also died, and namely, L. Valerius Flaccus, a bishop, in whose roume was chosen Q. Fabius Labeo. Also P. Manlius one of the three Triumvirs for the celebration of the holy feasts. In whose steed Q. Fulvius the sonne of Marcus was elected Triumvir. He was at that time veryPraet^rtatus, I^app^ar^th that he^^as under 17. ^^ne^^^ age, and so Livie useth t^^s word in the end of the 22 booke: for Praetexta was Puerilis habitus, Tacitus 12. lib. and upon this is should seeme ensued Lex^u^a annalis, o^ annaria, for the re^^esse of that d^sorder. yong, and not out of his embrodered Praetexta. But as touching the king of sacrificers, who was to be chosen in  place of Cn. Cornelius Dolobella, there was debate between C. Servilius the Archbishop, and Cornelius Dolabella one of the Duumvirs for the navie. For when the bishop would have had him to resigne that office, that he might consecrate and inaugurate him the king sacrificer, he refused so to doe. For which cause the bishop set a round fine on the Duumvir his head. Then Dolabella appealed

 to the people; and before them it was to be tried, Whether the said fine should be taken off or paied? Now when most of the tribes called into the railes for to give their voices, advised the Duumvir to obey the bishop, and awarded the fine for to be pardoned and remitted, in case hee would give over that office which hee had, behold it lightened at the very instant from heaven, which is the onely ominous signe that interrupteth and breaketh the assemblies of the people. Whereupon the Colledge of the bishops made scruple of conscience to inaugurate Dolabella, but they consecrated P. Cloelius Siculus, who had beene sacred in the second place. In the end of the yeare C. Servilius Geminus likewise the Archbishop himselfe departed this world, who also was one of the ten Decemvirs deputed for the holy ceremonies. And Q. Fulvius Flaccus, was by the colledge of the bishops, elected bishop in his roume. But M. Aemylius Lepidus was  created the soveraigne pontife, notwithstanding many noble persons made suite therefore. Likewise Q. Martius Philip, a Decemvir for the holy mysteries, was chosen in his place. Moreover, there deceased Sp. Posthumius Albinus an Augur, in whose steed P. Scipio the sonne of Affricanus was elected by the Augurs. The same yeare graunted it was to the inhabitants of Cumes, at their owne request and petition, that they might commonly speake Latine: as also to the publicke criers, to make portsale of goods in the Latine tongue. The Senate gave thankes to the Pisanes for the offer they made of lands, wherein to plant a Colonie of Latines. And three Triumvirs or Commissioners for that businesse were created, namely, Q. Fabius Buteo, Marcus and Publius, both named Popilius, and both surnamed Laenas. Letters were brought from M. Maenius the Pretor (who having the government allotted unto him of Sardinia, had commission also  to enquire after the practise of poysoning in all places, not within ten miles of the citie of Rome) importing thus much, that he had condemned alreadie three thousand persons, and that the informations and presentments multiplied daily, by reason of new matters discovered still; and therefore either he was to give over that inquisition, or to resigne up his province Sardinia.
Q. Fulvius Flaccus returned out of Spaine to Rome with great honour and renowme for his acts there atchieved. Who remaining yet without the citie because of his triumph, was created Consull with L. Manlius Acidinus, and within few daies after, rode triumphant into Rome, accompanied with his souldiours, whome hee had brought home with him. Hee carried in triumph a hundred and twentieWhich were s^rt unto him from princes and citie, to set out his triumph: these were called Coronae triumphales, and (...) the gold Coronarium. golden coronets. Moreover in gold one and thirtie pound weight, besides 173200 peeces of coine in Oscane silver. He dealt to his souldiours fiftie Denarij  apeece out of the bootie and pillage which hee had gotren. To every Centurion hee gave it double, and to the gentlemen of Rome that served on horsebacke, triple. The like he did in proportion by the Latin allies, and to all in generall he paied double wages. This year was the law first proposed by L. Iusius a Trib. of the Commons, as touching the yeer of the age requisit and meet for to sue for any publicke office, or to exercise the same. And hereupon it came, that the whole race of that familie was surnamedThe law it selfe called Annaria or Annales. Annales. Many yeares after there were created foure Pretors according to the law Baebia, which provided that there should be each other yeare foure chosen. And these were they who were first elected, namely, Cn. Cornelius Scipio, L. Valerius Levinus, Q. and M. both named Mutij, and both surnamed Scevolae.
Vnto the Consuls Q. Fulvius and L. Manlius the government of the same provinces was ordained,  which to those of the former yeare, with like numbers of horse and foot, as well cittizens as allies. In both provinces of Spaine, Tib. Sempronius and L. Posthumius continued still to have the commaund and conduct of the same armies which they had. And for to furnish them out, the Consuls were enjoined to enroll three thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen of Romanes, likewise five thousand foot of Latine allies and foure hundred horse. P. Mucius Scevola by lot had the civile jurisdiction within the citie of Rome, and commission to enquire into the devillish cast of poysoning both within the citie, and without for the compasse of ten miles. Cn. Cornelius Scipio was lord cheefe justice in forraine pleas and causes, Q. Mutius Scevola was lord deputie in Sicilie, and C. Valerius in Sardinia. Q. Fulvius the Consull, before that he went in hand with any affaires of State, said he would both discharge himselfe and also the citie of the dutie to  Godward, in performing the vowes which hee had made. Hee declared, that on that very day wherein he fought his last battell with the Celtiberians, hee had made a vow to exhibite games to the honour of that most mightie and gracious God Iupiter, and likewise to build a temple to Fortuna equestris: and how thereto the Spaniards had contributed certaine sums of mony. So a decreee passed, that those plaies should bee set forth: and two Duumvirs chosen, to give

order and bargaine for the edification of the same temple. Likewise there was set downe a certaine  stint of money to be disbursed for the defraying of the charges: to wit, not exceeding that summe in the solemnitie of the plaies, which was allowed unto Fulvius Nobilior, when hee exhibited the like sports after the end of the Aetolian warre. Item, that for these games he should not seeke or send for, gather and raise, receive or do any thing, contrarie to the Act of the Senate, which in the time of L. Aemylius and Cn. Baebius Coss. was made as touching such pastimes. This decree the Senate ordained, by occasion of the superfluous and excessive expenses emploied about the plaies of T. Sempronius the Aedile; which were very chargeable not onely to Italie and the Latine allies, but also to forraine provinces. The winter this yere was very sharp, by reason of snow, and all manner of tempesteous weather. The trees that were tender and subject to frost and cold, were all blasted and killed: besides the winter season continued much longer than ordinarie  in other yeeres. And thereupon the festivall solemnitie of the Latine holidaies were so troubled and disordered by a suddaine and insuportable storme and tempest upon the hill [Alba] that by an ordinance of the Bishops, it was celebrated againe the second time. The same tempest cast downe certaine images in the Capitol, and disfigured very many places with thunderbolts and flashes of lightning. It overthrew the temple of Iupiter in Tarracina, the white temple at Capua: Item, the gate there called Romana and the battlements of the wals in divers places. Among these wondrous prodigies it was reported also from Reate, that a mule was foaled with three feet. For this cause the Decemvirs were commaunded to go to the bookes of Sibylla: and out of that learning, they shewed to what gods sacrifice should be made, and what number of beasts was to be killed. And because many places were with lightning defaced, they ordained  that a solemn supplication should be holden one whole day in the temple of Iupiter. This done, the foresaid games and plaies which Q. Fulvius the Consul had vowed, were with great magnificence exhibited for ten daies together. After this followed the election of the Censors, wherein M. Aemylius Lepidus the Arch-bishop, and M. Fulvius Nobiltor, who had triumphed over the Aetolians, were created. Now betweene these two men, there had bene notorious enmitie, oftentimes testified and shewed in many sharpe and bitter debates, both in the Senate, and also before the people. When this election was ended, the two Censors according to the auncient use and custome, sat upon their yvorie chaires of estate in Mars field, neere the altar of Mars. To whom ther soon repaired thither, the principal Senators, accompanied with a troup besides of citizens: and among the rest, Q. Caecilius Metellus made a speech to this effect. My masters,The nation of Metedus to the Censors. you that  are Censors, we have not forgotten that you ere-while were chosen by the universal body of the people of Rome, to be superintendents and wardens over us for our manners and behavior: and that it becommeth us to be taught, admonished, and directed by you, and not you by us. Howbeit we ought to tell and declare, what there is in you, that either is offensive to all good men, or at lestwise which they wish were amended. When we behold and consider you severally apart, either you, o M. Aemylius, or you M. Fulvius, wee have not this day in the cittie of Rome any men, whom if we were called to a new scrutinie for to passe our voices againe, we would prefer before you to this office and place of dignitie. But when we see you both together, we cannot chuse but much doubt and feare that ye are very badly matched and coupled as companions in government: and that the common weale shall not receive so much good by this, That yee please and  like us all so well; as sustaine harme in this, ^^^t you displease and dislike one another. These many yeeres together, there hath bene great heart-burning and much malice betweene you, and the same must needs be grievous and hurtful unto yourselves: but now it is to be feared, that from this day forward, that rank or will be more prejudiciall to us and the common weale, than unto you. Vpon what motives and causes wee are thus fearefull, much wee could say, but that peradventure your irreconcilible anger is such, as hath snared and possessed wholly your spirits and minds alreadie. These quarrels, jarres, and grudges of yours, we all in generall would request you heartily to end this day, and in this very temple wherein we are assembled: and since the people of Rome by their voices have conjoyned you in one office; suffer your selves by us to bee linked and reconciled in perfect attonement. With one mind and accord, with one heart and counsel, chuse the Senate; review the Chevalrie and knighthood of Rome; number the cittizens; assesse their goods; purge and clense the citie; and finally consummate the solemnitie of the Cense with a sacrifice. And whereas in all your praiers well neere, yee shall use this ordinarie forme of words, That this thing, or that, may fall out in the end well and happilie, to my selfe and to my colleague,

 See that you wish the same truly, syncerely and from the very hart, that whatsoever ye shal pray vnto the gods for, wee men may beleeve and all the world see, that you desire the same to bee effected in deed. T. Tatius and Romulus in this very cittie reigned together with great untie and concord: in the middest whereof even in the very market-place, they had encountred and joyeed battaile together as mortal enemies with their cruell armies. What! not enmities onely have an end, but warres also. And many a time most venemous and spitefull foes become faithful allies, yea, and other whiles nere neighbors and fellow citizens. The Albanes after the subversion and utter mine of their citie, were brought over to inhabite Rome. The Latines and Sabines both, were endenizend Romans. An old said saw it is, and not so old as true, and for the truth become a common proverb, That enmities ought to be transitorie and soone die, wheras friendship should continue  and live for ever. At these words, there arose a confused bruit among them there assembled, in token of their consent and approbation: and anon were heard the destinct voices of them all in generall, craving and requesting of the Censors the same; which making one entire sound, brak off the speech of Metillus. Then Aemylius among other matters complained, that M. Fulvius had twise put him besides the Consulship, which otherwise he was sure of. And Fulvius on the other side found himselfe greeved, that he evermore by Aemylius had bene provoked, and that he had waged law by stipulation against him to his dishonor and disgrace. Yet both of them made saite and shewed, that if the one were as willing as the other, they would relent and be over-ruled by so many honourable personages of the citie. So, at the instant request of all them that were present, they shooke hands and thereby assured one another to forgive and forget all matters past, and truly  to make an end of malice, and bee perfect friends againe: whereupon they were much commended by the whole assembly, and conducted by them into the Capitoll. Where the Senate approved and highly praised, as well the carefull industrie of the principall cittizens, in effecting this so weightie a matter, as also the good nature and debonaritie of the two Censors. Who afterwards when they required to have a certaine summe of monie assigned unto them for to employ in the publike edifices and other workes of the cittie, were allowed by their decree, the full rent and revenues of one whole yeere.
The same yeere L. Posthumius and Tib. Sempronius the Pro-pretours in Spaine, agreed so together, that Albinus should make an expedition against the Vaccei through Lusitania, and so returne from thence into Celtiberia. But Gracchus went as farre as the utmost quarter of Celtiberia,  for that in those parts there was the greater war. And first he forced the citie Munda, which he surprised so dainly in the night at unawares. Then, after he had received hostages, and put a garison there, he went forward assaulting forts and burning the villages, untill he came to another cittie of exceeding strength, which the Celtiberians call Certima: where, as he was about to approch the wals with his engines of batterie, there came unto him orators out of the citie; who like good plaine men of the old world, made a speech unto him, nothing dissimuling but that they would warre and be revenged, if their strength and forces were sufficient. For they reqested leave to passe to the Celtiberian campe, there to receive aid and succour: but if they could not speed, then they would consult apart by themselves what to doe. Good leave they had of Gracchas; and some few daies after, they brought with them tenne Oratours more. About noonetide  it was of the day; and the first thing that they craved at the Pretour his hand was this, That he would make them to drinke before they parled. When they had once quaffed and carowssed round, they called againe for more: wherat, all that were present and stood about them, laughed heartily, to see them so rude and uncivile, and altogither without good manners. But afterwards, the eldest man of the companie began in this wise: Wee are sent (quoth he) unto you from our nation, to know what assured means hath induced you to levie warre against us? To this demand Gracehus answered, That he came with the confidence that he had in a brave and valiant armie; which (if they were so desirous) he would doe them the favour to see, that they might be able to make more certaine report to their countreymen upon their owne knowledge. And with that, he commaunded the colonels and knight marshals, to put in armes and embattaile all the bands  and companies, as well foot as horse; and then armed as they were to charge one upon another in manner of a battaile. These embassadours, after they had once seen this sight, were sent away: who went directly to the Celtiberians their neighbours, and frighted them from sending any succour to the citie besieged. The townesmen within having in vaine set fire-lights in the night time aloft upon their turrets (which was the signall agreed upon betweene them) and seeing

themselves destitute of the onely hope they had of aid, yeelded by composition. So they were  enjoyned to make paiment of four and twentie hundred thousand Sesterces; and to deliver fortie of their noblest gentlemen and best men of armes; not by way of hostages (for commaunded they were to serve in the warres;) and yet in truth, they stood for a pawn of assurance for their fealtie. From thence anon he marched to the citie Aldo, where the Celtiberians lay encamped, and from whome of late the embassadours aforesaid came: whome, for certaine daies he provoked to fight, making small skirmishes, by sending out against their corps deguard his light-armed vauntcourtiers, to the end, that skuffling togither every day more than other, hee might traine them all forth of their camp at length. And when he perceived once that his designe had taken effect, he commanded the captains of the auxiliarie soldiors, that after some short skirmish, they should make semblaunt as if they were overcharged with numbers, and so at once turne their  backes, and flie as fast as they could to their owne campe: himselfe in the meane while put his men in battaile array within the rampier at every gate. Long it was not, but he might see his owne bands and companies retiring backe for the nones and running away, and after them the barbarous enemies following as hard as they could in chase. Now had he his armie embattailed for the purpose, and readie to receive them: and therefore he made no longer stay than onely to suffer his friends and allies to enter at libertie into the campe, but hee set up a loud crie, and at one instant issued forth at all the gates. The enemies were not able to endure this unexpected violent charge; and so they that were come to assaile the campe of others, could not so much as defend their owne: for presently they were discomfited and put to flight; and within a while driven for verie feare into their hold, and in the end turned out of it also. That day nine thousand  of the enemies left their carkases in the field, three hundred and twentie were taken prisoners, togither with 112 horse, and 73 field ensignes. Of the Romane armie, there died not above an hundred and nine. Presently after this battaile, Gracchus marched with his legions to wast and spoile the countrey of Celtiberia: and as he made havock in all places as he went, with driving booties, with harrying and carrying all that ever he could come by; the cities and States of the countrey, some submitted willingly of their owne accord; others for constraint and feare received the yoke of subjection; so as in few daies space he became master of an hundred and three townes that yeelded unto him. A mightie rich pillage he gat in this expedition. After this, hee marched backe againe toward the citie Alce from whence hee came, and began to besiege and assaile the towne. The inhabitants endured the first assault of the enemies, but afterwards seeing  their towne not only assailed by force of arms, but also shaken with engins and instruments of battery, distrusting the strength of the city, they retired all within their fortresse: from whence also in the end, (having sent their Oratours before-hand) they and all that ever they had, were at the devotion of the Romanes. A great bootie there was gotten, and many noble gentlemen taken prisoners: amongst whome were two sonnes and one daughter of Thurrus. This Thurrus was a prince and great lord of those parts, and simply the mightiest potentate of all the Spaniards by many degrees: who beeing advertised of the hard hap and calamitie fallen upon his children, sent unto Gracchus into the campe for a safe-conduct, and thither hee came himselfe in person. And first hee demaunded, Whether hee would graunt unto him and his, their lives? The Pretour answered, That they should live. Then hee demaunded againe, If hee  might beare armes and serve under the Romanes? and when Gracchus permitted that also; Then will I follow you (quoth he) against mine old friends and allies, since they disdaine to respect and * regard me. From this time forward he tooke part with the Romanes; and in many journies he bare himselfe loially and valiantly in their warres, and much advaunced the Romane State. After this, Ergavica (a noble, rich, and mightie citie) affrighted at the calamities of other neighbour townes and States about them, set the gates open for to receive the Romanes. Some Authors have written, that these townes and cities yeelded not bona fide and in sinceritie of heart: but that so soone as he had withdrawen the legions out of any quarter, sodainly from that part they revolted: also, that afterwards, hee sought a cruell battaile neere the mountaine Caunus with the Celtiberians, from the breake of day untill noone: in which conflict there were many  slaine both of the one side and the other: neither did the Romanes any other great deed (as they suppose) at Ergavica that day to testifie their victorie, but kept the field, and challenged them out of their campe to fight. Moreover, that the next morrow all the day long, they gathered up the spoiles of the dead: and on the third day strooke a second battaile, which was greater

 than the other: and then at length, the Celtiberians without all doubt lost the field cleere; insomuch as their campe was forced and ransacked. Furthermore, that there died of the enemies that day two and twentie thousand, and not so few as three hundred taken prisoners, and well-neere as many horse, besides the winning of threescore and twelve militarie ensignes: and so the warre came to a finall end, the Celtiberians made peace indeed, continued fast and firme therein with all loyaltie, and were not so fickle and unconstant as before. They write moreover, that the same summer L. Posthumius smit a brave and fortunate battaile with the Vaccei in the farther province of Spaine, where hee put to the sword 35000 enemies, and forced their campe. But it soundeth more like a truth, that hee came not timely enough into that province, for to performe any such exploits during that summer season.
 The Censors made a revieu and new choise of Senators in good concord and faithfull unitie: for the president of the Senat was chosen, M. Aemylius Lepidus the Censor himselfe, who also was the high priest or Arch-bishop. Three Senators were cassed and deprived of their places: but Lepidus held some in, whom his colleague over-passed and lest out. Of that portion of mony, which out of the main allowance was divided between them, they caused these works following to be made. Lepidus for his part raised the great causey or wharfe at Tarracina, which was a peece of worke nothing acceptable to the people, for that he had himselfe lands and possessions there of his owne, and seemed to ease his private expenses, under colour of doing a publike work with the cities money. He built a Theatre, a fore-stage, or a vant-scaffold neer the temple of Apollo. He bargained with the Publicans or Vndertakers for the polishing, blaunching and whiting  of the temple of Iupiter in the Capitoll, and likewise of the pillars about it. From these pillers he removed the Images and Statues, which seemed to have beene unhandsomely set one against another, and out of all order. Likewise he tooke from thence, the targuets and field-ensignes of all sorts, that were there set up and fastened. But M. Fulvius put sorth to making more workes in number, and those of better and greater use. To wit, a peere, and certaine maine piles within the river Tyberis; upon which piles, certaine yeares after P. Scipio Affricanus and L. Mummius being Censors, tooke order for arches to be founded and erected. Item, A stately hall or palace behind the new shops of the banquers. Item, A fish market, with other shops round about it, which hee sold to particular persons. Item, A market place, and a porch or gallerie without the gate Tergemina, and another behind the arsenall, and neer the temple of Hercules. Item, neere the Tyber, and  behind the church of the goddesse Hope, he caused to be built the chappel of Apollo the Physician. Now they had besides another stocke of money in common, which they emploied in taking order for water to be conveighed into the citie, and certaine vaults to be made. But this worke was empeached by M. Licinius Crassus, who would not suffer the water to passe through his ground. Over and besides, these same Censors, instituted certaine rents for portage, and pondage, and diverse other imposts. Many chappels also, and publicke places in the tenure and occupation of privat persons, they tooke order to be reduced to the use of the people in common, and to be set open for all commers. They chaunged the order of giving voices, and caused to enroll the tribes according to sundrie quarters and divisions, having regard withall of the degrees of men, of their trades, misteries and occupations. Also the one of the Censors M. Aemylius sued  unto the Senate, that allowance should be made unto him of money for the games and plaies at the dedication of the temples of queen Iuno and Diana, which in the Ligurian war he had vowed eight yeeres before; and assigned there was unto him twentie thousand Asses. So hee dedicated both those temples within the cirque or shew-place of Flaminius. Also he exhibited stage plaies three daies together after the dedication of the temple of Iuno, and two daies after the other of Diana: and every of those daies within the cirque Flaminius. The same Censour dedicated in Mars field a chappell to the sea-gods, vowed by L. Aemylius Regillus, eleven yeares before, in a navall battell at sea, against the captains of king Antiochus. Over the gates of which chapell there was fixed a table with this title. FOR THE APPEASING AND COMPOSING OF A GREAT VVAR BETWEENE TVVO KINGS,Antiochus and E^me^es. * THE HEAD, * TO SUBDUE ** FOR TO MAKE PRACE**.  THIS CONFLICT,This place is defective in the Latine. * VVHEN L. AEMYLIUS REGILLUS THE PRETOUR, THE SON OF M.* VNDER THE CHARGE, COMMAUND, AND GOVERNMENT, HAPPIE FORTUNE AND CONDUCT OF HIM BETVVEENE EPHESUS, SAMOS, AND CHIOS, THE FLEET OF KING ANTIOCHUS THE ELEVENTH DAIES BEFORE THE KALENDS OF FEBRUARIE WAS VANQUISHED, DISCOMFITED, SHAKEN, BATTERED, AND PUT TO FLIGHT, AND

THERE UPON THE SAME DAY TVVO AND FORTIE GALLIES VVERE TAKEN, VVITH AT  THE MARRINERS AND SERVITOURS VVITHIN THEM. AFTER VVHICH FIGHT K. ANTIOCHUS AND HIS REALME*****. IN CONSIDERATION HEREOF VOVVED A TEMPLE TO THE SEA GODS, ASSISTANTS UNTO HIM IN ATCHEEVING THE NAVALL VICTORIE. Another table likewise, with the very same inscription, was set up and fastened over the gates of the temple of Iupiter in the Capitoll. Within two daies after that the Censours had chosen a new Senate, Q. Fulvius the Consull made an expedition against the Ligurians and after he had passed with his armie over wilds and mountaines, where no tracts led them, through streights and passes of forrests, he fought a pight battell with the enemies, and not onely woon the field, but also in one and the selfe same day forced their campe. Whereupon three thousand and two hundred of the enemies, and all that quarter of Liguria yeelded unto him. Then the Consull  placed these that had surrendered, in the plaines and champaine countrey, and planted garisons upon the mountains. Letters hereof with great speed came to Rome: wherupon there were ordained processions for three daies. During which time of procession, the Pretours celebrated sacrifices, and killed fortie greater beast. But the other Consull A. Manlius did no exploit worth remembrance in Liguria. Three thousand Transalpine Frenchmen passed over the Alpes into Italie, in peaceable manner marching without any hostilitie or harme doing, and requested of the Consull and the Senate a territorie to inhabite, where they might remaine quietly under the siegnorie of the Romanes. But the Senate commaunded them to avoid out of Italie; and gave the Consull Q. Fulvius in charge to make search and enquirie into this matter, yea, and to proceed against them who had been the cheefetaines and counsellers to persuade them to passe  over the Alpes.
This very yeer died Philip king of the Macedonians, worn away to nothing partly for age, and partly with griefe of hart after the death of his son [Demetrius.] It fortuned that he kept his winter in Demetrias, tormented with anguish of mind for the losse and misse of his sonne, disquieted with remorse and repentance for his crueltie against him, which stung and pricked his guiltie conscience. Besides, he saw his other sonne (who now was the undoubted heire apparant of the crowne, as well in his owne opinion as in the conceit of others) how all men turned their eyes and courted to him. He considered withall, how his old age was despised and forlorne; whiles some expected his death, others did not so much as looke for it; which was the greatest griefe and trouble of all other. And togither with him, there was Antigonus the son of Echecrates, bearing  the name of his unkle Antigonus by the fathers side, who had been guardian to Philip. This Antigonus the elder had ben a man of princely port and regall majestie; renowned also for a brave conflict and noble battaile against Celomenes the Lacedaemonian. And him the Greeks for distinction sake from other KK. of that name, surnamed(...) Tutor. His nephew or brothers sonne (I say) Antigonus, of all the honourable friends that Philip had, was the onely man that continued fast and firme unto him without all corruption. But this his loyall fidelitie and truth caused Perseus to be no friend of his, but rather the most mortall enemie that he had in the world. This said Antigonus forecasting in his spirit, in what daungerous tearmes he should stand, when the inheritance of the kingdome were devolved upon Perseus, waiting his first time and opportunitie; when he perceived that the kings mind was troubled, and that now and then he fetched deepe sighes for  sorrow that his sonne was dead; one while would give eare onely to the kings words, other whiles also would find some talk and minister occasion to speak of the act so rashly and unadvisedly committed. Oftentimes he followed and seconded him in his mones and complaints, and would be thought to lament with him for company. And (as Truth useth alwaies to give many signs and tokens of her selfe comming to light) he would enforce and helpe forward every small thing what he could, to the end that all might the sooner be discovered and breake foorth. The chiefe ministers and instruments of this vilanous fact, were Apelles and Philocles, who were the embassadours sent to Rome, and had brought those pernicious letters, under the name of Flamminus, which wrought the death of Demetrius. For commonly it was given out through all the kings court, that those were falsified letters, forged by his Secretarie, and sealed with a counterfeit signer. But the thing  being rather deepely suspected, than apparantly detected, it chaunced that Antigonus upon a time met with(...) Xychus, and laying hold upon him, arrested his bodie, and brought him into the kings house; and when he had left him in the safe custodie of certaine persons, hee went himselfe directly to Philip. It should seeme to mee, and if it please your grace (quoth hee) by many words

 which I have observed, that you would spend a great deale to know the whole truth as touching your two sonnes, and bee resolved whether of them twaine it was that laid wait to take away the life of the other. Now the onely man of all other that can undoe the knot and cleare this doubt, is in your hands forth comming, and that is Xychus. Herewith hee advised the king to call before him the said partie, since that (as it fel out) he was alreadie brought into the court. Sent for he was and presented before the king; and being asked the question, he denied everything at the first; but with such inconstancie, as it appeared evidently, that upon some little fear of torture offered unto him, he would be readie to bewray all: for at the very sight of the tormentour and the scourges, he relented. Then he disclosed and shewed in order the whole proceeding and maner of this wicked practice and villanie, how it was wrought as well by the embassadors, as also by his own selfe their  minister. Immediately there were some of purpose sent to apprehend the said embassadors. And Philocles who was present in the way, they surprised and took of a suddain: as for Appeles (who had ben sent to pursue one Chaereas) being advertised how that Xychus had bewraied and told all, sailed over into Italie. As concerning Philocles, there is no certaintie knowne. Some report, that at the beginning hee denied the matter stoutly: but after that Xychus was brought to his face and confronted him, he stood no longer in it. Others say againe, that being put to torture, he endured the paines, and continued still in the deniall. Philips sorrow and greete was by this meanes renued and redoubled, reputing himselfe more unhappie in his sons, and his miserie the greater, in that one of them was now dead and gone. Perseus being certified that all was discovered, tooke himselfe for a greater and mightier person, than to feare and thinke it needfull for him to flie upon  it. And therefore hee fought onely to keepe farre ynough out of the way, purposing to stand upon his guard all the while that his father lived, and avoid the flaming fire (as it were) of his burning choler. Philip seeing that hee could not possibly come by his person for to execute justice, thought upon that which onely remained to bee done, and studied how Perseus besides impunitie, should not bee recompensed and rewarded also for that his wickednesse. Hee called therefore Antigonus before him, unto whom hee was bounden and beholden alreadie, for bringing to light the unnatural murder committed upon Demetrius his sonne; and of whom he conceived this opinion, in regard of the fresh and late glorie of his uncle Antigonus, that the Macedonians should have no cause to be ashamed or repent, if they had him for to bee their king. And in this wise hee brake with him: Since my unhappie fortune is such (quoth  he)o Antigonus, that I ought (contrarie to all other fathers) to wish my selfe childlesse, I have a mind and purpose to make over unto you that kingdome, which I received at the hands of your unckle, which hee preserved and kept, yea, and augmented for my behoose during the time of my nonage, and wherein (whiles I was under his guardianage) he bare himselfe not onely valiant, but also true and faithfull unto me. No man I have but you, whom I can esteeme worthie to wear the crowne; and if I knew of none at all, yet had I rather that both it and the realme perished and were extinct for ever, than Perseus should enjoy it as the guerdon of his ungracious and divelish fact. I shall imagine yet that Demetrius is risen from death to life, I shall thinke that I have the fruition of him againe, if I may leave you in his place, you I say, the onely man of all others that wept for the death of the poore innocent young man, and lamented for my unhappy error  and unfortunate trespasse. After this speech with Antigonus, he never ceassed to entertaine and grace him in the face of the world with all kind of honour that hee could devise. For seeing that Perseus was in Thrace, Philip went in progresse to every citie of Macedonie, and recommended Antigonus to all the princes and States thereof. And without all doubt, if God had given him longer life but a little, hee would have enstalled him in full possession of the kingdome. Well, to returne againe unto Demetrias, where hee wintered (as before is said) hee departed from thence, and sojourned a long time in Thessalonica. From thence after hee was come to Amphipolis, he was surprised with a grievous maladie. Howbeit certain it was and very apparant, that he was more sicke in mind than bodie; and that ever and anon the remembrance and object, the apparition and ghost of his sonne, whome he caused (innocent as he was) to be  done to death, followed and haunted him so continually with care and griefe, that hee was out of all sleep and could not lay his eyes togither: yea it drove him into raving, cursing, and execration of Perseus his other son; and so he ended his daies. But although Philip died somewhat with the soonest for Antigonus, yet he would have gone very neer to have stept into his throne, if either the kings death had immediately beene divulged abroad, or that Antigonus had then been about

the court that he might have had intelligence therof. For Calligenes the kings Phisician, who had  the cure of him, staied not until the breath was fully out of the kings bodie; but so soon as he perceived that his state was desperat, upon the first deadly signes that he observed, sent messengers post to Perseus, who were set of purpose in places convenient, according as it was complotted between them twain: but he concealed the kings death from all them that were not of the houshold, untill he was come. By which means Perseus surprised them all before they looked for him, or knew abroad that the king was departed, and thus he took the crowne upon him by policie, which he had purchased with mischiefe.
The death of Philip sell out very wel to give some delay and respite, and to gather more forces for the waging of war: for the nation of the Bastarnae having ben a long time sollicited thereto, departed out of their owne countrie, and with a great power as well of foot as horse, came on  this side the river(...). Ister. Now there were arrived before to advertise the king hereof, Antigonus and Cotto. This Cotto was a noble man among the Bastarnians. And Antigonus was full against his will joined in embassage and sent with Cotto to raise the Bastarnians. Howbeit not far from Amphipolis they met with news (but very uncertain) of the kings death: which occurrence troubled the whole course of their designes. For thus it was complotted, that Philip should give the Bastarnae sale passage through Thrace and find them victuals: to the effecting and performation wherof, he had entertained the peeres and principall States of those quarters with presents, and assured them upon his fidelitie, that the Bastarnians should passe through their countrie peaceably without any harme doing. Now his intent and full purpose was, to extinguish utterly the nation of the Dardanians, and to plant the Bastarnians in their countrie. Hereby he aimed at a  two fold commoditie: the one was this; that the Dardanians (a people most malicious ever to the Macedonians, and who alwaies in time of the troubles and adversities of the kings, took their vantage to annoy them) might bee rooted out: the other, that the said Bastarnae leaving their wives and children in Dardania, might be sent to wast and spoile Italie. Now were they to passe to the Adriatick sea and so to Italie, by the way of the Scordiscians (for other way there was none to lead an armie) and soon would they, thought he, grant passage unto the Bastarnians: for they differed not at all, either in language, or manners and fashions: and more than that, they were like enough to joyne wit
h them in the expedition, seeing they went to the conquest and pillage of a most rich and wealthie nation. These designements were accommodated and fitted to what events soever should happen. For in case the Bastarnians should happen to be defeated by the Romanes and put all  to the sword; yet this would bee a canfort againe; that the Dardanians were consumed from the face of the earth, that he should meet with a bootie of that which the Bastarnians left behind them; and finally, have the possession free and entire to himselfe of all Dardania. But in case their fortune were to have the upper hand, then whiles the Romans were averted from him, and amused upon the war with the Bastarnians, he should be able to recover whatsoever he had lost in Greece. These had ben the designs projected by K. Philip. So they entred peaceably, and marched without hostilitie, under the word and promise of Cotto and Antigonus. But shortly after that newes came of the death of Philip; neither were the Thracians so tractable and easie to be dealth withall in commerce and traffike: nor the Bastarnians could be content with that which they bought with their money, or be kept in order as they marched, but that they would breake their ranks and  turne out of the direct way. Here upon they began to do wrong and injurie on both sides are one unto another: which increasing daily more and more to outrages, kindled the fire of an open war. In the end, the Thracians not able to endure the violence and multitudes of these enemies, leaving their villages in the plaines beneath, retired to an exceeding high mountaine called Donuca. To which place, when the Bastarnians would have gone: behold notwithstanding they approched to the tops and ridge of the hils, they were surprised with a storme and tempest, much like to that where with the Gaules (as it is reported) perished at what time as they were a spoiling and pilling the temple at Delphi. For they were not onely drenched first with shoures of raine pouring upon them, pelted afterwards with thicke stormes of haile stones, strucken with great cracks of thunder, and blasted with leames of lightning that dazzeled their eie-sight: but also the  lightning flashed so upon them on every side, that it seemed they were charged and shot directly against their bodies: so as not onely the common souldiers, but also the principall leaders and chiefetaines themselves were smitten downe there with and overthrowne. Wherupon when they were scattered and would have fled down the hill, from the exceeding steep rocks they tumbled

 downe they knew not how with their heads forward. And albeit the Thracians pursued them thus skared and affrighted, yet they had nothing in their mouth, but That the gods forced them to run away, and that the skie fell upon them. Being thus disparkled with this tempesteous storme, and returned as it were out of a shipwracke into the campe from whence they set forth, and most of them but halfe armed, they began to debate in counsell what to doe. Heere upon arose some dissension among them: whiles part were of opinion to returne backe into their own countrie, and part advised to follow the way still and pearce forward into Dardania. About thirtie thousand and persons went through under the conduct of Clondicus: the rest of the multitude returned the same way they came into the parts beyondDona^. Danubius. Perseus being possessed of the kingdome, commanded Antigonus to be put to death: and whiles hee was setting the states in order,  and establishing himself in his own seat, he sent embassadours to Rome, as well to renew the aminie that his father had with the Romanes, as also to request that he might be styled with the name of king by the Senate of Rome. And these were the affaires in Macedonie that yeere.
Q. Fulvius the other Consull triumphed over the Ligurians: and known it was for certaine, that this triumph was graunted unto him more for favour, than for any great exploit of his that might deserve such honour. He carried in shew a mightie deale of the enemies armour: but little or no money at all. Howbeit he dealt among his souldiours thirtie Asses a peece: to everie Centurion he gave twise as much, and to each gentleman serving on horseback, the same threefold. There was nothing in this triumph more memorable and worthie the noting, than this, that as it fell out, hee triumphed now the very same day that he had the yeere before upon his  Pretourship. After his triumph, he published the generall assembly for the election of Magistrates: wherein where created Consuls, M. Iunius Brutus, and A. Manlius Volso. This done, when there had been three of the Pretours elected, a suddaine tempest brake up and dissolved the assembly. The morrow after, which wasAnte quartum Idus Martij, i. the 11 of March. foure daies full before the Ides of March, the other three were chosen, namely Marcus Titinius Gurvus, Titus Claudius Nero, and T. Fonteius Capito. The Roman games were exhibited again the second time, by the two Aediles of the Chaire, Cn. Servilius Capto, and Ap. Claudius Cento, by occasion of certaine prodigies that hapned: for there was an earth-quake; and in the publike pavilions and tabernacles, where the sacred beds of the gods were solemnely spread, the heads of the gods which were laid in those beds, turned away of their owne accord, and the wooll together with the other coverlets which were  laid before Iupiter fell downe. It was taken also for a prodigious wonder, that the mice and rats had gnawne and tasted before of the olives upon the table [of Iupiter:] for the satisfaction and expiation of which prodigies, nothing else was done, but the solemnzing of those games and plaies againe, as is
aforesaid.



THE XLI. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the one and fortith Booke.
THe fire in the temple of Vesta went out. Tib. Sempromus Gracchus the Proconsull, vanquished the Celtiberians, and received their submission, and for a memoriall of the worthie deeds by him atchieved, he built a towne in Spaine called Gracchmis. Psoileumius Albinus the Proconsull, subdued the Vacceans and Lusitanes: and both of them triumphed. Anticcbus, the sonne of king Antiochus, whome his father had given in hostage to the Romanes, after the death of his brother Seleucus, who succeeded his father late deceased, was sent from Rome into the realme of Syria. The Censors held a review and numbering of the citizens, and solemnly purged the citie. There were enrolled in their bookes, of Romane citizens 273244. Q. Veconius Saxa, a Tribune of the Commons, published a law, That no man should make a woman to be his full bei^. M. Cato was the man that persuaded and spoke for this law, and his Oratum is extant. Moreover, this booke conteineth the warres and exploits of many captaines against the Ligurians, Istrians, Saxdians, and Celtiberians: also the occasions and causes of the Macedonian warre, which Perseus the sonne of Philip began: for he had sent an embassage to the Carthagenians, which they gave audience unto in the night season. Other states also and cities of Greece he sollicited. This Perseus, setting religion aside (for many stately and magnificent temples bee built in divers places, and namely at Athens, to Iupiter Olympius: and at Antiochia, to Inp. Capitolinus) was otherwise a king of most base demeanour and carriage.


THe beginning of this booke, and the greater part thereof immediatly ensuing, is lost. Imprimis, As touching the disposition of the provinces by lot, as well of Consuls as Pretors; and namely, how the government of Gaule sell to A. Manlius, and of Liguria to M. Iunius: and how of the Pretours, M. Titinius was assigned to the hither province of Spaine, and T. Fonteius to the farther; Nero to Etruria, T. Ebutius to Sardinia, Item, as concerning the fire of Vesis, the exploits of Tib. Gracchus and L. Albinus inCei^iberis. Biskai andLus^ania. Portugall: the survey and taxing of the cittie of Rome holden by the Censors; the law Voconia, as touching the inheritance of women, mentioned in Cicero, in S. Augustine de civitate Dei, and others: finally, of the acts atchieved  by M. Iunius about Genoway. And thus it sheweth a praerupt and broken front as ye see.
To have armed the same, which in peace he had received of his father: and for that cause it is said, That hee was passing well beloved of the youth and lustie gallants, who desired nothing more than to spoile and raise booties.
Now when the Consull was in deliberation with his councell, as touching warre in Istria, some were of opinion, to proceed thereunto incontinently, before that the enemies could assemble their forces; others advised, to consult first with the Senate: but their counsell imported, who were for speedie expedition. So the Consull dislodged from Aquileia, and encamped neer  the lake Timavus, which lyeth hard by the sea. Thither came Caius Furius (one of the navall Duumvirs) with ten ships: for two such Duumvirs or wardens had been chosen, to make head against the Illyrian fleet: who with twentie ships in all, keeping the upper sea, were to guard the

 sea-coasts so, as they had Ancona (as it were) the middle centre betweene: for L. Cornelius tooke the charge of all that lay on the right hand thereof, as farre as to Tarentum; and C. Furius of the left, unto Aquileia. These ten vessels (I say) were sent to the next port, against the marches of Istria, with other ships of burden fraughted with store of victuals and provision. The Consull followed after with his legions, and pitched his campe five miles from the sea. And within a short time, there was a good and frequent market kept in the port, from whence there was conveighted all manner of provision into the campe. And to the end that this might hold in more securitie, good guards were set about the camp on every side. TowardSelaveni^. Istria there was one standing frontier garrison, consisting of a cohort of Placentines, levied on a sodaine, opposed and lodged betweene the sea and the campe. And to the end the same might serve for a guard to defend  them that watered at the river, M. Ebutius (a colonell of the two legions) was commaunded to adjoyne two squadrons of souldiours out of the second legion. T. and C. both Aely, (colonels likewise) had led the third legion, by the way that goeth to Aquileia, which should guard the forragers and sewellers. From which quarter about a mile distant was the camp of the French. And a certaine pettie king there was among them, one Carmelus, having the conduct of three thousand armed souldiors, or somewhat more. So soones as the Romanes were approched, the lake,Tima^^o, or Larechia. Timavus with their campe, the Istrians set them downe secretly in a close place behind a little hill; and from thence followed the Romane armie as it marched, by crosse and crooked waies, espying and lying for all advantages that might be presented: for intelligence they had of all that was done either at sea or by land. And when they perceived upon a time the corps de  guard before the campe feeble and weake and that there was a great number of unarmed merchants betweene the campe and the sea, without any defense at all either from land or water, they ran at once upon the two foresaid guards, to wit, the Placentine cohort, and also the squadrons of the second legion. Now their enterprise at the beginning was covered and hidden by occasion of a morning mist, which at the first warmth of the sunne brake and scattered away, and then began somewhat to appeare through it: but the light was not yet cleere and come to the full; by reason whereof everything (as commonly in such a case) shewed farre bigger than it was. And this at that time mightily deceived the Romans, causing the armie of the enemies to seeme the greater by many degrees. At which sight, the souldiours of the one guard as well as the other being affrighted, fled into the campe with a great tumult and alarme, and there caused  far more feare than they brought with them: for neither were they able to tell why they fled thus as they did, nor give a readie answer to those that asked them the question. Over and besides, a great noise they heard from the campe gates, as where there was no sufficient guard to sustaine the first assault. Besides, their running thus huddle togither in the darke, while one tumbled upon another, made such a confusion, that they knew not whither the enemies was within the rampier or no. No other crie was heard but this; To sea, To sea. For by occasion that one souldiour at adventure began to set up that note, all the campe presently rung againe therewith, from one end to the other. Whereupon at first, (as if they had beene commaunded so to doe) to the sea they ran, some few armed, but the most part without any armour or weapons: afterwards more, and consequently at last in manner all; yea and the Consull himselfe, seeing that he laboured in  vaine to reclaime them, backe he fled, and could prevaile neither by commaund no
r authoritie, ne yet with praiers in the end; onely M. Licinius Strabo (a Tribune or Colonell of the third legion, abandoned of his owned legion) remained behind with three ensignes and no more. The Istrians finding him alone, (for no man else was seene in armes to make resistance) entred joyntly into the campe, ran upon him (and as he was embattailing his souldiors and encouraging them in the quarter about the Pretour his lodging) surprised, and with numbers over-charged him. The skirmish and fight was more cruell, than for proportion of so few defendants; and not ended, before that the Tribune himselfe and those about him, were slaine every man. The Generall his pavilion and all about it, was overthrowne; which when the enemie had ransacked and rifled of all that was there, they went as farre as the treasurers lodging, the market place, and to the  gate,By that gate was the market served, and i^ led directly to it. Quintana: where they found abundance of all things set out readie for their hands, and within the treasurers pavilion the tables spred and covered with good cares and meat upon them. Then their chiefe lord and leader (the pettie king aforesaid) made no more adoe but fate him downe, fell to his victuals and made good cheere; and anon all the rest following his example, did the semblable, and never once thought of armes or of enemies; and like to those who

were not wont to fa^e so well and feed liberally, they greedily overcharged their bellies with  wine and viands: but the Romanes all the while stood in farre other tearms. They trembled, they went hastily to their businesse both on land and sea. Downe went the shipmen and sailers with their titls and boothes; and looke what provision of victuals or other things were set foorth to s^^le upon the strand and shore, they harried and hurried a shipbord: the souldiours all affrighted ran amaine to the sea side, for to be embarked. The marriners fearing least their vessels should bee overcharged, some put backe the prease and withstood them for comming in, others shove off from the wharfe, and launched into the deep. Hereupon began a braule and broile, and from that they fell together by the eares, souldiours and mariners, one with another: some went away with knockes and wounds, and others left their lives behind them; untill at length, by the Consull his commaundement, the fleet was retired farre from the land. Which done, hee began to  sort the armed and unarmed apart. And hardly were there (of so great a multitude) twelve hundred found with armour about them, and very few horsemen that had brought their horses with them. All the rest were a confused and disordered companie, resembling the rascall sort of camp-followers, as victuallers, launders, skullions and lackies: who had beene a readie bootie to have preied upon, in case the enemies could have thought upon any feats of armes. Then at last came a messenger to recall the third legion, and to surprise the guard of the Gaules; and with that, from all parts they began to returne againe toward their owne campe, for to recover it, and wipe away and fordoe the shamefull blot and dishonour which they had received. The Colonels of the third legion commaunded the souldiours to throw down upon the ground their forrage and fewell, they charged the Centurions to set the elder and unweldie souldiours two  and two upon the horses and labouring beasts which they had discharged of their load; and willed the horsemen to take up behind them every one a young lustie footman; shewing what an honor it would be to the third legion, for to regaine by their valor the camp, which had been lost by the cowardise and fear of those in the second: and easily (say they) may it be woon againe, if the Barbarians, whiles they are encombred with the pillage, might bee surprised at unwares, and bee taken themselves, like as they overtooke others before. This exhortation was received with great alacritie and contentment of the souldiours. A lost were the ensignes born and advaunced apace, neither slaid the port-ensignes one whit for the souldiours. Howbeit the Consull and those companies which were brought from the sea, came first to the rampier. L. Atius a principall Centurion of the second legion, not onely encouraged the souldiours, but made remonstrance  unto them, That if the Istrians these victorers, had ever meant to guard and keepe the campe with the same force of armes by which they had woon it, they would at the first have pursued the enemies to the sea, so soone as they had turned them out of their tents; and afterwards have set a good corps de guard, at leastwise before the rampier and the avenues therof: but like ynough it is (saith hee) that with guzzelling wine they were dead asleep like beasts. And herewith he commaunded A. Baculenius his owne ensign-bearer, a man of approved valor and singular prowes, to advaunced his banner forward. Marry, that I shall (quoth he) full soone, if you will follow me alone that the thing may bee done more quickely. With that he forced his whole strength, and having flung the ensigned over the trench into the campe, hee was the first himselfe that entered at the campe gate. On another part likewise T. and C. both Aelij, and colonels of the third legion, were  come with their Cavallerie: then presently followed those also whom they had horsed two by two upon the labouring jades and garrons for cariage, and after them the Consull with his whole armie. But of the Istrians some few there were (such as were not stark drunk) whose wits and memorie served them to run away; the rest were dead asleepe indeed, and never awoke again. So the Romanes recovered all their goods, save only the wine and victuals which was devoured and consumed. The Romane souldiours who were crasie and sicke, and had beene left in the campe, after they perceived their owne fellowes within the rampier, found their hands againe, caught up weapons, and made a great carnage and execution. But above all others C. Popilius, surnamed Sabellus, a gentlemen and cavallier of Rome, bare himselfe most bravely that day, who being left in the campe (because hee was hurt and maimed in one of his fleet) flew the greatest number of  the enemies, by farre. Eight thousand Istrians fell upon the edge of the sword, and not one taken prisoner alive: for the choler and despiteous indignation of the souldiours was such, as they had no mind at all of prises and booties. Howbeit, the king of the Istrians, drunke as hee was, had so good fortune as to bee taken from the very bourd where hee sat, and hastily mounted on horsebacke

by his men, and so fled away and escaped. Of the winners there perished in all two hundred thirtie seven souldiours: and of them, more died in their morning flight than in the recoverie of their campe. Now it chaunced to, that Cn. and L. both named Gavily, new coloners and inhabitants of Aquileia, as they came with victuals, had like to have stumbled ignorantly upon the campe, when it was taken and possessed by the Istrians. They being retired backed in great hast to Aquileia, leaving their cariage behind them, set all on a fright and uprore, not onely at Aquileia but also at Rome within few daies after: for thither was the rumour run, That not only the campe was forced by the enemies, and (which was true indeed) the Romans put to flight, but that all was lost, and the armie utterly defeated. Whereupon, as the manner was in all suddaine tumults and alarmes, writs went forth for musters and levies of souldiours extraordinarily, not in the cittie  onely, but also throughout all Italie. Two legions of Romane citizens were enrolled, and the Latine allies were commaunded to set out ten thousand foot with three hundred horse. M. Iunius the Consull had commaundement to passe over into Gallia, and to levie of the citties and States of that province, as many as they were able to make and furnish. It was ordained withall, that T. Claudius the Pretour should make proclamation, that the souldiours of the fourth legion, and of the Latine allies five thousand foot and two hundred and fiftie horse, should meet together at Pisae; and that in the absence of the Consull he should defend that province: also that M. Ti^inius the Pretour should appoint the Rendez-vous at Ariminum; that the first legion, and the like number of allies, as well foot as horse, should there assemble. Then Nero tooke his journey, clad in his rich coat of arms, toward Pisae his province. And Titinius having to Ariminum Caius  Cassius a Colonell, to take the conduct of the legion there, tooke musters at Rome. M. Iunius the Consull passed out of Liguria into Gaule, and arrived at Aquileia, having levied aid-soldiors as he went, of all the cities of Gaul and the Colonies, to be in readinesse out of hand. There he was certified that the armie was safe and found: whereupon hee dispatched his letters to Rome to advertise them that they should not trouble themselves any more with this false alarme, and himselfe after he had discharged the Gaules of those aids which hee had imposed upon them, went to his companion in government. Great was the joy at Rome, comming thus as it did unlooked for. The musters were laid aside, the souldiors discharged who were enrolled and had taken their militarie oth, and the armie visited with the plague at Ariminum was dismissed and sent home. The Istrians albeit they were encamped with a great strength of armed men, not farre from the  Consull his campe, after they heard once that the Consull was come with a new armie, disbanded and slipt every man away on all sides to their several cities, and the Consuls retired with their legions to Aquileia, there to winter.
When these troubles of Istria were thus at length appeased, there went forth an act of the Senat, That the Consuls should agree betweene themselves, whether of them twaine was to return to Rome for to hold the assembly for election of magistrates. At what time as A. Licinius Nerva, and C. Papirius Turdus, two Tribunes of the Commons, in all their Orations to the people, inveighed bitterly against Manlius in his absence, and promulgated a law to this effect, That after the Ides of March (for the Consuls had their governements alreadie prorogued for one whole yeare) he should continue no longer in place, to the end, that so soone as he was out of his office,  he might presently be called to his answere judicially. Quintus Aelius; one of their Colleagues, withstood this bill by them proposed, and after much debate and contention prevailed so much, that it passed not.
About the same time Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, and L. Posthumius Albinus, being returned out of Spaine to Rome, had audience given them by the Pretour M. Titinius in the temple of Bellona, there to discourse of the acts by them atcheeved, to demaund their deserved honours, to the end that praise and thankesgiving also should be rendred to the immortall gods. Moreover, at the very same time intelligence was given by letters from T. Ebutius the Pretor, which his son brought and shewed to the Senat, of great troubles in Sardinia: Namely, that the Ilians, joining unto them the strength of the Balari, had invaded the province standing in peaceable tearmes:  neither was hee able to make head against them with so feeble an armie as hee had, and the same wasted and consumed much with the pestilence. The same newes related the embassadours likewise of the Sardinians, making humble suite to the Senate, to releeve and succour their citties at leastwise, for that their villages and countrey townes were alreadie past helpe.
This embassage, with all other matters concerning Sardinia, put over to the new magistrates; as pittifull an embassage

also was presented unto them from the Lycians, who complained greevously of the Rhodians, unto whom they had been annexed and made subjects by L. Cornelius Scipio: Indeed (say they) we lived somtime under the signorie of K. Antiochus, but that servitude of ours under the king, compared to this present state and condition wherein wee now are, seemed unto us an excellent libertie: for not onely are we now yoked and kept under publicke authoritie in generall, by taxes, levies, and impositions, but every one in particular endureth meere bondage and slaverie. Our selves are abused, yea and our wives and children suffer villanies before our eies: upon our bodies, our backes and sides they worke upon and discharge their humour of crueltie: in our good name (an indignitie unsupportable) we are desteined, depraved, and defamed: yea openly in the face of the world, they cease not to commit outrages against us, even to usurpe and extend their authoritie over us, and to trie maisteries upon us with extremitie: to the end that we Lycians might bee put out of all doubt, that there is no difference between us and slaves bought and sold for silver in ouvert market. The Senate mooved with these remonstrances by the Lycians, addressed their letters to the Rhodians to this effect, that it was no part of their meaning and intent, that the Lycians should be slaves to the Rhodians: or that any other borne free, should be enthralled by any person but their will was, that the Lycians should in such tearmes live under the governement and protection of the Rhodians, that both states, the one as well as the other, might range and frame themselves like good associates under the dominion and empire of Rome.
After this followed two triumphs over Spaine, one immediatly upon another: first, Sempronius Gracchus over the Celtiberians: and the morrow after, L. Posthumius [Albinus] over the Lusitanians  and other Spaniards of those parts. Tib. Gracchus carried in shew 40000 pound weight of silver: and Albinus twentie thousand. Both of them divided among their souldiers twentie five Denarija peece, to ech Centurion the same duple, and triple to every horseman. Thus did they also by allies as well as by Romanes.
It fortuned about that time, that M. Innuis the Consul, came out of Istria to Rome, by occasion of the election which was to be holden: and when the two Tribunes of the commons, Papyrius and Licinius, had in the presence of the Senate baited and wearied him with interrogatoties, as touching the affaires passed in Istria, they brought him foorth also before the bodie of the people. To which questions, after that the Consull had answered, how hee had not beene above 11 daies in the Province: and as for the things that hapned in his absense, he knew no otherwise  than they did, only by the common bruit and report: then, they went on urging him stil, and asking how it came to passe, that A. Manlius rather came not to Rome, to give account unto the State, why he passed out of Gaule (which was his allotted province) into Istria: and to shew, when it was that either the Senat decreed, or the people of Rome granted by their voices to enterprise that war? But haply it may be said (qd. he) that albeit the war was undertaken onely upon his own head alone: yet no doubt, executed it was right worthily with policie and valour. Nay ywis, but farre contrariwise: and hard it is to say, whether it were begun more Iewdly, than managed inconsideratly. Two entier corps, de guards were on a sodaine at unawares surprised by the Istrians: the Romane camp was forced and taken, with all the strength of horse and foot that was therin: the rest scattered without armes, and the Consull himselfe was the formost man that ran away to the  sea side unto the ships: and surely hee should render an account of all these matters, when he is a private person againe, since that he would not do it being Consull. This storme past, the generall assembly for the magistrates election was holden: wherein were created Consuls, C. Claudius Pulcher, and Tib. Sempronius Gracchus. The next day following were the Pretors chosen: to wit, P. Aeli
us Tubero the second time, C. Quintius Flamininus, C. Numisius, C. Mummius, Cn. Cornelius Scipio, and C. Valerius Laevinus. The civile jurisdiction of the cittie fell to Tubero, the forreine to Quintius. The government of Sicilie was allotted to Numisius: of Sardinia to Manmius. Howbeit this province by reason of the great warre therein became the charge of a Consull. And by lot it fell to Gracchus: but Istria to Claudius his collegue. Gaule was divided into two provinces; where of Scipio by lot obtained one, and Laevinus the other.

Vpon the Ides of March, on which day Sempronius and Claudius entred their Consulship, mooved it was onely in the Senate, as touching Sardinia and Istria, and the enemies to both those provinces, who there had levied warre. But the morrow after, the embassadours of the Sardinians being referred over to the new magistrates, and L. Minutius Thermus who had bene

 lieutenant to the Consull Manlius in Istria, entred into the Senat-house. By them the Senate was enformed how daungerous the warres were in those provinces. Mooved likewise were the Senatours by the embassies of the Latine allies, who in the end were admitted into the Senate, after they had importuned the Censors and Consuls of the former yeere: the summe of their complaints was this, That their owne citizens being once enrolled at Rome, were most of them departed and remooved thither to dwell: which if it might be suffred, within few reviews and sessings it would come to passe, that their citties should be dispeopled and desolar, their villages and fields desart and wast, and able to set out no souldiours for the warres. Semblably the Samnites and Pelignians complained, that foure thousand housholds were gone from them, and retired to Fregellae: and yet neither the one nation or the other, were set at a  lesse proportion of souldiours in all their levies. Two cautelous meanes and devises there were brought up, whereby men chaunged thus their cities at pleasure. The law graunted this indulgence to the allies of the Latine nation, as many as left yssue of their rase behind them in their house, That they should be reputed citizens of Rome. By abusing this law, some did injurie to their allies, other wronged the people of Rome: for, both they that were to leave such yssue at home, gave their children as it were in villenage to some Romane citizen or other whom they liked of; with condition to manumise and make them free, that they might be tribes or enfranchised citizens. And they also who wanted yssue to leave behind them, were held as citizens of Rome. But in processe of time without any of these colorable pretenses of right, without regard of law and respect of yssue, they crept in and had the benefit of the Burgeosie and freedome of  Rome, by their transmigration thither to inhabite, by enrolment in the reviews. To meet with thes
e practices, the embassadours craved a remedie for the time to come: as also that they would petemptorily commaund all their allies to repaire againe to their own citties: with an expresse inhibition, that no man should receive any other to be his vassaile and villaine, and so to alienate him, with intention by that meanes to chaunge the cittie wherein he lived: and that whosoever became cittizens of Rome after that maner, should not be counted for a cittizen. These petitions were graunted by the Senate. Then were decrees passed for those provinces of Istria and Sardinia which were in armes, to wit, for the enrolling of two legions into Sardinia, having either of them five thousand and two hundred foot, and three hundred horse, besides twelve thousand footmen, and 600 horsemen of the Latine allies; and ten quinquiremes or galeaces,  with five banks of ores, in case the Generall would warpe them out of the arcenall. The like number as well of the Infanterie as Cauallerie, was assigned for Istria. The Consuls also were enjoyned to send to M. Titinius in Spaine, one legion with 300 horse, besides 5000 footmen of allies, and 250 horsemen.
Before that the Coss. cast lots for their provinces, certaine prodigies were reported. Namely, that in the territorie of Crustumium, there fell from heaven a stone into the lake of Mars: That in the territorie of Rome, there was an infant born like a very stumpe, without head, feet, or hands: and a snake or serpent seene four footed. That in the market place of Capua, many houses were smitten with thunderbolts and lightning. Also at Puteoli two ships were set on fire by lightning, and burnt. Whiles these prodigious wonders were by others related, there was  seene a wolfe also in the day time at Rome, which having entred at the gate Collina, after much coursing and hunting, with much adoe and noise of them that followed the chase, escaped away from them all, and passed through the Esquiline gate. In regard of these strange tokens, the Consuls killed greater beasts for sacrifice: and for one whole day, a solemne supplication and praiers were made at all the shrines and altars of the gods. These sacrifices done and past, accordingly as it appertained, the Consuls cast lots for their provinces: and to Claudius befell Istria, to Sempronius Sardinia.
After this, C. Claudius published a law by vertue of an ordinance of the Senate, in favour of allies; and proclaimed, That those allies, and namely of the Latine nation, who either themselves or their ancestors, had ben enrolled among the Latine allies, during the Censorship of Marcus  Claudius, and Titus Quintius, or any time afterwards, should make returned every man into his owne cittie, before the first day of November next ensuing. And Lucius Mummius the Pretour had in commission to enquire and search for those that returned not accordingly. To this lawe and edict abovesaid of the Consull, an Act also of the Senate was adjoyned, That the Dictatour, Consull, Interregent, Censour, and lord cheese justice in the common

pleas for the time being, should endevour and take order, that whosoever were manumised  and made free, should take an oth, That he who manumised or enfranchised him, did it not with any intent, for to exchange the citie wherein he was: and looke who would not thus sweare, him they thought not worthie to be manumised. But his charge and jurisdiction was afterwards committed to C. Claudius the Consull.
Whiles these affaires passed at Rome, M. Iunius and A. Manlius, who had been Consuls the yeere before, having wintered in Aquileia, in the beginning of the Spring entered with an armie into the frontiers of Istria. Where, as they made wast and spoile farre and neere as they went, the Istrians entred into a commotion and tooke armes, rather upon greese of heart and indignation to see their goods thus pilled and ransacked, than for any assured hope they had of their sufficience to make head against two armies. Having therefore raised a concurse of their able youth  from all their cities and States, they assembled in hast a suddaine and tumultuarie armie, which at the first gave battell, and fought more in heat of courage, than with persistance of resolution. In conflict there were slaine of them to the number of foure thousand; the rest abandoned all warre, and fled here and there into their cities. From thence they sent embassadors first into the Romane campe to crave peace, and then the hostages which were demaunded. After intelligence given at Rome of these newes by the letters of the Proconsuls, C. Claudius the Consull fearing least this occurrence might put him by the government of his province and the conduct of the armie, without solemne praiers and vowes made, without his Lictors clad in their coats of armes, departed sodainly in great hast (all of the head) by night toward his province, and made no man privie thereto, but onely his colleague. His voyage thither was not so rash and inconsiderate, but his carriage there, was more foolish and undiscreet: for beeing thither  come, he assembled a generall audience; where, after hee had very unseasonably reproached Manlius for his running away out of the campe, (to the great discontentment of the soldiours, who were the first that fled;) and with opprobrious tearmes shaken up M. Iunius also for taking part in this dishonour with his companion: in the end hee commaunded them both to avoid out of the province. Whereupon the souldiours made answer againe, and said, That they would then obey the Consuls commaundement, when (according to the auncient custome of their fore-fathers) he had made his solemne vowes within the Capitoll; and then taken his leave and departed out of the citie, accompanied with his Huishers in their rich cotes of armes, warlike. Hereat he was so farre entraged with anger, that he called upon the treasurers deputie belonging  to Manlius, for chaines and gyves, and menaced to send Iunius and Manlius both bound to Rome. But the deputie likewise made as little reckoning of the Consuls commaundement: and the more animated hee was to disobey the Consull, by reason that he was backed by the whole hoast round about him; who as they supported the cause of their captaines and leaders, so they hated the Consull at the heart. In conclusion, the Consull beeing loden and wearied with the contumelious and railing behaviour of every one in particular, and with the frumps and taunts of the multitude in generall (for they stuck not over and besides to mocke him and make a laughing stocke of him) he went his waies againe to Aquileia, in the same ship wherein he came. From thence he wrate unto his colleague by an edict, to charge those new souldiours who were enrolled for Istria, to meet at Aquileia: to the end, that no businesse should keepe him at Rome, but  that with all speed he might depart from the citie in his coat of armes, and after he had conceived and pronounced his vowes accordingly. His companion in office was well content, and did all these things requisite full willingly: and a short day was assigned for the assembling of the soldiours at the Rendez vous above-named. But Claudius was at Rome well-neere as soone as his letters; where, at his first comming, he made an oration in the publicke audience of the people, as touching the demeanor of Manlius and Iunius: and having staied no longer than three daies at Rome, he set out with his Lictors formally in their cote-armour, when he had made his vowes solemnly in the Capitol, and so departed into his province again with as much celeritie and hast (if not more) as he came from thence.
Some few daies before, Iunius and Manlius began to assault by all forcible means the town  Nesatium, into which the principall persons of the Istrians, and Aepulo their king, were retired. Claudius, with his two new legions, presented himselfe before the towne; and alter hee had discharged the old armies and their commaunders, laid siege unto it, and intended to force it with mantilets and engins of batterie. The course also of the river which ran along beside the walles,

 and not onely empeached the assailants but yeelded water unto the besieged, hee diverted into another new channell, and bestowed many daies worke thereabout. This mightily affrighted the barbarous people, to see how they wet cut off from water. Howbeit, they never thought of peace for all this, but fell in hand to kill their wives and children; and when they had so done (because they would present to the vieu of their enemies, so horrible a fact and fearefull spectacle) they massacred them upon the walles openly in their sight, and then threw them headlong downe. Whiles the sillie women and poore infants (amid their piteous and lamentable cries) were thus cruelly murdered, the Romane souldiors mounted over their walles and entred into the citie. Their king when he once perceived (by the fearefull outcries of those who fled) that the towne was lost; for feare he should be taken alive, stabbed himselfe with his dagger to the heart. All the  rest were either taken prisoners or killed. After this, two other townes, Mutila and Faveria, were woon by assault and rased. The pillage was greater than a man would have looked for in so poor a nation: which was bestowed every whit upon the souldiours. Five thousand sixe hundred and two and thirtie persons were sold out-right in port-sale under the guirland. The chieftains of this war were first scouraged with rods, and then beheaded. Thus Istria, by the ruine of three towns and the death of their king, was appeased: and all the cities and states therof from every quarter, came in with their hostages, made submission, and did fealtie and homage to the Romanes.
The Istrians war was no sooner ended, but the Ligurians began to complot for to take armes and enter into rebellion. T. Claudius the Proconsull (who the former yeere had been Pretor) was governour and commaunder at that time of Pisae, with a garrison of one legion. The Senat being  advertised thereof by his letters, thought good to send the very same letters to C. Claudius (for the other Consull was alreadie passed over into Sardinia:) and withall, a decree was graunted out to this effect, That considering he had performed his commission in Istria, so as there remained no more for him to doe there, he should (if he thought so good) transport his armie into Liguria. Moreover, upon the Consull his letters, wherein he wrate what exploits hee had atchieved in Istria, there was ordained a solemne procession for two daies togither. Semblably, the other Consull Tib. Sempronius, managed his affaires as happily in Sardinia: he entred with an armie into the countrey of the Sardinian Ilians. Great aids were come from the Balarans to relieve and succour those Ilians: with both these nations hee fought a battaile in pitched field. The enemies were discomfited and put to flight, turned out of their campe, and twelve thousand  armed men slaine. The morrow after, the Consull commaunded all their armour and weapons to be gathered togither and laid on an heape; and this he burned as a sacrifice to the honour of Vulcan. Which done, he retired with his victorious armie into the associate cities, there to passe the winter.
C. Claudius likewise, upon receit of the letters of T. Claudius, and the commission directed from the Senate, marched with his legions out of Istria into Liguria: where, the enemies were come downe into the plaines, and lay encamped neere the river Scultenna. In which place there was a battaile fought: fifteene thousand of them were put to the sword, and not so few as seven hundred taken prisoners, either in the conflict or within the campe; for that also was forced and woon: besides, one and fiftie ensignes they lost. The Ligurians, as many as escaped the execution, fled  on all sides to the mountains for refuge; and notwithstanding that the Consull spoiled and wasted their champain country, there was not one man made shew of arms. Thus Claudius having in one yeere vanquished and subdued two nations, and in one Consulship (a rare felicitie in any other man) reduced other two provinces into quietnesse and peace, returned to Rome.
Certaine prodigious and monstrous sights were that yeere reported, to wit, in the territorie of Crustumium, a certeine foule called Sangualis, with her bill pierced into a sacred stone. In Campain a boeufe spake: at Syracusa a bull that straied out of the fields from the heard, lept the brasen cow there in the city and did his kind. In the territory of Crustumium, ther was a supplication and procession holden one day long in the very place of the foresaid prodigious sign. In Campaine, the boeufe or cow aforesaid, was put out to be kept and fed at the charges of the citie. Last of  all, the prodigie of Siracusa was expiat by a purgatory sacrifice, by direction from the soothsaiers to what gods, supplications and sacrifice should be made. That yeere died M. Claudius Marcellus the bishop, who had been Consull and Censor. In his stead M. Marcellus his sonne was consecrated bishop. Likewise in the same yeere, there was a colonie of two thousand citizens of Rome, planted at Luca. The Triumvirs or the commissioners who had the conduct and placing of

them, were P. Aelius, L. Egilius, and Cn. Sicinius: one and fiftie acres of land and an halfe was  set out for them apeece to occupie, out of the territorie late conquered from the Ligurians, and which had been sometime the possession of the Tuscanes, before it was holden by the Ligurians.
Then came the Consull C. Claudius to the citie of Rome, where after he had discoursed before the Senate, as touching the prosperous execution of his affaires, as well in Istria as Liguria, and thereupon demaunded a triumph, hee soone obtained that honour; and during his magistracie triumphed at once over those two nations. In which solemnitie of his triumph, hee carried in shew 307000 Deniers, and Victoriatus, the same that Qu^natius, (...)i Denarius. It had the image of Victorie stamped upon it. 85702 Victoriates. He gave to every common [Romane] souldiour fifteen Denarij apeece, a double proportion to the centurions, and thrice as much to every horsman. But upon the allies he bestowed lesse by the one moietie than to naturall citizens: and therfore  as they followed his chariot, they were silent and said never a word: a man that had seene them would have said they were malecontent.
During the time of this triumph, the Ligurians perceiving that not only the Consull his armie was brought home to Rome, but the legion also at Pisae discharged by T. Claudius: thinking now all feare past and overblowne, secretly levied a power; and having passed over the crosse frontiers, by traversing the wayes through the mountaines, descended into the downes, and wasted the domaines of Modenna, and by sodaine assault surprised the verie colonie. The newes hereof was no sooner arrived at Rome, but the Senate commaunded C. Claudius the Consull to hold the high court for the solemne election, with all convenient speed: that so soon as new annuall magistrates were created, hee might returne into his province, and perforce recover this  colonie out of their hands. So according to the advise and ordinance of the Senate the said assembly was holden: wherein were elected Consuls Cn. Cornelius Scipio Hispalus, and Q. Petilius Spurinus. Then were the Pretors afterwards chosen, to wit, M. Popilius Lenas, P. Licinius Crassus, M. Cornelius Scipio, L. Papyrius Maso, M. Alburius, and L. Aquilius Gallus. The Consull C. Claudius had his patent sealed againe for one yeere longer, to continue in commaund of the armie, and government of the province Gallia. And for feare least the Istrians likewise should follow the example of the Ligurians, he had commission to send those allies of the Latine nation, whom he had brought out of his province for to solemnise his triumph.
Vpon that very day, on which the Consuls, Cneus Cornelius and Quintus Petilius entered their magistracie, and sacrificed each of them an oxe as the manner was, in the honor of Iupiter: In that beast which Q. Petilius caused to be slaine, the liver was found head-lesse. When hee had reported this accident unto the Senat, he was enjoined to sacrifice another boeufe, for to appease the wrath of the gods. Moved then it was in the Senate house as concerning the provinces, and a decree passed, that both Consuls should bee sent to Pisae, and against the Ligurians: but order was given, that whether of them had the charge of Pisae allotted unto him, he should (when the time came) repaire to Rome against the election of yeerely magistrates. Moreover, there was another braunch of this decree, that either of them should enroll two new legions, and three hundred horsemen, and levie of the Latine allies ten thousand foot apeece, and sixe hundred horse. And T. Claudius continued still in full commaund, untill such time as the Consull was arrived in his province. Whiles these matters were thus debated and passed in the Counsel house, Cn. Cornelius was called forth by a bailife or huisher. And within a while after hee was gone out of the temple, he returned thither againe with an heavie and dismaied countenance, and declared unto the LL. of the Senate, that the liver of that oxe which he also had killed for sacrifice, a beast of sixe yeeres old and well liking, was consumed and come to nothing; and when he hardly beleeved the minister attending upon the sacrifice, who told him hereof, that himselfe caused the water to be poured forth of the pot wherin the tripes and inwards were sodden, where he saw the rest of the tripes and entrals full and whole, but all the liver wasted away, after a wonderfull and miraculous manner, not to be spoken. The LL. were much terrified and amazed at this prodigious object: and the more perplexed were they, for that the other Consull likewise related unto them, how in regard that in his sacrifice the liver wanted an head, hee had killed three oxen  more, one after another, and yet could not procure the favour and grace of the gods. Hereupon the Senate commaunded him still to sacrifice these greater beasts, untill such time as he had his desire and the gods were pleased againe. Now it is said, that all the other gods were well ynough contented, and their ire mitigated and appeased, onely the goddesse Health. Salus, Petilius could not be

 reconciled unto, for all that ever he might doe. Then the Consuls and Pretours committed the disposition of their provinces to the arbittement of the lots. Pisae fell to Cornelius, and Liguria to Pettlius. As for the Pretours, L. Papyrius Maso was lord cheese justice by lot appointed, within the citie of all citizens pleas, and M. Aburius had the jurisdiction over straungers: M. Cornelius Scipio Maluginensis had the charge to govern the lower Spain, and L. Aquilius Gallus, Sicilie. The two Pretors behind, requested earnestly that they might not be sent into their provinces, and namely M. Popilius into Sardinia: alledging, that Gracchus was able to quiet that Island; and the rather, for that T. Ebutius the Pretour was by the Senate adjoined to him for assistance: neither was it good to enterrupt courses begun, the continuitie whereof is the most effectuall meanes to exploit any great important affaires. For what with delivering up of the sword by the old L. Deputie,  and receiving it by the new successour (whome it were more meet first to bee trained up in knowledge of the State, than to bee put to the managing of State-matters) oftentimes the good opportunities of atcheeving brave enterprises passe by and are lost. This excuse of Popilius was held for good, and so approoved. Then comes P. Licinius Crassus, and he for his part made allegations why he might not go into his province: namely, by occasion of the solemn sacrifice, that he was to give his attendance upon. Now the higher part of Spaine was allotted unt him. But commaunded was hee either to goe into his province, or els to take oth in a frequent and full assemblie of the people, that the solemne sacrifice (as he pretended) was the thing that hindered him, and nothing els. This order being set downe and thus passed in the behalfe of P. Licinius; then steps me up M. Cornelius, and required them to take an oth of him likewise, that hee might not  goe into the nether province of Spaine. So both these Pretours were sworne according to one and the same forme of oth. Whereupon M. Titinius and T. Fontetus were commaunded to remaine in qualitie and place of Proconsuls within Spain, and retaine still the same authoritie and power of commaund: and order was graunted, that for to supplie their forces, there should bee sent unto them three thousand citizens of Rome with two hundred horse, and also five thousand Latine allies, and three hundred horsemen.
The solemnitie of the Latine holydaies began the Fifth of May. third day before the Nones of May: wherin, because at the sacrificing of one beast the magistrate of Lanuvium in his praier left out these words [Populi Romani Qutritium] and praied not for the good estate of the people of Rome, and the Quirites, it bred a scruple. The matter was mooved in the Senate, and the Senate referred it  over to the Colledge of the bishops and prelates of the church. And they pronounced this award, That for as much as those Latine feasts were not solemnized as they ought, they should begin againe a new: and that the cittizens of Lanuvium, by whose default they were thus to be renewed, should bee at the charges of all the beasts for sacrifice. Moreover, to breed more fearefull scrupulositie in mens minds, it fortuned that Cneus Cornelius the Consull as hee returned from that solemnitie out of the Albane mountaine, fell downe in a sit of Apoplexie: which turned into an Hemiplegia or dead palsey all the one side of his bodie, and so hee was conveighed to the bath and hote waters at Cumes: where, by occasion that his disease grew upon him still, hee departed this life: from whence hee was brought to Rome, and there carried forth in all magnificence of funerall obsequies, and right honourably enterred. Hee had  bene Bishop also as well as Consull. Q. Petilius the other Consull, being commaunded to hold an assembly for the surrogation of a colleague unto him, (so soone as possibly hee might bee warranted by the auspices and approbation of the sacred birds) and withall, to proclaime and publish the Latine seasts and holydaies aforesaid; summoned the election against the3 of August. third day before the Nones of Sextilis: and the Latine solemnitie, the third day likewise before the11 of August. Ides of the same month.
Whiles mens minds were much possessed alreadie with religion and set upon their devotions, word was brought moreover of certaine fearfull prodigies: to wit, that at Tusculum there was seene a burning flame in the skie: that at Gabes, the temple of Apollo, and many private mens houses: likewise at Graviscae the towne wall and one of the gates were smitten with thunderbolts.  For the procuration where of, the LL. of the Senate ordained that the Bishops should give order according to their discretion.
Whiles the Consuls were thus staied, first both, by their owne scripulous holinesse; then one of them by the death of the other; and afterwards by occasion of the new election and the renewing of the Latine festivall solemnitie: C. Claudius in the meane time approched with his

armie to Modenna, which the Ligurians the yeere before had woon. Hee had not continued the  siege full three daies, but he forced the colonie: and having thus recovered it from the enemies, he restored it againe to the former inhabitants. Eight thousand Ligurians died there within the wals upon the sword: and immediatly he dispatched his letters to Rome, wherein hee not onely declared the simple newes, but glorified himselfe and made his boast, That through his fortitude and fortune, both the Romans had not an enimie that durst shew his head on this side the Alpes; and that he had conquered so much land as might serve for to be divided by the poll, among many thousands. Tib. Sempronius likewise at the same time, fought many fortunate battailes in Sardinia, and utterly tamed and subdued the Ilanders: fifteene thousand enemies he there slew: all the States of that nation which had revolted, were reduced to obedience under the people of Rome: the old tributaries had an imposition and exactation laid upon them of a duple tribute, which they surely paid: the rest were put to a contribution of corne. After hee had set the province  in quietnesse, and received out of the whole Iland two hundred and thirtie hostages, hee sent certain lieutenants as messengers to make report at Rome of all his proceedings: who also in his behalfe should make suite unto the Senat, That in regard of the happie successe in those exploites, under the charge, conduct and fortune of Tib. Sempronius, first, due honour praise and thanksgiving might be rendred to the immortall gods; and then, that himselfe might bee allowed at his departure out of the province, to bring away his armie with him. The Senate gave audience to the messengers abovesaid within the temple of Apollo: and upon their relation ordained a general procession for two daies: commaunding the Coss. to sacrifice 40 head of greater beasts: and withal, enjoyned Tib. Sempronius the pro-Consull to continue that
yere with his armie in that province. Then the election which had bin published against the The third of August. third day before  the Nones of Sextilis for the substitution of one of the Coss. was the same day accomplished. And Q. Petilius the Cos. created for his colleague, M. Valerius Lavinus, for to enter immediately into his magistracie. This Laevinus had bin a long time desirous to be emploied in some province or other: and fitly it fell out for his longing desire, that letters came, importing how the Ligurians rebelled and were gone out againe in armes. So after hee once heard the contents of these letters, he made no longer stay, but upon the very 5. of August. Nones of Sextilis all goodly to be seene in his warriors coat of armes, he commanded the third legion (by occasion of this alarme) to go into France, to C. Claudius the Pro-consull: also the Duumvirs or two wardens for the ports and navie, to goe to sea, and with a fleet to make saile for Pisae, and from thence to coast about all Liguria, and thus by hovering upon the seas, to terrifie the enemies that way also. Q. Petilius likewise the Cos. had appointed a day for his armie to meet in the same place. Moreover C. Claudius the Pro-consull, advertised of the Ligurians revolt, over and besides those forces which he had about him at Parma, levied in hast a strength of more souldiours; and so with his complet armie approached the borders of the Ligurians. The enemies upon the arrivall of C. Claudius, by whose conduct they well remembred how late they had bene discomfited and put to flight neere the river Scultenna, minding to seeke for defence rather by the strength of advantageous places than force of armes, against that power of his which to their cost they had before tried, seized the two hils,(...) Pelegrino. Letus and Balista, about which they raised a mure also for their better safetie. But such as lag
ged behind and quit the champaine plaines and lower grounds with the latest, were surprised  and cut short, to the number of fifteene hundred. The rest kept within the mountaines: who albeit they were in feare and daunger of their owne parts, yet forgat not their inbred crueltie; but ran upon the booties and prises which they had taken at Modenna, their poore prisoners whom they held captive, they pitiously mangled and killed most villanously: as for the beastes in the temples every where, they rather hacked hewed and cut in peeces butcherlike, than sacrificed in decent seemely and religious manner. Thus beeing satisfied with the bloud and massacre of living creatures, they tooke all their breathlesse things they had, and reared and stucke them upon the walls; and namely, implements of all sorts, made rather for use and necessitie than ornament and shew. Q. Petilius the Consull, for feare least the warre would bee ended in his absence, dispatched his letters to M. Claudius, to hast away with his armie to him into France, for he would attend his comming upon the plaines called Macri. Vpon the receit of which letters, Claudius dislodged out of Liguria, and delivered unto the Consull his armie at the said plains called Macri. Fewe daies after came Caius Valerius the other Consull thither also. There they divided their forces, and before they departed one from the other, they both together made a

 survey and review of their severall armies. This done, they cast losts into what quarters they should either of them goe, for that they held it not good pollicie to charge the enemie both of them joyntly in one part. Now certaine it is, that Valerius received his lot according to the auspices, in that hee was within the precint of the temple or prospect by the Augur assigned. But Petilius herein made default (as the Augurs pronounced afterwards) and namely the error was herein, because he being himselfe without the compasse aforesaid, had put the lot into the casket, which was carried afterwards within the circuite of the said temple. This done, they went into divers quarters: Petilius encamped affront that banke and rising of the hil between Balista and Letus, which by a continuall ridge uniteth and joyneth the one mountaine to the other. There, as he was exhorting his souldiours in open audience, he let fall (by report) an ominous word, presaging his  owne death, never thinking of the ambiguitie and duple construction therof; saying that he would that very day Capete Letu^, thus written with a capitall L. signifieth. To gaine the hill Letus: but with the litle ^, (which Se care cannot importeth. To take his death. capere Letum. In two severall places at once he began to mount up the hils. That regiment wherein he was himselfe, avaunced forward couragiously: but the other was repulsed and beaten backe by the enemies: whereupon the Consull iodofull gallop to helpe that side which went downe: and in every truth reclaime his men hee did from running away; but whiles without good regard of his own person he kept before the ensignes in the forefront, he chanced to be shot through with a dart, and so fell downe dead in the place. The enemies were not ware of the Generals death: but some few of his owne men who saw him fall, made haft (as knowing well that in it consisted now the main victorie) to cover his bodie. So
the rest of the multitude, as well cavallerie as infanterie, captainelesse as they were, disseazed the enemies and were maisters  of the mountaines. Of Ligurians there were slaine 3000: of the Romane armie not above two and fiftie. Now besides this evident yssue and event which fell out upon so heavie and deadly a presage by theValerius Maximius reporting the same storie, calleth this Om\^e of his (which I commonly interprete) [Osse] fortiutum vousjactum; When a man casteth forth a word at a venture, and speaketh more truly than he is aware. For want of a proper tearme to expresse the Latine [Omen] all translators hi: herts, French, Italian, and English, have ben put is their shifts, and helpe themselves with [Praesage.] Which in mine opinion is nos appropriate to the thing, but common: as comprising other tokens; of birds, whether they be auguria of auspicia; of beasts inwards; of lightening and the rest: or rather implying (...), i. the fore-deeming by those signes, yea, and extendeth to the fore-giving of the mind. Whereas that other word [Osse] is very significant, and in analogie aequivalent to [Omen.] I merveil much therefore, why it is thought either strange and new (seeing it is English, used no (...) commonly in times past, and at this day currant in the North-paris, where the people haply are more observant of such presages) rather than many other f^rraine words, brought into our language, and raunged with the English: or why it should be condemned as absonant and not pleasing to the ears, more than (...) in Greek, which commonly be tokeneth (a voice) and more properly in Plato (as) Budaeus hath wel observed) is taken for [Omen] like as f for omina^i, and (...) [divinare] at Eustathius noteth upon Homer,I had, (...) E. From whence, who seeth not that [Osse and Ostang both] are derived? The word then being not basely borne, but descended from the northe, of all learnin
g, the Greeke tongue, and enfranchised in this Island time out of mind (howsoever it hath been confined into the North) would not bee exiled cleane, but rather reduced and received for a free denizen, quasi postliminio. osse aforesaid, the pulletier also was heard to say, that all was not well in the auspices of the birds; neither was the Consull himselfe ignorant thereof.
C. Valerius having heard [The great clerkes This within those mark^ [] The Latine copies have not, but is partly supplied out of Priscian in his 17 locke. and deep divines, those also that were profoundly seene in the common law, gave it forth, That seeing the two ordinarie Consuls (Cn. Cornelius Scipio Hispalus, and Q. Petilius Spurinus) of that yeer, were both dead, the one by sicknes, the other by the sword, it was not lawlfull for the other Consul (C. Valerius Laevinus) subroged in the place of the deceassed, to hold the assembly general for the election of new Magistrats.] conducted. On this side the Apennine were the Garules, Lapirines, and Her catians: beyond  the Apennine were the Briniates. Against them that had pilled and ransacked Pisae and Luna, Q. Mutius made war within the compasse of the river Audena: and when hee had brought them in subjection, he tooke from them their armes. For which exploits atcheeved in Fraunce and Liguria, under the conduct and happie fortune of the two Consuls, the Senate ordained that there should be publick procession for three daies, and commaunded to sacrifice fortie greater beasts. And thus verily the tumultuous warres of the French and the Ligurians, which arose in the beginning of the yeere, were in short time and without any great maistrie dashed and appeased.
But now in lieu thereof, great care was taken for the Macedonian warre, by occasion that Perseus sowed the seeds of debate and quarrell betweene the Dardanians and the Bastarnians. Besides,  the Roman embassadors who were sent into Macedonie, to see in what tearms things there stood, were now returned to Rome, and had brought word, That in Dardania they were up in armes. With them there came also from, king Perseus certaine Oratours to make excuse in his behalfe, and to cleere him in the action, namely, that the Bastarnians neither were by him sent for, nor entered into any execution by his motife. The Senate would neither acquit the king as

unguiltie, nor yet directly accuse him as culpable in that point. Onely they required, that hee  should bee advertised and admonished, to bee very well advised and carefull to keepe that league and accord inviolable, which he would seeme to entertaine with the Romanes.
The Dardanians seeing that the Bastarnae were so farre off from departing out of their countrey (as they well hoped they would) that they endammaged and endaungered them still everie day more than other, as bearing themselves bold upon the succors of the Thracians neere neighbours, and the Scordisci; thought it their best course in pollicie, to adventure upon some hardie enterprise, although it were rash and inconsiderate: whereupon they assembled all in arms, and from every quarter of their countrey shewed and advanced before the next towne, to the camp of the Bastarnians. Winter time it was, a season of the yeere which they made choise of, that the Thracians and the Scordisci might be retired home in to their owne countries: which when  they were advertised of, and that there remained none but the Bastarnae alone, they devided their forces in two parts: with the one, to march directly forward and openly to make head against them affront; with the other, to serch a compasse through by-waies and blind forrests, and so to charge upon their backs. But before they could wheele about the enemies camp, the battaile was begun: wherein the Dardanians had the overthrow, and were driven to put themselves within their citie, which was almost twelve miles distant from the campe of the Bastarnae. The conquerors followed the traine of victorie, and incontinently invested the towne, making full account, that the next day either the enemies would yeeld, or else they should be able to win the place by fine force. In the meane time, the other regiment above said of the Dardanians, which cast about, knowing nothing at all of their fellowes diffeature, began to assaile the campe  of the Bastarnians, left without a sufficient guard for defence.
As the manner of kings was,There wanteth (...) of (...) ^^ king the ^^ (...) of king T^^^^^^. he sate in a stately throne of Ivorie, to heare pleas and decided of the finallest and most tristing matters. So transported was he and carried away with an humor of levitie and spirit of inconstancie, so distracted and wandering in all the course of his life, that he was never setled and well contented in any condition of state whatsoever: in such sort, as neither he knew his owne selfe, nor any man else wist well what to make of him. He would not seeme to speake unto his friends, and hardly was seene to laugh familiarly among those of his neerest acquaintance. Hee made a foole of himselfe, and mocked others likewise; such was his unordinate and irregular munificence. To men of honour standing highly upon their worth and reputation, his manner was to bestow childish trifies, as sugar-plums to eat or to play withall, toyes and gewgawes instead of great and pretious presents: others againe that looked for nothing, those he enriched. And therefore some deemed, that he knew not what hee did: others gave it out, that he did all in plaine mockage: and there were againe that let not to say, how he was out of his right wits, and cleane besides himselfe. Yet in two things, which were both great and laudable, he carried with him a princely and royall mind indeed; to wit, in adorning citties with stately gifts, and honouring the gods with divine worship. He promised the Megapolitans in Arcadia, to raise a wall about their citie; and in truth the better part of the money to destay the charges there of, he sent unto them. He went in hand to build a magnificent Theatre of marble at Tegaea: at Cizicum, he gave freely to the Prytaneum (a faire hall by it selfe in the heart of the citie, where, at the common charges, certaine had their diet of free-cost) by way of honourable  reward, a cupbord of golden plate sufficient for the furniture and service
of one table. As for the Rhodians, I cannot say, what one speciall gift singular above the rest, hee bestowed upon them; so liberally minded was hee to them-ward, and his hand ever open to give them of all forts whatsoever they needed or required. Now, his magnificence in honouring the gods, what it was (if there were nothing else) the temple of Iupiter Olympius begun by him in Athens (so answerable every way to the majesty of that great god, that the like to it is not to be found again in the whole world) may testifie sufficiently. Moreover, hee beautified Delos with goodly seaensigns, and with a great number of statues and images. Likewise he promised to edisie at Antiochia, a stately temple in the honour of Iupiter Capitolinus; not onely arched above-head with a golden embowed rouse, but seeled all over the wall sides with plates of gold: besides many other  things in divers places, which by reason that he, reigned but a very short time, he could not finish and performe. In magnificence also of playes, publicke shewes, and pageants of every sort, he over-went all the kings his progenitors before him, as well in regard of Grecian actors and gamesters, whereof hee had many about him, as of the rest who were acquainted with the fashions

 of his owne countrey. He represented the fight of sword-players at the sharpe with unrebated swords, after the custome of the Romans; with greater terror and feare at first, than pleasure and delight of men, who were not used to behold such sights: but afterwards by often exhibiting the same, in such manner, as sometime they drewblood one of another, yea and otherwhiles gave not over so, but fought to the utterrence, even to death, hee made it a familiar exercise and a pleasant spectacle to the eye; and thereby set an edge upon the courage of many yong gallants, and emboldened them to embrace chivalrie and follow feats of armes. So as in processe of time, he that was wont at the beginning to send as farre as Rome for these sensers, and to hire them for great wages and reward, now with his owne L. Cornelius Scipio (had the jurisdiction) over forreiners. To M. Attilius the Pretour, the government  of Sardinia by lot was fallen, but he was enjoyned to passe over into Corsica with the new legion which the Consuls had enrolled, consisting of five thousand foot and three hundred horse, And during the time that he should be employed there in the warres, Cornelius had commission to continue in his charge and place of commaund; within Sardinia. Vnto Cn. Servilius Caepio for low Spaine, and P. Furius Philus for the higher, were assigned three thousand Romane footmen and an hundred and fiftie horse; but of Latine allies, five thousand of the one and three hundred of the other. As for L. Claudius he was appointed to Sicilie without any supply at all. Moreover, the Consuls had commaundement to enroll two legions besides, with the full number as well of foot as horse, and to charge the [Latine] allies, with the setting out and maintenance of a thousand foot men and six hundred horse. This levie and taking of musters, the Consuls  went through with, in more difficultie, by reason of a great mortalitie, which beginning the y
eere before with a morrein of kine and oxen, turned this yeere into pestilent epidemiall diseases of men. Looke who fell sicke once, lightly they died before the seventh day: and those that overlived and escaped that crisis, lay long sicke by it, and commonly of the quartane ague. The most that went of this maladie were slaves, whose breathlesse carkasses lay ordinarily along everie street unburied: and more than that,Libitina non sufficiebat. men were not able to enterre so much as the dead bodies of free persons, they died so thicke; in such sort, as they putrified and rotted above ground: for neither hungrie dog not greedie gripe, would once touch them. And for certaine it was knowen and noted, that neither all that yeere nor in the former, during the mortalitie of man and beast, there was not a vultur or grype any where to bee seene. Divers prelats and priests of  State dropt away of this plague, and namely, Cn. Servilius Caepio a bishop, the father of the Pretour: Tib. Sempronius Longus the sonne of Titus, one of the Decemvirs for sacrred rites and divine service: P. Aelius Paetus the Augur: Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, C. Attchus Aemylius the chiefe superintendent of all the parish-priests, and M. Sempronius Tuditanus a bishop. These were substituted bishops in place of the dead, to wit, C. Sulpitius Galba in stead of Tuditanus.
For Augures were subordained, T. Veturius Crassus Sempronianus in the roume of Gracchus; Q. Aelius Paetus for P. Aelius. Decemvirs over holy rites was elected, Catus Sempronius Longus; and C. Scribonius, surnamed Curio, supplied the want of the grand superintendant aforesaid, Still continued the pestilence; where upon the Senate ordeined, That the Decemvirs should have recourse to the bookes of Sibylla: by whose order and direction, publicke supplications held for  one day long: and after a devout manner, the people conceived and made a solemne vow in the common-place, according to that forme of words which Q. Martius Philippus endited and prompted unto them, to this effect: That if this maladie and pestilent disease, were remooved out of the territorie of Rome, they would for two daies space solemnize a feast, goe in procession and poure out their prayers with all devotion. In the Vejentian countrey a main child was borne with two heads; and another at Sinuessa but with one hand. At Oximum a maid child came into the world with teeth in the head: and over the temple of Saturne (standing in the market place of Rome) there was seene in the skie a bow full bent all the day long, if the aire were cleere and the weather faire: and at one time there shone out three sunnes. Also in one night, there evidently appeared many flaming lights and fire-drakes shooting along in the aire. The men of Lanuvium  and Caere affirmed plainely, That within their towne they saw a serpent with a crest and mane, yea and the same marked all over with yellow spots like gold: and it was held for certein, that in the territorie of Capua an oxe spake.
Now were the embassadours returned out of Affricke by the 7 of Iune. Nones of Iune, those I meane, who went to Carthage, after they had been with king Masanissa, and spoken with him. But better

and more certaine intelligence they had by this king, than from the Carthaginlans themselves, as touching the affaires that had passed in Carthage. Howbeit, thus much they reported upon their assured knowledge, that embassadours came from king Perseus, and had audience in the Senate secretly by night within the temple of Aeseulapius. Also both the king affirmed flatly, and the Carthaginians themselves but faintly denied, that embassadors likewise had been sent from Carthage into Macedonie. Whereupon the Senate was of advise and resolved to dispatch their embassadours also into Macedonie. And these three were sent, to wit, C. Laelius, M. Valerius Messala, and Sext. Digitius.
During this time, Perseus, by occasion that certaine Dolopians obeied him not, and of some matters in controversie and difference referred the audience and decision to the Romanes, and refused the arbitrement of the king, led forth an armie against them, and reduced the whole nation  under his obedience and jurisdiction. From thence hee passed over the Oetaean mountaines, and upon certaine religions motions arising in his mind, he went up to Delphos, for to visite the Oracle. Being thus on a suddaine seene in the very heart and middest of Greece, he strucke a terror not onely into the cities next adjoining, but also the bruite of this tumultuous alarme was blowne as farre as to king Eumenes. After hee had staied at Delphi not above three daies, hee returned turned into his owne realme, by the way of Phthiotis, Achaia and Thessalie, without any dammage done or wrong offered to the territories through which he passed. Neither thought hee it sufficient thus onely to win the love and favour of those cities and states through which he was to journey, but hee addressed either embassadors or wrote his letters, praying them to beare no longer in mind the enmities which had beene betweene them and his father, for as much as  they were not so bitter and deadly but they might well ynough, yea, and ought to end and die with him: as for himselfe, he saw no let or hinderance in the world to empeach them for entertaining a faithfull amitie with him. But above all others hee sought meanes to be reconciled to the Achaeans, and to reenter into grace and favour with them. This nation alone of all Greece, together with the citie of Athens, were growne into those tearmes of despight and malice against the Macedonians, that they debarred them from once setting foot within their confines. And hereupon it came, that when certaine slaves fled out of Achaea, they retired into Macedonie for refuge, and there remained: and because the Achaeans had forbidden the Macedonians to come within their liberties, they durst not likewise for their parts enter into the marches and frontiers of his kingdome to recover their bondmen. Which when Perseus perceived, he caused al those fugitive  slaves to be apprehended, and he dispatched his letters unto the Achaeans, where in he wrote That he would right courteously send backe their slaves home againe, although they were runne away from them unto him; advertising and advising them to beware and looke well unto it, that there were no more any such escapes and runnings away of their bond-servants here after. When these letters were read by Xenarchus their Pretour, who sought to currey some favour and to wind himselfe into grace with the king, most of them that were present judged the letters to have been written right graciously and with great government and moderation, but principally those persons, who beyond their hope were to recover and receive their slaves whom they had lost.
But Callicrates one of them who were fully persuaded, that the safetie of their whole estate depended upon the loiall observance and inviolable maintenance of the accord contracted with the Romanes, spake thus or to this effect following, It may seeme to some here (quoth he) my maisters of Achaea,The Oration of Ca^^tates the Achaean. that wee are in question at this present of a small matter and of meane importance: but I for my part am of opinion, that we are not now in hand to treat, but have alreadie debated, and after a sort concluded, one of the greatest affaires and of most consequence that wee know. For we who have interdicted the KK. of Macedonie and the Macedonians to come within our borders, and have decreed that this edict may stand firme and irrevocable, and that for this intent especially, Because wee would admit neither embassadors nor messengers from the KK. for feare least by entercourse of them, the hearts of some among us might bee sollicited and tempted to noveltie and alteration; wee now are content to heare the king, although absent in person, preaching in some sort to us, yea, and more than that (God send us good lucke) approve  and applaude his Oration. And whereas the very wild beasts refuse (for the mest part) the meat which is laid for a bait to deceive and hurt them, yea, and have the wit to shun and avoid the same; wee, blind beetels that we are, suffer ourselves to bee caught and fed with the vaine apparence and colourable shew of a litle kindnesse, and for hope to recover some poore slaves (a matter

 of small worth and reckoning) suffer our owne freedome to be undermined, and in daunger of subversion. For who seeth not, that the ouverture is made, and the way laid open for entrance into consederacie with the king, onely to violate and breake our association with the Romanes, wherin standeth all our weale and welfare? Vnlesse some man peradventure will make a question, whether the Romanes must levie warre against Perseus? and doubt thereof now after Philip is dead, which in his life time was expected, and by his death onely interrupted? Two sonnes, ye know full well, king Philip had, Demetrius and Perseus. For noblenesse of parentage by the mothers side, for vertue, for wit, for the love and affection of the Macedonians, Demetrius farre surpassed his brother. But for that the father intended ever and meant, that whether of his two sonnes hated the Romanes, he should have the crowne after him for recompence, he caused Demetrius to bee  murdered; for no other crime in the world that could be laid to his charge, save onely that he was entred into amitie with the Romanes: but Perseus he made the king, whom he knew that the people of Rome judged more worthie to suffer punishment than to inherite a kingdome. And this Perseus, what other thing hath hee done els after his fathers decease, but made preparation for warre? First and formost he procured the Bastarnians, to the terror of all the world, for to invade Servia, as some thinke. Dardania; who if they had settled there, Greece should have had more troublesome neighbors of them than Asia hath of the Galatians. And albeit hee was disappointed of this hope, yet hee gave not over to dessigne and plot for warre; nay, if we will speake a truth, he hath alreadie begun the war. Dolopia he hath subdued by force of annes, and could not abide to heare that the determination of certaine provinces which were debatable and litigious, should be referred to the award
 of the people of Rome. From thence having passed over the mountaine Octa, that all upon a seddaine he might shew himselfe in the very centre of Greece, hee ascended up to Delphi. And to what end, thinke ye, hath he taken this diswonted voiage and unaccustomed expedition? After this he made his progresse all over Thessalie: And what if he annoied and hurt none of them all, whom he hated in his heart? I feare me so much the more this manner of dealing, and that it is a bait to catch them withall. Then, forsooth, he sendeth his letters unto us, with a goodly shew of a bon-present, and willeth us to thinke estsoones how to prevent from haeceforth, that we never had need againe of the like bountie of his. What is that, but to annull and repeale that edict of ours, wherein the Macedonians are debarred from setting foot within Morca. Peloponnesus? and to bring about, that we may have againe the kings embassadours to come unto us, that we may entertain  mutuall hospitalitie betweene their princes and ours? and anon after, see the Macedonian armies, yea, and the king also in person to crosse from Delphi (for a finall arme of the sea lieth betweene) streight over into Peloponnesus? and finally, that we band and combine with the Macedonians, when they shall take armes against the Romanes? As for mee, this is mine advise, to make no new ordinance, but to let all alone in their entier, as they now stand, untill such time as wee are come to some certaine tearmes, Whether we have cause to be afraid, or feare onely our owne shaddowes? If the league shall continue firme and sure betweene the Romanes and the Macedonians, then may we have entercourse of friendship, of commerce and traffick with them. But for this present to thinke and consider hereof, in my simple judgment, is a nice and ticklish point, and besides, out of season, untimely, and somewhat with the soonest. When hee had thus  said, Arco brother to Xenarchus the P
retour discoursed in this manner following. Callicrates (quoth he) hath caused both me and all of us besides,The Oration of Archo. who are of contrarie opinion to him, for to find the more difficultie in speaking our minds to the cause in question.
For whiles in maintenance of the association which we have with the Romanes, he saith that it is disturbed and troubled, (albeit there bee no man about either to disturbe or trouble it) he hath wrought cunningly and contrived, that whosoever seemeth to gainsay him, may be thought to oppose and set himselfe against the Romans. In the first place, as if he had ben a man, not conversing here among us, but one come from the Senat of Rome, or some inward secretarie and of the privie counsell to the KK. he knoweth forsooth, and uttereth all that in great secrecie hath beene done. Nay, hee foretelleth like a wise man, what would have ensued, in case Philip had lived longer: and namely how it came  about, that Perseus thus inherited the crowne: what the Macedonian designes are: and what the Romanes intend to doe. But we, who know neither for what cause, nor in what manner Demetrius came by his death, ne yet what Philip meant to have done if hee had lived still, must accommodate and frame our counsell to those occurrents which have openly passed in the view of the world. Wee take knowledge, that Perseus after hee was invested in his throne and crowned

king, repaired to the Romane embassadours: and we know likewise that hee was intituled by the  people of Rome with the style of (King Perseus.) We heare besides, that Romane embassadours came to the king, and were by him well received and graciously entertained. If I haveany judgement these bee all signes of peace and not of warre, neither can the Romanes take offence, if, as wee followed them when they bare armes, so we follow them now likewise, as the authours of peace. And verily I see no reason why we alone of all other Greekes, should make so mortall and inexpiable warre against the realme of Macedonie. What! is it because we are so neere unto the Macedoninas, and by that vicinitie expossed to all dangers from thence? or that wee are the weakest of all the rest, and like to the Dolopians, whom Perseus of late hath subdued? Nay ywis, it is farre otherwise and cleane contrarie. Sure enough we are for any harme they can do us, in regard either of our owne forces (which the gods of their goodnesse have vouchsafed us) or of the distance of place so far remote. But set case we bee as much subject as the Thessalians and Aetolians: Say, we are of no more credite and authoritie among the Romans (albeit we have beene alwaies their associats and friends) than the Aetolians be, who were their open enemies but the other day: Then, what right, what priviledge and commerce, the Aetolians, the Thessalians, the Epitotes, and in one word, all Greece besides, have and use with the Macedonians, we also may have and hold the same. How is it then, that we alone like cursed and damned creatures, should thus practise to abandon the common law of men, (and as it were) renounce all humane societie. Be it, that Philip (when time was) did somewhat, and gave us just cause, armed as he was and ever warting upon us, to passe this decree and edict against him: what hath Perseus deserved? Perseus (I say) the new king, a harmlesse prince that never did us
injurie; nay, who is willing and seeketh by courtesies and good turnes to cancell and rase out all former quarrels and enmities of his father:? why are we the onely enemies that he hath in the world? And yet, I might full well and truly say, that from the former kings of Macedonie we haue received so great favours and benefits, that in regard thereof, we should put up and forget the wrongs of Philip alone (if haply he have done us any) at leastwise now after he is dead and his head laid. Indeed, at what time as the Romane fleet rid in the harbor of Cenchreae, and the Consull lay encamped with his armie before Elatia, wee sat in counsell three daies together, debating and divising, Whether we should band with the Romanes or side to Philip? And albeit the present feare of the Romanes before our eies, might have made us in our opinions to encline somewhat and leane toward them: yet there was something in it doubt lesse, that it was so long ere wee could resolve: and to say a trueth, it was the auncient acquaintance and amitie that we had with the Macedonians, and the great benefits which in old  time we had received from their kings. Why then, me thinkes, those selfe same regards should be of some force and efficacie, to moove us, if not to be their speciall and best friends, yet at least wise not to bee their principall and greatest enemies. Let us not, Callicrates, make semblance and shew of that, which we are not in hand withall, and is no point of this present question. There is no motive made of a newe societie; there is no person about to draw any capitulations of a new alliance, wherein we should rashly enwrap and entangle ourselves, and betied to any inconvenience. Onely, let there be a mutuall commerce between us, and an alternative intercourse of yeelding and demaunding right to and fro, as appertaineth; let us not by interdicting and forbidding them to enter and trafficke within our countrie, debarre our selves likewise from
all negotiation and dealing with them in their kingdome; that by this  meanes our slaves may have no place of retreat and refuge to flie unto. And what prejudice is this to the Roman confederacie? Wherfore make we thus of a finall thing and evident, so great a matter and suspicious? Wherfore raise we such troubles of nothing? Wherfore seeke we to draw others into jelousie and hatred with the Romans, and all this, to find means of courting and flattering them? If there will be warre, Perseus (yee may be sure) maketh no doubt, but that we altogether will follow the Romans: yet so long as the peace holdeth, surcease and suspend we in some sort our malice and hatred for the while; it ended for ever it may not bee. When the same men who had consented to the kings letters before gave their accord now also to this propose, the chiefe and principall persons among them tooke great indignation and disdaine, that Perseus should seeme to demaund and obtaine that by a few lines in writing, which he deemed was not worth the sending an embassage. Whereupon the time was deserved and no decree passed at this Session. Afterwards were embassadours addressed unto them from the king, at what time as a Diet was holden in Megalopolis: but the side which was for the Romanes, and feared to give them occasion

 of displeasure and offence, did what they could to debarre them of accesse and entrance into the Counsell. And much about this time, by reason of these jarres, the Aetolians grew enraged among themselves, and by discharging their mutuall furie in killing one another, had like to have brought the state to a finall ruine and desolation. But being wearie thereof, they in the end as well of the one side as the other, sent their Embassadours to Rome, and also laboured at home to have the quarrell taken up, and to be made friends and reconciled together. Howbeit this was crossed by a new mischiefe that came betweene, which also rubbed the former gauls and fretted the old sores. For whereas certaine Hypateans, exiled persons, and being of the faction of Proxenus, were promised libertie to returne home againe into their countrie, with safe conduct also granted by Eupolemus one of the chiefe and principall men of the citie: so it was, that fourscore  of them, men of marke and qualitie (whome to meet upon the way as they returned, Eupolemus himselfe went out with the multitude) after they had bin friendly received with courteous greetings, salutations, and shaking of hands, had no sooner entred within the gate of the cittie but they were massacred, notwithstanding they pleaded the faithfull promise of protection, and called the gods to witnesse, but all in vaine. By this occasion the civill war betweene them waxed much hotter than before, and turned in the end to a light fire. Now there arived C. Valerius Laevinus, Ap. Claudius Pulcher, C. Memmius, M. Popilius, and L. Canuteius, as sent from the Senate of Rome. Before these commissioners, the embassadors from both factions appeared at Delphi, and debated the matter with great earnestnes and vehamiencie, where Proxenus seemed to have the better hand as well in right of the cause, as through his eloquent tongue: Proxenus (I say) who within few daies after, dranke a cup of poison of h
is wives tempering, where of he died: and  she condemned therefore, departed into exile. The like madnesse haunted the Candiots also and distracted them with intestine dissention. But upon the comming of Q.Mutius the lieutenant generall, who was sent accompanied with a fleet of ten saile, to appease their debates, they sell to some tearmes of peace and attonement. There had bene a truce also before of sixe monthes, but afterwards the warre flamed out much more terrible. The Lycians likewise at the same time, were infested and plagued with warre by the Rhodians. But my meaning is not, neither is it any part of my purpose, to describe the warres of sorreine nations, nor to discourse of the circumstances how they proceeded: for enough I have to do, and more than I can well discharge, to write the acts onely of the people of Rome.
 The Celtiberians in Spaine, who being subdued and tamed by force of armes, had submitted to Tib. Gracchus, remained quiet all the time that M. Titmius the Pretour continued there in government. But immediatly upon the arrivall of Appius Claudius they revolted: and began to shew themselves in open action of rebellion, by giving a suddaine assault upon the Romane campe. It was about the breake of day, when the sentinels upon the rampiat and Corps de guard about the gates, might discover enemies comming a farre off, and so they gave the alarme. Appius Claudius having put out the signall of battaile; and in fewe words exhorted his souldiours to fight and play the men, led them forth at three gates at once. The Celtiberians made head and opposed their forces as they issued foorth. At the first the skirmish was equall on both parts: for that by reason of the streights of the passage, all the Romanes could not fight: but after that  one had put forward another, and followed still apace, they were all at length gotten without the trench, so as they were able now to display their battaillons, and to confront their enemies from one point of their battaile to the other, where with before they were environned: and then they made so forcible a sallie upon them, that the Celtiberians were not able to endure their violence. For before the second houre of the day, they were discomfited and put backe: and fifteen thousand of them either died in the place, or yeelded their bodies prisoners: two and thirtie militarie ensignes they lost, and were turned out of the campe the same day: and heere an end of that warre. For as many as escaped the medley gat them home to their owne townes, and quietly afterwards bare the yoke of subjection.
That yeere were created Censors, Q.Fulvius Flaccus and A. Posthumius Albinus: who made  a revieu of Senatours and chose new. For president of the Senat they elected M. Aemylius Lepidus the Archbishop. Nine they put out of the Senate-house. The principall persons noted and disgraced, were these, M. Cornelius Maluginensis, who two yeers before had been Pretor in Spain; L. Cornelius Scipio, Pretor for the time being, and L. chiefe Iustice of the common pleas, as well among citizens as aliens; and L. Fulvius, who was whole brother to the Censor himselfe, and as

Valerius Antias reporteth, equall in degree of calling, and his fellow every way. The Consuls also  after they had made their vowes within the Capitoll, went forth to their provinces. The one of them, (to wit, M. Aemylius) had in charge given him by the Senat, to appease the sedition of the Padoans in Venice, who as their embassadors made report, by factious siding and part-taking, were all on a fire with civill warre.
The embassadours who were gone into Aetolia for to pacifie the like troubles, brought word backe, That it was not possible to bridle and refraine the furious rage of that nation. But the comming of the Consull made all whole among the Padoans and cured the maladie: who having nothing else to doe in the province, returned to Rome.
These Censors were the first that caused the streets of Rome to be paved with hard flint and pebble stone within the citie; and the high waies and causeys without to be raised with gravell, and the sides therof to be well banked and kept in reparations: also bridges to be made in divers  places: a scaffold besides for the Aediles and Pretors to behold the games and plaies. Moreover, the barriers in the race, from whence the horses begin to run, and the [Ovales] to marke and skore up the number of courses *** Over and besides the goles, beyond *** the yron grates and cages *** and at the feasts in the mount Albane for the Consuls. They took order besides all this, for the paving with flint of the cliffe or descent from the Capitoll, and from the gallerie or porch before the temple of Saturne looking toward the Capitoll, unto the place called Senaculum, and the court Hostilia above it. Also the merchants hall or burse without the gate Tergemina they paved with stone, and fenced it about with strong stakes and posts of wood. The gallerie also Aemylia they caused to be repaired; and made an ascent by staires from the Tyber to the burse or merchants hall aforesaid. Without the same gate also, they paved  with pebble stone the gallerie or walking place into the Aventine *** from the temple of Venus. The same Censors bargained for the making of walls about Calatia and Oxymum: and having made sale of some publicke edifices there, they employed the mony raised thereof, in making of shops and stalles round about both the market places. The one of them, that is to say, M. Fulvius, (for Posthumius said plainly, that unlesse it were by vertue either of an act of the Senate, or graunt of the people of Rome, hee would put forth no workes to be made with dispense of their money) agreed upon a price for the building of a temple to Iupiter at Pisaurum and at Fundi: also to make a conduit, for water to be conveighed to Pollentia; and at Pisaur
um for a way to be paved, and Sinuessa *** In these colonies, hee caused also a sinke or vault to be made about them, to carry away all filthinesse into the river: also the market  place to be enclosed with porches, galleries, and shops; and three stately halls called Iani, with quarrefours or foure throughfares, and as many fronts. For these workes, one of the Consuls disbursed the money, and bargained with the Publicanes and undertakers. In which regard, the inhabitants of those colonies above-named, gave his great thankes. These Censors were likewise severe and precise in exercising their office, for the redressing and reformation of mens maners: for many gentlemen had their horses of service taken from them, which were allowed them by the cittie.
A little before the yeeres end, there was a solemne procession holden one whole day for the happie atchievement of the affaires in Spaine, under the conduct and good fortune of Appius Claudius the Proconsull; and twentie head of great beasts were killed in sacrifice. And the morrow  after they went in another procession with supplications, at the temples of Ceres, Liber, and Libera: for that there was reported from the Sabines countrey, a mightie earthquake, which over-turned many houses.
After that Appius Caludius was returned out of Spaine to Rome, the Senat ordiened, that hee should enter the citie with the pompe of an Ovation. And now approched the time for the election of new Consuls. Much a doe there was and hard hold at this assembly, by reason of the multitude of competitors: but in the end, L. Posibumius Albinus and M. Popilius Laenas, were elected Consuls: which done, the Pretours also were created, to wit, Cn. Fabius Buteo, M. Matienus, C. Cicercius, M. Furius Crasipes, A. Attilius Serranus, and C. Cluvius Saxula, these three last rehearsed, the second time.
This businesse and solemnitie finished, Ap. Claudius Cento entring with Ovant pompe into the citie for his victorie of the Celtiberians, brought into the common treasurie 10000 pound weight of silver, and five thousand of gold. Cn. Cornelius was consecrated the Flamine of Iupiter.

 The same yeere there was set up a painted table in the temple of the goddesse Matuta with this inscription, VNDER THE CONDUCT AND HAPPIE GOVERNEMENT OF TIE. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, CONSULL, THE LEGION AND ARMIE OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME, SUBDUED SARDINIA. IN VVHICH PROVINCE, THERE VVERE SLAINE AND TAKEN PRISONERS EIGHTIE THOUSAND ENEMIES. WHICH GRACCHUS (AFTER HE HAD MANAGED THE AFFAIRES OF STATE MOST FORTUNATELY, DELIVERED MANY CAPTIVES OUT OF BONDAGE, AND RECOVERED THE TRIBUTES AND CUSTOMES TO THE COMMON-VVEALE) BROUGHT HOME VVITH HIM. HIS ARMIE SAFE AND SOUND, CHARGED VVITH AN EXCEEDING RICH ECOTIE, AND REENTERED THE CITTIE OF ROME, IN A SECOND TRIUMPH. IN MEMORIALL OF  VVHICH EXPLOIT, HEE CAUSED THIS TABLE TO BE SET UP AS A PRESENT IN THE HONOUR OF IUPITER.
Now this table conteined the portraiture of the Iland Sardinia, and the picture also and resemblance of sundrie battailes. Moreover, in this yeere were represented to the people certaine pastimes and shewes of sword-players, whereof some were small and of no account: but one above the rest, exhibited by T. Flaminius, surpassed. And this hee did in honour of his father deceased; with a dole of flesh among the people, a great publicke feast besides, and stage-playes for foure dayes togither. But the principall matter in this festivall solemnitie, was this, That in three daies space there fought at utterance with unrebated swords, threescore and fourteene champions.


THE XLII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the two and fortith Booke.
FYlvius Flaccus the Censor uncovered the roofe of the church of Iuno Lacinia, which was selated with marble, and all to cover a temple which he had dedicated. But by an act of the Senate he was forced to bestow the sclates there againe. Eumenes the king of Asia complained in the Senat, of Perseus king of Macedonie. His inimies done to the people of Rome are here reported: for the which, defiance was sent, and warre proclaimed against him. P. Licinius Crassus the Consull, unto whom the province of Macedonie was assigned, passed over thither, and in certaine light expeditions, fought sundry battels with Perseus in Thessalie, all by horse-service, but with bad successe. The Senate appointed a day of bearing betweene Masanissa and the Carthaginians, touching the territorie in question. Embassadours were sent in the associate citties and States, and to the consederate kings, to request them to continue loiall and fast in friendship, by reason that the Rhodians stood in doubtfull tearmes. The Censours tooke a review and numbred the citizens of Rome, wherein were enrolled in the subsidie bookes 257231. Moreover, this booke containeth the fortunate exploits against the Islanders of Corsica and the  Ligurians.


AFter that L. Posthumius Albinus and M. Popilius Laenas the Consuls, had before  all other things proposed unto the Senate as touching the governement of the provinces and conduct of the armies, ordained it was, that Liguria should be the charge as well of the one of them as the other. Also that both of them should levie new legions, (and two apeece they were allowed to have) therewith to defend the said province and keep it in obedience, besides ten thousand footmen and six hundred horse of Latine allies. Moreover, to enrol three thousand foot, and two hundred horsemen of Romanes for a supplie in Spaine. Last of all, commaunded they were to prest fifteene hundred footmen and a hundred horse of Romane citizens: with which strenght, that Pretour unto whom  Sardinia fell, should passe over into Corsica, there to warre, and M. Attilius the old Pretour, in meane time to see unto the government of Sardinia. This done, the Pretours went to cast lots for their provinces. A. Attilius Serranus had the place of lord cheefe justice within the citie, and C. Cluvius Saxul the jurisdiction betweene citizens and forrainers. Vnto Cn. Faebius Buteo fell the higher Spaine, to M. Matienus the lower. M. Furius Crassipes was to governe Sicilie, and C. Ciciretus Sardinia.
Before that these magistrates tooke their journey, the Senate was of advise, that L. Posthumius the Consul should goe into Campaine, for to limit out the citie-lands apart from the grounds of private persons: for that it was seene and knowne, that particular men setting out their bounds and encroching by little and little upon the Commons, inprocesse of time held a great part of it in  their own possession. This Cos. was angrie and offended with the Praenestines, for that upon a time when he went thither amongst them (in qualitie then of a private person) to offer sacrifice in the temple of Fortune, they did him no honour neither in publike nor private. Whereupon, before hee departed now from Rome, hee addressed his letters before him to Praeneste, that the cheefe magistrate should come and meet him upon the way, provide him a lodging at their cities charges, and at his departure from thence, to see that there were sumpter horses and beasts of cariage readie for him. Now before this mans Consulship, the magistrates of Rome had never beene chargeable to their allies not put them to cost for any thing whatsoever: and therefore allowed they were from the citie their mules, set out they were with tents and pavillions, and all other furniture and provision for the warres, to the end that they should not lay upon the allies any  such burden. Privat lodging they had in friends houses, which they enterteined courteously and liberally with reciprocall hospitalitie. For at Rome likewise their houses were open to receive those hosts of theirs, with whom they were wont before to have kind usage, and who had bidden them welcome. In like manner, embassadours (if they were sent by chaunce to any place of a sodaine) imposed upon the towns and cities through which they were to passe, one sumpter horse onely; to farther expence were no allies put for any Romane magistrates. This revenge of the Consull for a discourtesie offered, (due and just though it were, yet not to have beene exercised during his magistracie) and the silence of the Prenestines (proceeding either of too much modestie or over-great feare) gave occasion to the magistrates ever since to take it for a priviledge and custome to doe the semblable, yea and to charge their allies with more grievous impositions  everie day than other in the same kind, as if the precedent example had beene approoved.
In the beginning of this yeere, the embassadours who had beene sent into Aetolia and Macedonie, made report, That they might not come to the speech of K. Perseus, for that some said he was absent; others, that he was sicke; and the one as false, as the other was untrue: howbeit, they might evidently perceive and see, that preparation was made for warre, and that hee would delay no longer, but enter into armes. In like sort they related, that in Aetolia the civill dissention and sedition grew daily more and more, neither could the chieftaines of these factions discords be repressed and held in awe by their countenance and authoritie.
As the citie of Rome was amused upon the continual expectancie of the Macedonian warre, before any enterprise thereof begun, thought good it was and requisite, that order first should be taken for the expiation of prodigies, and the pacification of the gods, by way of humble praiers, such as were represented and delivered unto them out of the fatall bookes of Sibylla. For at Lanuvium were seene, as the common voice went, certaine shewes and resemblances of a

 mightie great navie. Item, At Privernum there grew blacke wooll out of the earth. Also in the Veientian territorie, neere a towne called Remens, it rained stones. Moreover, all the countrey Pomptinum was overcast (as it were) with clouds of Locusts, and within the land of Gallia, there were seen certain fishes to leap from under the clots of earth, that were turned with the plow as it took stitch and made surrow. For these straunge and fearfull sights, the foresaid bookes were looked into and perused, and out of them the Decemvirs declared and pronounced, both unto what gods sacrifice should be offered, and what beast were to be slain therfore: moreover, that the one supplication should bee holden, as propitiatorie for those prodigious tokens, as also the other, which the yeare before had been vowed for the health of the people, should now bee performed, and holydaies kept therefore. So the sacrifices were accomplished according to the order and forme set downe in writing by the Decemvirs.
 The very same yeere was the church of Iuno Lacinia uncovered, upon this occasion: Q.Fulvius Flaccus the Censor was building of a temple to Fortuna equestris, which hee had vowed during the warre against the Celtiberians, when he was lord pretour in Spaine. His desire and earnest endevor was to straine himselfe, that there might not be in Rome a temple of more state and magnificence than this. And supposing that it would be a great beautie and ornament unto it, in case the roofe were covered with tiles of marble, hee went into the Brutians countrey, and there he was so bold with the church abovesaid of Iuno Licinia, as to untile the one halfe thereof, making full account, that so much would served for to cover that temple which hee was a building. Boates and barges hee had readie for to receive and carrie away the said tiles or sclates, without  being empeached or controlled for this sacriledge by the allies, whom he held in awe and frighted by his Censorian authoritie. Now after the Censor was returned to Rome, those marble sclates were disbarked out of the foresaid vessels, and conveighed to the temple. And albeit no words were made from whence they came, yet concealed it could not bee. And hereupon arose much muttering in the Senate, and from all parts thereof they called hard upon the Consuls, to have the matter put to question and debated of. The Censor was sent for, who was no sooner entered into the Senate, but both all in generall, and also every one in particular had a fling at him, and much more sharpely reproched him to his face in these tearmes, That hee could not bee content to abuse and violate the most holy and stately church in those parts, which neither Pyrrhus nor Anniball ever offered violence unto, unlesse he uncovered it  also in foule sort, and in manner laid it ruinate. The lanterne thereof was taken away and gone, the rouse left bare and naked, exposed and open to raine and soule weather, and thereby subject to rot: that hee being chosen Censor for to reforme the manners of other; to whome it appertained by his office (after the auncient maner and custome) to see that the temples were close and covert; to call upon, that all publicke places be kept wind-tight and watertight, and in sufficient repaire: that he (I say) of all others should raunge over the cities of allies and consederate States, pulling downe their temples as hee goeth, and uncovering the roases of the sacred edifices, and in demolishing the churches of the immortall gods, commit that, which if he did but practise upon the privat houses of allies, might seem an unworthie act and a great indignitie: and finally, by rearing one temple with the ruine of another, obligue the people of Rome with the verie guilt of his owne crime: as if (ywis) the immortall gods were not the  same in all places, but that we must honour and adorne some of them with the spoile of others. Now as it was apparent (before the matter was put to the censure of the Senate) which way the LL. enclined in opinion: so immediately upon the proposing thereof, they all opined and gave one sentence, That order should bee taken with the publicanes of the citie workes, for the carrying backe againe of the same sclates to the former temple, and that certaine propitiatorie sacrifices should bee offered for the pacification of Iuno. As for all ceremonies requisite toward the divine service aforesaid, they were with all complements performed accordingly: but the farmers who had undertaken at a price to recarie those tiles, brought word that they had landed them in the churchyard, and there left them, because they might not meet with any workeman,  who could devise with all the skill and cunning he had, how to bestow them as they were laid and couched before.
Of those Pretours who were gone into their provinces, M. Fabius as he was in his journey toward high Spaine, died at Massiles by the way: and therefore upon intelligence given thereof by the Massilian embassadours, the Senate ordained that P. Furius and Cn. Servilius, whome to

succeed others were to be sent, should cast lost betweene themselves, whether of them should  continue still in government, and have the charge of high Spaine. And the lot fell out very well and fit, that the said P. Furius who had ruled the said province before, should there remaine.
The same yere, by occasion that a good part of the Ligutians and Gaules territorie woon by conquest, lay void and was not as yet in the tenor and occupation of any man, there passed an Act of the Senate, that it should be divided by the poll. So, A. Attilius the L. chiefe Iustice of the cittie of Rome, by vertue of a decree graunted out of the Senat, created ten Decemvirs or commissioners for that purpose, to wit, M. Aemylius Lepidus, C. Cassius, T. Ebutius Parrus, C. Tremellius, P. Cornelius Cethegus, I and L. both named Apulius, M. Caecilius, C. Salonius, and C. Munatius. To every Romane cittizen they set out ten acres apeece: and to the Latine allies three.
About the same time that these affaires passed at Rome, there arrived thither embassadours  out of Aetolia, about their owne civill discords and seditions. Likewise there came others from Thessalie, reporting what was a doing in Macedonie. For Perseus (casting now in his mind how to compasse that war, which during his fathers life he devised and thought upon) endevoured to draw and win unto him not onely all the nations but the citties of Greece, by sending his embassages among them, and promising liberally more than he performed. Howbeit the hearts of the most part were inclined to him and favoured his dessignes, yea and much more affectionate than to king Eumenes: notwithstanding that all the Sates of Greece, and most of the principall personages were obliged unto Eumenes, and in fee as it were with him, in regard of many courtesies and gracious favours received at his hands: and that hee carried himselfe so in his owne realme, that the citties which were subject unto him, were not willing to change their condition  with any of the free States whatsoever. Whereas contrariwise, the bruite went, that Perseus after his fathers decease, killed his wife with his owne hands: and likewise secretly murdred Apelles, whose ministrie and service in former time he had used in taking away the life of his brother Demetrius: for which cause he lived in exile, because Philip made search after him for to have him punished accordingly; him (I say) he murdered, after he had sent for him upon his fathers death, and procured him to come unto him, with great promises to recompence him highly for the execution of the foresaid fact. Yet as infamous and spotted as he was with these domesticall murders (besides many other massacres of straungers abroad) and for no good part and worthie desert otherwise commendable; he was commonly more esteemed and better regarded of the States of the countrie than king Enmenes, a prince so kind and good to his kinsfolke, so just and righteous  to his subjects, so bounteous and respective to all men; whether it were that they, possessed aforehand with the same and majestie of the Macedonian kings, despised the rising of this new kingdome; or that they were desirous of novelties and alterations; or lastly, that they wished and had a desire that he should make head against the Rumanes.
Now were not the Aetolians onely together by the eares among themselves, by reason they were dived so deepe in debt, but the Thessalians also: and this pestilent maladie as it were by catching and infection, was spread as farre as Perrhoebia. But after that the Senat was advertised that the Thessalians had taken armes, they sent App. Claudius as embassadour to see and appease those troubles: who having rebuked and chastifed the chieftaines of both sides, eased and stricken off a great part of the debt, which grew burdensome and grievous by excesse usurie, and  that with consent of the most of the creditours, who had thus overcharged their debtours, hee parted the paiment of the due debt and principall, by even portions for certaine yeeres. The troblesom state of Perrhoebia likewise was reduced into good terms of quietnes, by the self-same Appius, and after the same order. And at the very same instant Marcellus visited the Aetolians, and tooke knowledge at Delphi of their troubles and garboiles which proceeded from very hostile hearts and minds, enemielike, and were pursued with civill war. And when hee saw that they contended and strove avie to surpasse one another in rash courses and audacious; hee would by his decree neither charge nor discharge the one partie more than the other: but he requested them indifferently on both sides, to absteine from warre, to make an end of discord and dissention, and burie all that was past in perpetuall oblivion. Whereupon they were reconciled: and this their attonement  was ratified with the assurance of pledges interchangeably given: and accorded it was, they should meete at Corinth, there to bestow their hostages. From Delphi and that generall diet of Aetolia, Marcellus crossed the seas into Peloponnesus, where he had appointed and published a solemne assembly and counsell of the Achaens. Wherein hee highly praised and commended

 the whole nation, for observing so stedfastly their old decree, wherby they debarred and excluded the Macedonian kings out of their confines, he declared evidently and presented to the view of all the world, what malice and hatred the Romans bare to Perseus. And that it might break out the sooner into open warres, king Eumenes came to Rome, and brought with him a note or abstract of all the preparations for the warre, which with diligent search and enquire into particulars, he had gathered.
Much about the same time, the five Embassadours sent unto king Perseus for to see into the affaires of Macedonie, were commaunded to take a voyage as farre as Alexandria, for to renew the old amitie with king Ptolomaeus. The names of them were these, C. Valerius, Cn. Lutatius Cerco, I. Baebius Sulca, M. Cornelius Mammula, and M. Caecilius Denter. And even then or not much  after, there came embassadours from king Antiochus: and the chief and principall person among them, one Apolonius, was admitted to come into the Senat, where he excused the K. his maister for many good and just reasons, in that he had not sent his tribute and made paiment so soon as he ought by the day appointed: but now (he said) that he had brought it all, to the end that the king should be to them beholden for nothing but the respite of time only. And besides, that they were come with a present of certaine plate of gold, weighing three hundred pound. That the king his petition was, That the societie and friendship which had bene contracted between his father and them, might be renued also with him: promising, that if the people of Rome would impose anything upon him to be done, which were meet to be laid upon a good and faithfull allie, hee would not saile in his devoire to performe all offices whatsoever. For why, the Senate had so well deserved of him, at what time as he sojourned in Rome, and such courtesie he sound among the  floure of the Romane young gentlemen, that of all degrees and sorts of men, he was reputed and used more like a king indeed, than an hostage for the time. These embassadours received a gracious answere: and withall, A. Attilius the Pretour of the cittie was enjoyned to renew the league with Antiochus, which had bene concluded with his father. As for the tribute, the treasurers of the citie received it: and the Censors tooke all the golden vessels aforesaid, who had the charge to bestow the same in what temples they thought good. Vnto the chiefe embassadour was sent a present in money, amounting to the summe of one hundred thousand Asses: who also was alowed an house to lodge in at his pleasure of free-cost: and all his charges were defraied by the citie, during the time that he made abode in Italie. The embassadours who had bene in Syria, gave this report of him, That he was a man in great favour and highly honoured with the king: and  besides, singularly well affected to the people of Rome. Now concerning the affaires of the provinces for that yeere, thus much as followeth.
C. Cicercius the Pretour fought in raunged battaile with the enemies in Corsica, wherin seven thousand of the Ilanders were slaine: and 1700 and better taken prisoners. In that conflict the Pretour had vowed to build the chappell of Iuno Moneta. After this, was peace granted to the Corsians at their owne suit and seeking: but they were compelled to pay two hundred thousand pound weight of waxe. Cicerius having thus subdued Corsica, passed from thence over into Sardinia. A field also was fought in Liguria, within the territorie of the Statellates, neere the towne Caristus: for thither assembled a great armie of the Ligurians. At first upon the arrivall  of M. Popilius the Consull, they kept close within the walles: but afterwards seeing the Romanes at the point to give assault and to lay batterie to the wals, they issued forth of the gates and embattailed themselves. The Consull for his part for slowed not to come to hand-fight, the onely thing he sought for in threatning to give assault. The medley continued above 3 houres, and the hope of victorie hung in equall ballance: which when the Cos. perceived, namely, how the Ligurian ensignes removed not and gave no ground; hee commaunded his Cavallerie to mount on horsebacke, and to charge with all their force and violence upon their enemies in three severall places: many of these horsemen pierced quite through the middest of the battaile, and passed so farre, that they charged the enemies upon the backe as they fought, Whereupon the Ligurians were much terrified, and began to flie from all parts: very few retired  back into the citie, by reason that the horsemen made head against them that way most: besides, many of the Ligurians wer left dead in the place, such was their resolute persistance in fight: killed also they were every where as they fled. Ten thousand (by report) fell upon the edge of the sword, above seven hundred taken prisoners in one place or other, and 82 militarie ensigns were caried away. And yet was not this victorie without effusion of Romane blood: for there died of

them not so few as three thousand souldiours, by reason that the formost of both sides fought so  manfully in the forefront, and while they would not give ground one to the other, were stricken downe and slaine without mercie. After this battaile, the Ligurians rallied themselves into one place, out of all parts where they were scattered in the rout; and seeing that more of their men were lost than left behind (for in all they were not above ten thousand) they yeelded simply without any composition: howbeit in good hope they were, that the Consull would not deale worse by them nor in more rigorous manner than other Generals before him. But he disarmed them all, rased their towne, sold their bodies and all that they had, and sent letters to the Senat of these exploits of his. Which when A. Attilius the Pretour had read in the Senat, (for the other Consull Posthumius was absent, by occasion that he was employed in the survey and visiting of the lands in Campania) they thought it a verie hard and cruell course, that the Statellates, who onely of all the Ligurians had not borne armes against the Romanes, who were  then assailed first when as they began not of their owne accord to make war, who also put themselves into the protection of the Romanes, should be thus rigorously intreated, thus some, dismembred and consumed in most cruell maner: that so many thousand of franke condition, innocent persons, and imploring the mercie of the Romanes, should be thus sold out-right, (a most daungerous example, that never hereafter any one will venture to submit himselfe again:) and finally, that they should be distracted and carried away into all parts, to live in slaverie under them, who having been sometimes prosessed enemies of the Romans, now enjoy peace and repose. In regard hereof, there passed and arest or act of the Senat, that M. Popilius the Consull should pay backe the price unto the buyers, and restore the Ligurians to their former libertie; to take order also that their goods (as much as possibly might be recovered) should be rendred  unto them: also that armour should be made in that nation with all speed possible, and that the Consull so soone as he had reestablished the Ligurians (upon their submission) in their former estate, should depart out of the province; for as much as the honour of victorie consisted not in exercising crueltie upon the poore and afflicted, but in vanquishing the obstinate. But the Consull, as he bare himselfe proud and cruell against the Ligurians, so he shewed as great frowardnesse and disobedience to the Senat. And having sent away the legions to winter in Pisae, he returned to Rome, carrying a sell and angrie stomacke against the LL. and as spightfull and malicious a mind to the Pretour: where immediatly he assembled the Senat in the temple of Bellona, and ratled up the Pretour in broad and grosse tearmes. For that he, whose part it had been to  have mooved the Senat for thankesgiving to the immortall gods, in regard of the happie atchievement of the wars, instead ther of passed and act of the Senat against him and in favor of the enemies, for to put him by his victorie and to give it away from him to the Ligurians; and finally being no better than a Pretour, would have had the Consull yeelded in manner up into their hands. Whereupon he said that he would be so bold as set a fine on his head: and withall, he required the LL. of the Senat to command and ordeine, That the arest devised against him might be reversed; and to give order, that the processions which in his absence they ought to have decreed (upon his letters sent of his good successe) might now be holden; in consideration first of the honour due to the immortall gods, and then respectively in some measure for his owne desert. But after hee was checked by some of the Senatours to his face, and that in no milder tearmes than he had been rebuked in his absence, he went his waies into his province again, and  obtained neither the one suit nor the other.
The other Consull Posthumius having spent the whole summer in surveying the lands onely, and never so much as seene his owne province, returned to Rome against the generall assembly for election, and created Consuls C. Popilius Laenas. Consequently were Pretors elected, to wit, C. Licinius Crassus, M. Iunius Paenus, Sp. Lucretius, Sp. Cluvius, Cn. Sicinius, and C. Memius, the second time. In that yeere was holden a review of the citie and the number taken of citizens, (when as Q.Fulvius Flaccus and L. Posthumius Albinus were Censors:) wherein were found and enrolled of Romane citizens 269015. The number was somewhat the lesse, by reason that L. Posthumius the Consull had proclaimed in a publick audience, That no person of those Latin allies  who were to returne into their own citties (by vertue of an edict made when C. Claudius was Consull) should be enrolled into the subsidie booke at Rome, but every man in his severall cittie. This Censorship was administred with concord and unitie, yea and to the good and profit of the common-weale. What Senatours soever they deposed from their place and dignitie, and

 so many gentlemen of Rome as they tooke their horses from, they made them all no better than contributaries to pay all skot and lot, yea and displaced them out of their tribes. And looke whomsoever the one of them noted with disgrace and ignominie, he was not relieved nor allowed againe by the other. This Fulvius dedicated the temple ofThe fortune of (...).Fortuha equeslris, now six yeers after he had vowed the same in a battaile which he fought with the Celtiberians, at what time as he was Proconsull in Spaine: likewise the exhibited the stage-plaies for foure daies togither, and one day in the cirque or shew-place. Corn. Lentulus (a Decemvir for the holy rites and sacrifices) that yeer died; in whose roume was substituted A. Posthumius Albinus. There were such mightie drifts and clouds as it were of locusts, brought sodainly at once by a wind from the sea into Apulia, that with their swarmes they overspread all the field farre and neere. For the riddance of which noisome vermine consuming the fruits of the earth, Cn. Sicinius, Pretour elect, was sent  with his full commission of commaund into Apulia, who assembled a mightie number of people for to gather them up, and emploied a great time thereabout.
In the beginning of the yeere ensuing, wherein C. Popilius and P. Aelius were Consuls, the remnant of the debates which arose the yeere before, was set on foot againe. The LL. of the Senat would have had the matter proposed and debated again as touching the Ligurians, and the ordinance of the Senat in that behalfe renewed. But, as Aelius the one Consul put up a bill therof, so Popilius the other was an earnest suiter, and besought both his collegue and also the Senat in the behalfe of his brother; nay he proceeded so far, that he gave the house to understand, in case they went about any such decree prejudicial unto him, he would crosse and revoke the same:  by which countenance of his he affrighted his colleague; but the LL. were offended so much the more and stormed against both the Consuls, yea and persisted still in their enterprise. And therfore when it was debated in counsell as concerning the provinces, albeit the Coss. made meanes to be sent into Macedonie (because the war of Perseus was so neere at hand) yet Liguria was assigned to both of them: for the LL. protested and said, That they would not passe a decree for the government of Macedonie, unlesse the case of Popilius were propounded, and an act therof entred. Afterwards, when they demanded a warrant to enroll new armies, or at least-wise to levie a supply for making up the old, both the one motion and the other was denied. The Pretors also, who required to have a supplement with them into Spain, had a nay: and namely, M. Tinius into the hither province, and P. Lucretius into the fatther. As for C. Licinius Crassus, to him  there fell by lot the jurisdiction within the citie over citizens, and to Cn. Sicinius that other over forreiners, C. Memmius was alloted to Sicilie, and Sp. Cluvius to Sardinia. The Consuls for these causes being highly offended and angrie with the Senate, caused the Latine feasts and holidaies to be published against the very first day that possibly they might, with an intimation that they would goe straight into their province, and not attend the managing of any affaires touching the State, but onely that which directly pertained to their government.
Valerius Antias writeth, that in these Consuls yeere, Attalus the brother of K. Eumenes came in embassage to Rome, to enforme criminous matter against Perseus, and to give the particulars of the preparation that he made for warre. But the Annales of many other writers (more worthie of credit than he) deliver unto us, that K. Eumenes presented himselfe in proper person:  where he was received with such honour, as the people of Rome thought not onely meet and agreeable for his deserts, but also fit and surable to their owne favours and benefits, which they had in ample manner conferred and in great number heaped upon him.
And then he had audience given him in the Senate, where he shewed the cause of his comming to Rome what it was; namely,The oration of Eumenes.(besides and servent desire that he had to see those gods and men, by whose grace and favour he enjoyed so good estate, as better hee durst not wish:) because hee gladly would advertise the Senat by word of mouth, to prevent and withstand the designes of Perseus. And beginning his speech with the platformes and enterprises of Philip, hee recounted withall, how it cost his soone Demetrius his life, for that he stood against the warre with the Romanes: moreover, how he had caused the whole nation of the Bastarians to quit their owne countrey where they were  born and bred, to the end, that by their aid he might passe over into Italie: but whiles (quoth he) these matters he projected and cast in his head, his time was come, and arrested he was by death: but he left his kingdome to him, whom he knew to be the most despiteous enemie that the Romanes had. And therfore Perseus having received this war (as a man would say) by way of inheritance left him by his father even together with the crown and scepter, from the very first day of his

raigne, doth nought els but entertaine, foster, and promote the same, by all the meanes and devises  that possibly he can. Mightie and puissant he is besides in number of young, lustie, and able men for service, who during the time of long peace have sprung up and multiplied exceedingly. In wealth and riches a great potentate he is, and besides in his flourishing years and the best time of his age which as it is accompanied with the very strength and vigor of his bodie, so his spirit and mind is inured and hardened with skilfull experience and long practise of martiall seats. For from his very infancie nuzzled hath he been in the field and campe, conversing ordinarily within the roiall tent and pavillion of his father, acquainted with the warres, not onely waged against neighbour nations, but also against the Romans; and that which more is, emploied by his father in many and sundrie expeditions and executions of service. But since that himselfe entered upon the kingdome, and swaied the regall scepter in his owne hand, hee hath exploited and accomplished  many things with mervellous felicitie and successe, which his father Philip before him could never compasse and effect, notwithstanding he tried and assaied all means, as well of open force as secret sraud. To augment this greatnesse of his, he hath purchased alreadie that authoritie and reputation in the world, which others hardly in continuance of long time, and by many favors and ample benefits attaine unto: and namely, throughout the States of Greece and Asia, all men reverence his majestie. For what good turns, for what pleasures done, for what bountie of his they should thus doe and honour him so much, neither see I, neither can I say for certaintie; whether it happen by a speciall gift and fortune that hee hath of his owne, or that (which I am myselfe afraid to speake) it be the deepe malice and hatred which he hath conceived against the Romans, which is the cause that he is of that countenance and so gracious among them. Nay, with the very  kings and princes of other nations he is highly esteemed and of passing authoritie. The daughter of Seleucus he hath taken to wife, without any suit of his owne, but being earnestly wooed and requested thereunto. And to Prusias he hath given his owne sister in mariage, after much seeking and instant intreatie. These two weddings were solemnized with the exceeding joy and innumerable presents of infinite embassages: and whould be present to celebrate the Auspices and complements, yea, and give those spouses in marriage, but the noblest and most renowmed States that were? The Baeotian nation had been much sollicited by Philip, yet could never bee induced to draw or pen any covenants of accord and amitie with him: but now there is to be seene a league engrossed, yea, and engraven in three severall conspicuous places, the one in Thebes, a second at Sidenum, within a most holy, sacred and renowmed temple, and the third at Delphi. What should I speake of the generall counsell of the Achaeans? wherein, had not the dessigne beene dashed by some there in place, who intimated and alleadged hard the seignorie and empire of the Romanes, it would have gone very hard, but that he should have serfoot even within Achaea. But contrariwise, I assure you, my due and deserved honors (unto whom it is hard to say, whether they bee more bounden and obligued for private pleasures or publicke benefites) are either forlet through rechlesse difuse and negligence, or els annulled and abolished of wilfull malice and hostile hatred. As for the Aetolians, who knoweth not, that in their civile broiles and feditions, they sought to Perseus for releefe and succour, and not to the Romanes? Being thus upheld with societies and amities, he hath provided such furniture of his own, and made that preparation for war at home, as he needs none from abroad. Of himselfe he is thirtie thousand strong  in foot, and five thousand in horse. For ten yeares he is stored with corne aforehand, so as for that kind of purveiance he may spare his owne territories, and also forbeare his enemies. As for mony in readie coine, he hath such abundance, that over and above the forces of naturall Macedonians, hee wageth ten thousand mercenarie souldiours, and hath wherewith to make due pay for as many yeeres, besides the yearely customes and profites that atise out of the kings mines. Now for armour, he hath gathered together into his arcenals and armories, sufficient to furnish three such armies. What should I speake of the youth and serviceable men for warre? Set the case that Macedonie failed him and were not able to find ynough; all Thrace is subject unto him, from whence he may serve his turne as out of an ever-running fountaine and lively spring. The rest of his speech he knit up with an exhortation in this manner. I relate not these things (quoth he) my  LL. of Rome, as blowne abroad and vented by headlesse hearsay and doubtfuli rumors; neither have I ben so readie to beleeve them, as a man desirous that such criminous imputations should be verified upon my enemie; but as undoubted and certaine reports upon mine own knowledge, as if I had been sent by you of speciall purpose to be aspie: and declared that and no more, which

 I had seene with mine eies and not otherwise. Neither would I have left mine owne realme, wherin (by your means and goodnes) in glorious and magnificent State I sit warme ynough, for to saile over so large a sea as I have done, and to carrie vain tales and untruths to you, thereby to crack my credite with you for ever hereafter. But I tell you, these eies of mine have seene the most renowmed and noblest cities of Asia and Greece, discovering more and more from day to day, what they intend and what their meaning is: who, if they bee let alone and permitted to run on as they begin, would be engaged so far, as they might not possibly returne againe and save themselves by any repentance. Beheld I have Perseus (I say) how hee containeth not within the realme of Macedonie, but one while seizeth upon this by force of armes, anotherwhile gaineth and getteth that by favour and good will, which with violence hee could never have conquered. I perceived  and considered well how unequall the match and condition is, whiles hee upon you prepareth warre, and you againe performe to him securitie of peace. Although in my conceit, and so farre as I could see into it, hee made no more any preparation thereof, but was alreadie upon action and execution. For he chased Abrupolis, a confederate prince and friend of yours, forth of his kingdome. And Arietarus the Illyrian, another of your associates and allies, he killed outright, because hee found that he had written some letters unto you. As for Eversa and Caellicrates, both Thebanes, and two principal States of that citie, for no other reason, but because in a parliament of the Baeotians, they had spoken their mind against him too franckely, and avowed that they would repeat unto you what things had passed, hee caused to be made away and murdered. The Bizantines hee succoured against the order taken in the accord: upon Dolopia hee levied warre:  Thessalie and Doris both hee invaded and overran with his armie, to the end, that in some intestine and civile war, by the help of the worse part he might afflict and plague the better. He shuffled all together, and made a very confusion of the State in Thessalie and Perrhaebia, upon the hope of cancelling all bonds and crossing out all debt bookes; that thus by a power and multitude of bankrupts, such as were over-deeply engaged, and whom he had obligued and bound to himselfe, hee might depresse and oppresse the great men and principall personages. Having wrought these practise uncontrolled, whiles you sit still looking on and suffring all, he seeing you to let him doe with Greece what he list, maketh full account, that no man will put on armes and make head against him, before he bee passed over into Italie. How safe this may bee for you, nay how this can stand with credite and honestie, see you to that and bee advised. For my selfe, I assure  you, I thought it a meere shame and very villanie, that Perseus your enemie should enter into Italie to make war upon you, before that I, your friend and allie, came to give you warning for to take heed and stand upon your guard. Now since I have in this manner performed my devoire, done that office which I was bound unto of necessitie, and in some measure acquit my selfe and discharged my bounden dutie and obligation of fidelitie; what remaineth more behind for mee to doe, but to be your beadsman to all the gods and goddesses, to vouchsafe you that grace, that you may provide both for your own Commonweale; and also for us your friends and allies, who depend wholly and only upon you? In this last speech he came neere unto the LL. of the Senat, and touched them to the quick. But for the present no man might know any thing, but only that the king had been in the Senat, so silent were they all, and kept the counsel-house close shut with  secrefie. But after the warre was brought to an end, then came abroad, both what the king spake, and what answere was returned to him againe.
Some few daies after, the Senate sat to give audience unto the embassadours of king Perscus: but having their minds and eares both, possessed aforehand by king Eu^nenes, all the defence that the embassadours made, and all the entreatie they used, was rejected. Besides, the stoutnes used by Harpalus (the principall person of the embassie) moved their patience and exasperated their stomackes.
For he said, that indeed the kings desire and endevour, to bee credited and beleeved in his Apologie and defence, That he neither had said nor done any thing founding to hostilitie: mary, in case he perceived and saw, that they came upon him thus, and would needs picke quarrels and give occasions of warrre, he would stand upon his guard, and defend himselfe  with a resolute and valiant courage. For the hazard of the field was common, and the issue of warre uncertaine. Now, all the cities of Greece and Asia both, would rather than their lives have knowne what the embassadours of Perseus, and what Eumenes had done in the Senate: for in regard of his comming, most of the states (supposing verify that hee would stirre coales and make lome worke) had sent their embassadours to Rome, pretending colourably other matters in semblance

but indeed to listen after news: and among the rest, was the embassage of the Rhodians, and the chiefe thereof was one Satyres, who made no question nor doubt, but that Eumenes had done their errand, and put their cittie and Perseus together in all the criminall matters laid to his charge. And therefore hee made all the meanes that possibly hee could by the meditation of patrons, friends, and acquaintance, to debate the matter with king Eumenes before the bodie of the Senate: which when he had obtained, his tongue walked at large, and overbold hee was and too round with the king, in broad invectives and intempe rate tearms: namely, that he had solicited and stirred up the nation of the Lycians against the Rhodians, and was an heavier friend unto Asia than Anttochus had bene. Which speech of his as it was palusible enough and pleasing to the States of Asia (for they likewise by this time inclined to affect and favour Perseus) so it was unsaverie altogether and odious to the Senate, and nothing profitable to themselves and their  cittie, But contratriwise, this banding and conspiracie against Eumenes, wan him the more grace and favor among the Romanes; so as they did him all the honor they could, gave him most rich and costly presents, and endowed him with a curule chaire of estate, and a staffe or scepter, both of yvorie.
After these embassages had their dispatch and were dismissed, Harpalus returned into Macedonie in all speed and hast possible, relating unto the king, how hee had left the Romanes not preparing as yet for warre; but so farre out with him and so highly offended, that it appeared evidently it would not belong are they began. And Perseus againe for his part, besides that he looked for no other, was well enough pleased therwith, presuming upon the floure and strength of his forces. But above all other he maliced Eumenes most: with whose bloud he laid the first foundation  of the warre: for the suborned one Evander a Candiot and captaine under him of certaine auxiliarie souldiours, and three Macedonians besides (whose service and ministrie he had used in the like feats) to murder the king. Hee gave them letters addressed to one Praxo an hostesse of his, a jollie, dame in Delphi, and of greatest credite and wealth among them. For assured hee was, that Eumenes minded to go up to Delphi, there to sacrifice unto Apollo. These traitors together with Evander set forward; and to execute this their dessigned enterprise, they looked all about and sought for nothing but the opportunitie of some place or other. Now, as men ascend from Cirrha to the temple, before they come to any place much peopled and frequented with houses, there stood a mound or mud-wal on the left hand of the path or way, rising somewhat higher than the foundation and ground-worke; along which wall there was passage for one by one and no  more: for on the right hand the earth was broken downe and fallen, and a breach made of some good depth. Behind that mound aforesaid, these traitors had hidden themselves, and raised some steps like staires; to the end that from above, as from the top of a wal, they might discharge their shot upon king Eumenes as he passed by. Before him their marched from the sea, at the first a sort of his friends and followers, together with his guard intermingled one with another; but afterwards as the way grew more streight and narrow, the traine waxed thinner. But when they were once come to the place where they could not goe but by one at once, Pantaleon one of the States and princes of Aetolia, with whom the king had begun some communication, entred first into the narrow path aforesaid: with that, the knaves that lay in waite behind, rose up and rolled downe two huge stones, whereof the one smote the king upon the head, the other aslonished  his shoulder. And verily all the rest of his friends and followers, seeing him fall with the blow, fled some one way, some another: only Pantaleon staied behind all, fearlesse, to protect and guard the king. The murderous villaines might have fetched a short compasse about the wall, and soone runne to the king to make sure worke and dispatch him quite: but they supposing they had done the deed alreadie, fled to the fitch of the mount Pernaslus, and made such hast, that when one of their companie hindered and staied their running, because he dragged behind and could not keepe pace and follow them hard at heeles through those steepe and blind waies, they made no more adoe but killed him outright, for feare least if the were taken, hee should bewray and disclose the whole treason. The body of the king lay along on the ground: and first his friends came running about him, then his guard and houshold servants. When they reared him up, they  found him astonied with the stroke and altogether senselesse in a traunce: howbeit by some heat remaining, and the beating of his heart, they perceiued there was some life, but little or no hope they had that he could escape and live. Some there were of his guard and pensioners about him, that made pursuite after these murderers by their tracts: and when they had held on their

 chase as farre as to the crest of Pernassus, wearying themselves to no purpose, they gave over and returned as wise as they went. The Macedonians as they had begun an audacious enterprise inconsideratly, so they left it undone as fearfully and without advise. Now by this time was the king come again to himself. And the morrow after, his friends conveied him to his ship; from thence to Corinth; and from Corinth along the streights of Isthmus they brought their vessels,and crossed over to Aegina: where his cute was caried so close and secret, without admitting any person to come unto him, that the rumor ran into Asia how he was dead. And Attalus his brother (by your leave) gave good care therto, and beleeved the news sooner than was beseeming brotherly love and unitie. For he entred into such talke both with his brothers wife, and also with the captaine of the castle, as if he had bene the undoubted heire and assured inheritor of the crowne. All this Eumenes  knew full well afterwards: who albeit he purposed to dissimule the matter, and to put it up, at leastwise with silence; yet at their first encounter and meeting together, he could not hold, but reproved and reproached his brother, for being so forward and over-hastie to court and woe his wife. The bruite also was blowne to Rome, and a blunder there was of the death of king Eumenes.
About the same time C. Valerius was returned out of Greece, who had bene sent thither as embassadour to looke into the state of the countrie; to marke also and observe the plots and proceedings of king Perseus. He reported all things sutable and agreeable to the intelligences given by king Eumenes, and withall, brought with him from Delphi dame Proxo, in whose house those villanous traitours were lodged and harboured: also one L. Ramnius a Brundusian, who enformed  moreover and gave evidence as followeth. This Ramnius was one of the principall citizens of Brundusium, and used to lodge and entertaine in his house, not onely all the Romane captains when they came to towne, but also the embassadours of forreine nations, such as were of greatest marke, and principally those that were sent from any kings. By this means, acquainted he grew with Perseus, albeit they never had seene one anothers face. And being invited by the king his letters, wherein he was promised great hope of some nere and inward friendship above others, and consequently of great preferments therby, he made a journie unto him. Within a short time he was wound into very familiar acquaintance with the king, and drawne into private conference and discourse of secrets, farther ywis, than himselfe was willing or well liked of. For the king dealt with him, yea and importuned him with instant praiers and large behests of rich rewards, that for as  much as all the Romane captaines and embassadours used to take his house for their Inne, he would cause as many of them as he writ for, to be poisoned, Now for that hee knew it was a right difficult and dangerous matter to come by such a poison and compasse this project, especially if many were partie and privie to him: and besides, the event uncertaine, either in the effect of the drug it selfe to be strong, quicke, and forcible enough to doe the feate: or in the secret working thereof, lest it should be found and spied; he would therefore put into his hands such a poison, as neithier in the giving, nor after it was giuen, might be knowne by any signe whatsoever. Ramnius fearing least if hee refused and denied, hee should be the first man to take assay and make experiment of the poison, promised so to doe, and then departed. But returne to Brundusium hee would not, before he had spoken with C. Valerius the Embassadour, who then sojorned (as hee  heard say) about Chalcis. First unto him he revealed this plot, and by his commandement came along with him to Rome: where being brought into the Senate, after audience given, hee laid abroad in every point all that had passed. This new matter, over and besides those which Eumenes had reported, was the cause that Perseus was the sooner taken for an enemie, and so declared: the rather because they saw him not onely about to make open warre of a princely and royall mind, but also to practise and execute privilie all kind of mischiefe, by way of covert brigandage, theevish stealth, and secret poison. The mannaging of this warre was put off and referred to the new Consuls: howbeit for the present ordained it was, that Cn. Sicintus the Pretour, who had the jurisdiction betweene citizens and staungers, should levie and enroll soldiours, who being conducted to Brundusium, should with all convenient speed commit to sea, and  saile over to Apollonia in Epirus, for to seize upon the maritime citties: to the end that the Consull unto whom the province of Macedonia should be allotted, might arrive there with his vessells in safetie, and set his forces on land with ease.
Eumenes, after he had been kept a long while at Aegina, during the time of his hard and dangerous cure, so soone as ever he might goe safely abroad, went to Pergamus; where, over and

besides the old hatred setled in his breast, being pricked also with this fresh and bleeding villanie  practised by Perseus, he prepared warre with all his power to the utterance: and thither repaired unto him embassadors from Rome, to testifie their joy for his evasion and escape out of so neere and great a daunger.
When the Macedonian warre was delaied and put off for one yeere, and the rest of the Pretours gone alreadie into their provinces, M. Iunius and Sp. Lucretius (unto whome befell the government of Spaine) after that they had importuned and wearied the Senate, in suing so long for one thing, obtained at the length a commission for a supply of soldiours to make up the armie; by vertue whereof they enrolled 3000 foot, and 150 horse for the Romane legions; and levied five thousand foot and three hundred horse for the armie of the allies. These forces were transported into Spaine with the new Pretours.

The same yeere, after that a great part of the Campaine territorie, which privat persons here and there held in occupation without regard of lawfull title and tenur, was (upon diligent survey made by Posthumius the Consull) recovered againe for the publicke use of the citie of Rome; M. Lucretius a Tribune of the Commons preferred a law, That the Censors should let out to ferme, the said Campaine lands to tenants for yeerely rent. A thing that had not been done for many yeeres after the winning of Capua, namely, that particular men should be so greedie as to encroch thus beyond their bounds upon the common wast.
The Macedonian war being now concluded, but not as yet published and proclaimed, whiles the Senat was in doubtfull expectation what kings would friend them, and who would side with Perseus; there came to Rome embassadours from Ariarates, bringing with them the kings sonne, a verie child. The speech they made was to this purpose, That the king their master had sent his sonne to Rome, there to have his education; to the end that being there brought up, hee might from his first infancie be acquainted with their fashions, and converse with the people of Rome. His suit and request to them was, that they would vouchsafe unto him not onely the ordinarie entertaiment and protection that private persons affourd to their guests, but also to take the charge of publicke tuition, and as it were the guardianage of him. This embassage of the king was well taken of the Senat and pleased them highly. Whereupon they ordained, that Cn, Stnius the Pretour, should let out a mansion house with all the furniture, wherein the young prince and his traine might keepe their resiance.
The Thracian embassadours likewise presented themselves before the Senat, to debate their  owne controvercies in their hearing, and withall desired their friendship and amitie. They obtained their suite, and besides their was sent unto them by way of present, the summe of 2000 Asses apeece. Glad were the LL. of the Senate that these States were received into their societie, by reason that Thracia lyeth hard on the backe-side of Macedonie: but to the end that they might have perfit intelligence and notice, how all things went in Asia and the Ilands, they sent thither T. Claudius Nero, and M. Decimius in embassage: whome they commaunded also to visit Creete and Rhodes; and withall, both to renew the amitie, and also to spie and observe, whether the hearts of those allies had been sollicited and tempted by K. Perseus.
As the citie was thus in doubtfull suspence and expectation of the event of this new warre, behold, in a tempest that arose in the night, a certaine columne or pillar, garnished and set out  with the beake-heads of warre ships, (which had been erected in the Capitoll during the first Punicke warre by M. Aemylius the Consull, who had for his companion in government Serg. Fulvius) was by a clap of thunder and lightning, rent and cloven from the very base to the chapter. This was taken for a prodigious token, and report thereof was made to the Senat. The LL. gave order, that the Aruspices should be conferred with about it, and their advise taken: likewise they commaunded the Decemvirs to looke into their bookes of Sibylla. The Decemvirs for their part pronounced and declared, that the citie should be purged and hallowed, publicke supplications and prayers made unto the gods, and greater beasts killed for sacrifice, as well at Rome in the Capitoll, as in Campaine neere the promontorie of Minerva. Also that with all convenient speed, there should be plaies solemnly exhibited for ten daies togither, in the honor  of most mightie and most gracious Iupiter. All this was done with diligence accordingly: but the soothsayers and Aruspices aforesaid, made answer out of their learning, That this prodigie portended good, and signified the advancement and enlarging of their owne territories: togither with the ruine and destruction of their enemies; for that those beak-heads which the storme

 overthrew and cast downe, had been the spoiles of ships woon from the enemies. There happened other occurrents besides to encrease the scrupulous religion and devotion of men: for reported it was, how at Saturnia within the towne it rained bloud three daies togither. Item, At Calatia an asse was soled with three feet; and a bull togither with five kine were strucken starke dead with one thunderbolt and flash of lightning: last of all, at Oximum there was a showre of very earth and nothing else. In regard of these woonders also, sacrifices were celebrated, supplications made, and one day kept holiday and all shop-windowes shut.
Yet were not the Consuls departed into their provinces, because they neither would obey and condescend unto the Senate in proposing the matter as touching Popilius at the councell table; and the LL. were as resolute for their parts to let no decree passe, before that were done.  The spight and heart-burning they bare against M. Popilius, grew the more by occasion of his owne letters, wherein hee wrate and gave them to understand, That being Proconsull, hee had now a second time fought with the Statellates in Liguria, and put ten thousand of them to the sword: by reason of which hard courses and extremities of warre, the other nations likewise of the Ligurians were entred into armes. At which newes not onely Popilius was blamed behind his backe, for making warre against all law and equitie upon them that had yeelded, and thereby provoking those who before were quiet, to goe out and put themselves in action of rebellion; but the Consuls also were checked to their faces in the Senate, because they set not forward to their charge and government. M. Martius Sermo and Quintius Martius Scylla, two Tribunes of the Commons, seeing the LL. of the Senat thus drawing all in a line, tooke heart unto them,  and both menaced the Consuls to fine them, unlesse they made more hast unto their province; and also recited in the Senat a law which they had drawne and framed, and were upon the point to promulge, as touching the foresaid Ligurians who had submitted. The tenure whereof ran in this forme, THAT VVHAT PERSON SOEVER OF STATELLAE HAD YEELDED HIMSELFE, AND VVAS NOT RESTORED TO LI^RRTIE AND FREEDOME BEFORE THE CALENDS OF1 of August. SEXTILIS NEXT ENSUING, THE SENAT UPON THEIR OTH SHOULD ORDAINE ONE SPECIAL COMMISSIONER TO MAKE INQUISITIONEY VVHOSE FRAUD, COVIN, AND NOTICE HEE VVAS IN VILLENAGE, AND PUNISH THE PARTIE ACCORDINGLY. Then by authoritie and approbation of the Senate, they published this for a law. Now before that the Consuls tooke their journey, the Senat assembled in the temple of Bellona in regard and  favour of C.Cicereius the Pretor of the former yeere. Where audience was given him: and after he had declared what exploits he had performed in Corsica, there upon demaunded triumph: which when hee could not obtaine, he made no more adoe, but rode triumphant in the Albane hill; for now it was taken up and grown for a custome so to doe, and aske the authoritie and the State no leave.
The foresaid law proposed by the Martij, the Commons, with a generall consent by their voices graunted and enacted. By vertue of which act of the Commons,C. Licinius the Pretour put to question in the Senat, Whom they would have to sit upon the inquisition according to the forme of the said law. And the LL. ordained himselfe to be the inquisitor. Then at length and not asore, the Consuls put themselves in their way toward their province, and received the charge  of the armie from M. Popilius. This Popilius durst not yet returne to Rome, for feare hee should be called in question and put to his answere before that Pretour and supreme judge, who had required the advise of the Senate as touching that enquest framed and drawne of purpose against him: knowing full well (as he did) how the Senate was not well affected to him, and the people much more maliciously bent and set against him. But the Tribunes of the Commons thought they would prevent and meet with this flinching of his and absenting himselfe, by intimation of another act and law provided in that behalfe, namely, That if he entred not into the citie of Rome before the 13 of Novem.Ides of November immediately following, it should be lawfull for C. Licinius to proceed in judgement, and give sentence against him in his absence. This cord towed and haled him to Rome with a witnesse: and when he was returned and entred into the Senat, they were  upon his top, and gave him such a welcome thither, as testified their displeasure and hard conceit of him. After hee had been well baited and shaken up among them, an act of Senate was entred in this wise, That so many of the Ligurians as had not beene enemies, after the time that Q. Falvius and L. Manlius were Consuls, those the Pretours, C. Licinius and Cn. Sicinius, should restore and establish in their former state of freedom; and that the Consull C. Popilius should set

them out lands to occupie and possesse beyond the Po. By vertue of this arest, many a thousand  were set free and enfranchised, who being transported over the river Po, had land assigned unto them accordingly. Now M. Popilius upon the law Martia (promulged by the two Marij, Tribunes of the Commons) answered for himselfe judicially twise before C. Licinius. At the third time, the Pretour, overcome with a respective grace and favour to the Consull absent, and the earnest praiers of the whole name and house of the Popilij, adjoiurned the defendant to make appearance in the court upon the 15 of March.Ides of March; on which day the new magisrates were to enter into their offices: and this hee did, because himselfe by that time should be a private person againe, and therefore not to sit upon the bench as judge to heare pleas and to determine. Thus the foresaid act as touching the Ligurians, finely shifted and cunningly avoided, came to just nothing.
At that time the Carthaginian embassadours were at Rome, with Gulussa the sonne of Masanissa;  betweene whome hard hold and much debating there was in the Senate. The Carthaginians complained, that over and besides the lands (about which there had been sent commissioners from Rome before-time, to view the place and to enquire into the cause). Masanissa within the last two yeeres had by force and armes possessed himselfe of more than threescore and ten townes and castles within the Carthaginian domaine and territorie. And an easie matter was it for him to doe, who made reckoning of nothing, nor had regard of any person; whereas the Carthaginians were so tyed and obliged by their capitulations to the good-abearing, that they held their peace: for, inhibited they were to beare armes without their owne countrey. And albeit they knew assuredly, that they should war within their owne confines, if they desseized the  Numidians of those peeces, yet feared they that one expresse article of the accord, wherein they were debarred in plaine tearmes, to wage warre against the associates of the people of Rome. Howbeit, the Carthaginians could no longer endure his pride, crueltie, and avarice. Sent therefore they were unto the Senate as humble oratours, that to might please them to graunt one of these three requests; to wit, That either they might debate with indifferent audience before them (being allies to both alike) as touching the right of the one and the other: or that they would permit the Carthaginians to defend themselves by just and lawfull armes, against unjust and ungodly force: or else finally (if partiall favour swayed more with them than the truth of the cause) to set downe at once, what their pleasure was should be given away out of their owne, to Masanissa. For they yet, would have some gage of their hand, and know what they gave; whereas  he himselfe had no stay, nor would ever see to make an end; so unsatiable was his lust and appetite. But in case they might obtaine none of these points, and that there could be found any fault or trespasse of theirs, committed since the peace graunted unto them by Scipio; then, that they rather than any other would chastise them. For leifer they had to live in servitude under the siegnorie of Romanes with safetie, than enjoy such as libertie as should bee exposed to the injuries of Massanissa. And better were it for them to perish and die once for all, than to live and languish under the yoke of a most cruell and bloudie butcher. At which words the tears trickled downe their cheekes, and downe they fell at their feet. Lying thus prostrate upon the ground, as they moved pitie and compassion to themselves, so they procured despight and malice against the king. Then thought good it was to demannd of Gulussa, what hee had to answere as touching  these matters? or els (if he had so rather himselfe) to declare before, for what cause and upon what occasion he was come to Rome. Gulussa made answere, That neither it was easie for him to deale in those points, wherof he had no commission from his father: nor for his father to give him any such charge, considering that the Carthaginians, shewed not unto him of what business they would treat, ne yet made him so much as privie of their comming to Rome. This only was known, that there was a close counsell holden for certaine nights, by the principall States of Carthage within the temple of Aesculapius, from whence embassadors were dispatched to Rome with hidden and secret messages. And this was the cause that his father had sent him to Rome, to beseech the Senat not to give credite to the slanderous accusations that should be preferred against him by those that were common enemies as well to them as him; who hated him; for no other cause, but  for that he had continued so constant in his sealtie and allegeance to the people of Rome. The Senat thus having heard what they could say of both sides, sat in counsell as touching the demands of the Carthaginians: and at length commaunded this aunswere to bee returned, How their advise and pleasure was, that Gulussa should presently depart and goe into Numidia, and give his

 father to understand from them, that with all speed hee send his embassadours to the Senate, as concerning those complaints which the Carthaginians had made of him: also to give intimation and knowledge unto the Carthaginians, that they repaire likewise thither to debate their contoverasies and differences betweene them. And if it lay in their power to effect ought for the honour of Masanissa, they would be as willing to doe it hereafter, as they had been readie heretofore. Marie, to minister justice for savour and affection, that they would not doe in any wife. Willing they were that every man should know and hold his owne, and keepe him within compasse; neither minded they to set out new limits, but to observe the old bounds. Indeed they had granted to the Carthaginians, after they were conquered, both townes to inhabite, and territories to possesse; not to this end, that in time of peace they should plucke that away by wrong and outrage,  which during the warres they could not take from them by martiall law and force of armes. Thus was the young prince together with the Carthaginians, dismissed. Presents were given both to the one and the other, according to the order, and other courtesies of hospitalitie were friendly observed.
Much about the same time Cn. Servilius Caepio, App. Claudius Cento, and T. Annius Lucius, embassadours sent into Macedonie; for to demaund amends and restitution, and withall to disclaim and renounce the kings amitie, returned to Rome. Who having related in order what they had seene and heard, enflamed the Senate more againts Perseus, who were alreadie of themselves enkindled ynough.
They made report, That through all the cities of Macedonie they saw preparation for warre in all sorcible manner; that when they came to the court, for many daies they  could find no meanes of accesse to the speech of the king; and in the end, after they were departed from thence homeward (as being past all hope of parley with him) then and not afore, they were called backe againe of their way, and so brought unto his presence: that the sum of their embassage and speech unto to him was this, namely, to put him in mind of the league first contracted with Philip, and afterwards renued with himselfe since the death of his father; wherein by expresse words he was inhibited to beare armes without his own frontiers, and likewise debarred to levie warre upon any confederate allies of the people of Rome: after this, that they had recounted and laid abroad from point to point those specialties, which they themselves had lately heard king Eumenes to declare and discourse, which were all apparent truths, upon his owne assured knowledge. Moreover, that the king held a secret counsell for many daies together, with  the embassages of the cities and States of Asia: in reagard of which injuries, that the Senat thought in reason and equitie that he should make satisfaction, yea, and restore back both to them and also to their associates, whatsoever hee held contrarie to right, contained in the accord. That the king hereupon at the first fell into a fit of choler and indignation, and gave them hard tearms, reproching at every other word the Romanes for their covetousnesse and insolencie. And as for their embassadours that came unto him one after another, he said they were but, spies, to listen and see what he did or said; and no mervel, for they thought it meet that he should conforme and frame himselfe in all his words and deeds, according to their becke and commandement. At the last, when hee had in this wise discharged his choler with high words and broad speeches for a long time, that he commanded them to repaire againe unto him the next morrow, for that hee  would give them their answer in writing: and then he delivered unto them a script to this effect as followeth. First, as touching the accord and covenant concluded with my father, that is nothing to me at all: if I suffred it to be renued, it was not for any liking or approbation therof; but because I being new come to the crown, and lately possessed of the kingdome, I was to bear and endure all things whatsoever. But in case they will enter into a new league with me, requisit it is that a treatie and agreement passe first of the conditions. And if they could bee content that a covenant were drawne with equall and indifferent capitulations, yet I will sleepe upon it and bee well advised what to doe for the best, as I doubt not but they likewise will have a good regard to the profite of their Commonweale. And herewith, that he suddainely flung away from them, and wee all began to void out of the pallace. Whereupon wee proceeded according to our commission  on the abandon and disavow his amitie and societie. At which words of ours, hee staied in great wroth and furie, and with a lowd and shrill voice, warned us upon our owne perill and hazard, to bee gone out of the marches of his realme within three daies: finally, in this manner wee departed and put our selves in our journey, and found neither friendly welcome at our first comming, nor any courteous entertainment while we were there, not yet a kind farewell at our

departure. When they had once done, the Thessalian and Aetolian embassadours had audience.

The Senate, to the end that they might know out of hand, what captaines and commanders the commonweale was to employ, thought good to write unto the Co^^ that the one-or other of them (who first might) should repaire to Rome for the creation of new magistrates. And no great matter to speake of, as concerning the state, was that yeere done by the Consuls. But more expedient it was thought for the commonweale, to suppersse and appease the Ligurians, whose bloud was up and chased against them, considering that the Macedonian warre was in daily expectance.
Moreover the embassadors of Issa gave occasion, that Gentius also king of Illyricum was had in jealousie: who at one time both complained of him, that now twise he had given the wast to their  countrie: and also made report, how the Macedonian and Illyrian kings were all one, and so great together, that with one consent and common counsell they prepared to warre upon the Romans: finally, that the Illyrians were now at Rome, in shew and semblance of embassage, but indeed and very truth, no better than spies, addressed of purpose by the motife and advise of Perseus, to hearken and learne whereabout they went at Rome. These Illyrians were sent for into the Senat-house, and when they had said, that they were emploied in embassage from their king Gentius, to aunswere unto those accusations which it might be the Isseans framed against him: it was againe demaunded of them, How it hapned that they went not directly nor shewed themselves in such sort to the magistrate, that according to the manner and custome, they might have had their lodging provided and presents given them, with the ordinarie allowance of the cittie, meet for them during  their abode; that thereby knowledge might have bene taken as well of their comming, as also of their businesse and errand? But being taken in atrip and found fumbling in their answere, they were commaunded to void out of the Counsel-chamber. For thought it was not meete, to give them their dispatch as embassadours, since they made no meanes to present themselves unto the Senate: but rather they were of advise, to dispatch embassadors of their owne to the king, to signifie unto him, which of his associates had complained unto the Senate, how hee had burnt their villages within their territorie: yea, and to tell him of it plainly, that it was not well don^ of him, that he could not forbeare but do wrong to his owne allies. In this embassie were sent, A. Terentius Varro, C. Pletorius, and C. Cicereius.
Likewise those embassadours, whose commission was to visit the associate kings, returned out  of Asia, and reported, that in the said Asia they had communication with Eumenes; in Syria with Antiochus, and in Alexandria with Ptolomaeus: who all of them had beene sollicited by sundrie embassies of Perseus, howbeit they persisted firme and fast in their processed sealtie, and promised to performe whatsoever the people of the Rome would command them. Also that they went to the confederated states, whome they found true and loiall enough, excepting the Rhodians onely, whom they perceived to bee floting and wavering, as altogether infected and poisoned with the counsell of Perseus.
Now were the Rhodian embassadours come to answere those things which they knew were commonly bruited abroad touching their citie: howbeit the Senat was not of mind to give them audience, before the new Consuls entred into their office. But they were all of advise to delay no  longer the preparation of warre. C. Litinius the Pretor had in charge, out of the old Quinqueremes which were laid up in the dockes and harbours, to repaire as many as might serve at sea; to rig also and prepare a fleet of 50 saile. But if he could not come to make up that ful number, then to write unto his colleague C. Memmius in Sicilie, for to repaire, calke and trim those ships which were in Sicilie, that with all speed possible they might be sent to Brundusium. The said Pretour C. Licinius was commaunded to enroll of Romane citizens (and those, Libertines, such as of bondmen borne had beene enfranchised) for marinners and sailers, as many as might serve five and twentie ships: and Cn. Licinius had commission to levie as many of Latine allies for the like number of ships: also the same Pretour was enjoyned to charge the Latine allies with eight thousand foot, and foure hundred horse. A. Atilius Serranus, who had beene Pretour the yeere before, was chosen to receive these forces at Brundusium, and to conduct them over into Macedonie: and Cn. Sicinius the Pretour was appointed to have the armie in readinesse for to be transported. As for C. Litinius the Pretour, he by authoritie from the Senat, wrate to C. Popilius the Consull, that he should commaund the second legion, which had beene longest emploied in Liguria, and

 consulted of most experienced souldiours, together with foure thousand footmen and two hundred horse of the Latine allies, to be readie at Brundusium upon the 13 of Februarie.With this fleet of ships and forces of souldiours, Cn. Sicinius was commaunded to keepe Macedonie, untill one were appointed to succeed him; and for this purpose his charge of command was continued for a yeere longer. All these directions of the Senate were put in execution with great diligence and expedition. Eight and fortie Quinqueremes were set aflote out of their docks: and L. Percius Licintus was ordained to conduct them to Brundusium: the other twelve were sent out of Sicilie. Three embassadours were dispatched into Apulia and Calabria, to wit, Sex Digitius, T. Iuventius, and M. Caecilius, for to buy corne to serve the fleet and the armie. Now when all things were provided and in readinesse, C. Sicinius the Pretor departed from the citie in his warlike  coate of armes, and arrived at Brundusium. About the end of the yeere C. Popilius the Consull returned to Rome, somewhat later than the Senate had ordained; who was commanded to take the first time, and with all speed to create new magistrates, considering that so great a war approached so neere. And therefore when the Consull discoursed in the temple of Bellona, as touching his exploits in Liguria, the LL. of the Senate were nothing well pleased to heare him: but instead therof, they muttered every where, and asked him estsoones, Why he had not restored to libertie those Ligurians, who were oppressed through the wicked proceedings of his father? The election of the Consuls was holden upon the twelvth day before the Calends of March, according to the writs that went out: wherein were created Consuls, Pub. Licinius Gracchus and Caius Cassius Longinus. The morrow following, the Pretours were elected, to wit, Caius Sulpitius Galbs,  L. Furtus Philus, L. Canilius Dives, C. Lucretius Gallus, C. Caninius Rebutius, and L. Villius Annalis. To these Pretours the provinces were assigned in this manner: That two of them should sit as LL. chiefe justices in Rome for civil jurisdiction: three other to have the government of Spaine, Sicilie, and Sardinia: so as the sixt onely should remaine not allotted to any place, for to be emploied wheresover the Senate would think good and ordained. The Consuls elect were commaunded by the Senate, upon the solemne day when they were to enter into their magistracie, after they had sacrificed greatest beasts, as it appertained, to pray in this forme, That the gods would vouchsafe the warre which the people of Rome intended now to enterprise, to speed well and come to happie yssue. The same day the Senate decreed, that C. Popilius the Consull should set out plaies for ten daies together in the honour of Iup. Opt Max and that offrings should  be made at all the shrines and altars, if so be the commonweale for ten yeeres, in the some good estate as now it stood. And as the Senat ordaines, the Consull vowed in the capitoll, that the said plaies should be exhibited, and offrings presented of as great valours as it pleased them to set downe. This vow was pronounced by the Consul in the presence of no fewer than 150 Senators, and according to that form of words which Lepidus the high-priest or soveraigne bishop indited. The yeere died certaine Prelates of State, to wit, L. Aemylius Pappus one of the Decemvirs or superintendents over the holy rites, and Q. Falvius a bishop, who the yeere before had bene Censor. This man had a soule end. It fortuned that news came unto him of his two sonnes, who then served in the wars of Illyricum, how the one was departed out of this life, and the other lay sicke of a greevous and dangerous maladie. The sorrow for the one, and  the fear for the other, happening to just at one time, brake his heart and oppressed his spirits; insomuch as the next morning, when his servants entered betimes into his bed-chamber, they found him hanged by a cord, strangled. It was thought abroad, that he had never beene his owne man, since he was Censor, and commonly it was spoken, That Inno Lacinia in wrathfull displeasure against him for spoiling her temple, hereft him of his right wits. In the roume of Aemylius, M. Valerius Messala was substituted Decemvir: and in steed of Fulvius, there was elected Archbishop, Cneus Domitius Aenobarbus, who to say a truth was very young to bee made a priest.
In that yeere wherein P. Licinius and C. Cassius were Consuls, not onely the cittie of Rome, and the whole land of Italie, but all the princes and States of Europe and Asia, were amused respectively  upon the warre betweene the Macedonians and the Romanes. Eumenes ((...) of Asia) not onely carried an old cankred malice against Philip, but also was pricked forward with new despite and anger upon a fresh occasion, in that by the wicked practise of Perseus, hee had like to have beene sacrificed at Delphi. Prusias king of Bithynia, was resolved not to enter into armes, but to attend the issue of the warre. For hee thought it not reason and

seemely for him to take armes in the defence of the Romanes against his wives brother;  and this account hee made, that is Perseus happened to have the better he might soone obtaine pardon at his hands by the mediation of his sister. Ariarates king of the Cappadocians, over and besides that hee had promised aid to the Romanes in his owne name, ever since that hee was linked in affinitie to Eumenes, drew the same way which hee went, and joyned with him in all his counsels both of warre and peace. As for Antiochus [king of Syria] his teeth watered verily at the kingdome of AEgypt, as he, who despised as well the childhood of the young king in his nonage, as the weaknesse and negligence of his guardians: and considering there was some controversie about the title of Coelesyria, he supposed that he should have good occasion to levie war, to manage also and exploit the same without empeachment, whiles the Romanes were busied in the Macedonian warre; howbeit as well by his owne embassadours sent unto the Senat, as also unto theirs addressed unto him, he promised stoutly to be for them. Prolomeus [the young king of AEgypt] beeing yet underage, was at the dispositions of others: his tutors and protectours, as they prepared to wage warre against Antiochus for the recoverie of Coelesyria, so they promised the Romanes withall to doe their devoirin the Macedonian warre. Masanissa [K. of the Numidians] was altogither for the Romans; he furnished them with coine, and intended to send his sonne Misagenes with aides both of men and elephants in that service. Howbeit hee so disposed of his designes, as might serve his turne which way soever the world went: for if the victorie fell to the Romanes, he ordered that his affaires should remaine still in the same state; and better hee was not to looke for, because the Romanes would not suffer any violence to be offered unto the Carthaginians: but in case the Romans went downe and had the overthrow, (who then protected the Carthaginians) then hee made full reckoning of  Asia to be his owne. Gentius [king of Illyricum] had so demeaned himselfe, that he was suspected of the Romanes; yet was hee not fully resolved which side to take unto: and it seemed hee would joyne to one or the orher, more upon a fit as it tooke him in the head, than with any discretion or advise. Cotys the Thracian, king of the Odrysians, tooke part evidently with the Macedonians. In these tearmes (I say) stood the KK. as touching this present warre. As for the free cities and States besides, the common people every where (as alwaies lightly it is seene) enclined to the worse part, and ran with the K. and the Macedonians: but the principall persons and men of qualitie, a man might perceive affected diversly. Some went with the Romans all upon the head, in so much as they greatly empaired their authoritie in excessive favour to them: few of them  were induced by the just and upright government of the Romanes, but the most part were carried away with this strong conceit, That the more they emploied themselves for them, the greater men they should be at home in their owne citties. Another fort there were of the kings flattering favorites, who being deeply drenched in debt, and in despaire of bettering their fortune (if the present state held still) abandoned and gave themselves over to entertain all changes and innovations. And some there were besides, possessed with a vaine humour of their owne, because Perseus seemed to have more favor of the common people. At third fort there were (and those of the best and widest of all other) who is it had lyen in their hands to determine whome they would have to be the greater lord, wished to have been under the Romans rather than the K. Marie if they might have had their liberty to be chusers simply of their fortune, by their good  will they would not have had the one part advaunced by the depression and subversion of the other: but that the forces and puissance of them both remaining entire and unfoiled, peace thereby might be entertained: and so betweene them both, the state of cities should continue in the best case, when as the one part might ever protect the weaker side from the injuries of the mightier. And those that stood affected thus, held them quiet and said not a word; but being safe themselves, beheld the behaviour and deportements of those that were the partakers and favourets of either side.
The Consuls that day wherein they entred their government, when they sacrificed (according to the ordinance of the Senat) with greater beasts in all the temples and chappels, wherin (for most part of the yeere) the sacred beds and couches for the gods were prepared; and there  by had presaged by good tokens, that their prayers were acceptable to the immortall gods, made report unto the Senat, That their sacrifices were as they ought to be, as also their praiers, which they conceived as touching the warre. The Bowell-priers likewise by their learning declared, That if they went about any new enterprise, they should make speed; for why? all did prognosticate

 victorie, triumph, and enlargement of their seignorie. Whereupon the LL. of the Senat commaunded the Consuls to propose unto the people the first day of the generall assembly of the Centuries in this manner: IN THE NAME OF GOD, AND TO THE WELFARE AND HAPPINES OF THE COMMONWEALTH: WHEREAS PERSEUS THE SONNE OF PHILIP K. OF MACEDONIE, (AGAINST THE ACCORD AND COVENANT CONCLUDED WITH HIS FATHER FIRST, AND AFTER HIS DEATH RENEVVED VVITH HIM). HATH LEVIED VVARRE UPON THE ALLIES OF THE PEOPLE OF ROME, VVASTED THEIR TERRITORIES, SEIZED THEIR CITIES, COMPLOTTED TO ENTER INTO ARMES AGAINST THE PEOPLE OF ROME, AND TO THAT END HATH PROVIDED ARMOUR, SOULDIORS, AND A FLEET: UNLESSE HE MAKE SATISFACTION, PLEASETH IT YOU  THAT VVARRE BE ENTERPRISED AND VVAGED AGAINST HIM. This bill passed by all the suffrages of the people. Then was there an act of the Senat likewise entred, That the Consuls should either agree together, or else cast lots for the provinces of Italy and Macedonie; and looke whose lot sell to Macedonie, he should persecute with fire and sword K. Perseus, and all that sect and bend which tooke his part, unlesse they made amends to the people of Rome. It was concluded also, that four legions should be newly enrolled, for either Consull swaine: with this preheminence and vantage to the province of Macedonie, that wheras to the legions of the other Consull (according to the auncient custome) there went but five thousand foot and two hundred horse apeece, there should be enrolled for Macedonie six thousand foot and three hundred horse equally to a legion. Also for the one of the Consuls in the armie of the allies, the number  was augmented, so as besides those six hundred horsemen which Cn. Sictnius had conducted alreadie, he should of those allies transport over into Macedonie, sixteen thousand footmen and eight hundred horse. As for Italie, twelve thousand footmen of allies and sixe hundred horse were thought sufficient. Moreover, this prerogative had the province of Macedonie, that for Centurions and souldiors the Consull might enroll of the elder sort whome he thought good, as many as were not above fiftie yeeres of age. In choosing of Tribunes militarie and colonels, the old manner was this yeere chaunged, in regard of the Macedonian warre; to wit, that the Consuls (by advise and authorities of the Senate) should moove unto the people, that the said Tribunes might not that yeer be elected by voices of the people, but that their elections should be referred to the judgement and discretion of the Consuls and Pretours. The charge commaund  was thus divided among the Pretors as followeth. That Pretour whose lot sell to go whither it pleased the Senat to send, was assigned to take his journey to the sleet at Brandusion, and there to survey and revise the sea-servitours, and looke how many he thought not meet for service, them to discharge, and to make up the number with chosen Libertines; and in any wise to order it so, that two third parts consisted of Romane naturall citizens, and the other third of allies. Item, That provision of victuals for the navie and the armie, should be brought out of Sicilie and Sardinia. And the Pretours of those two provinces had in charge to exact a double tenth of the Sicilians and Sardinians, and this graine to be conveighed into Macedonie for the armie. Now Sicilie sell to C. Caninius Rebulus, Sardinia to L. Furius Philus, and Spaine to L. Canaleius, C. Sulpitius Galba was L. chiefe Iustice for the citizens of Rome, and L. Iunius Annalis  for the straungers: but C. Lucretius Gallus his lot was to goe where the Senate would employ him. Betweene the two Consuls there was some jarre and wrangling, rather than any great debate about there province. Cassius for his part said, That he was by right to warre in Macedonie without any casting of lots for the matter, for as much as his colleague might nor enter into lot with him, and save his oath. For hee being Pretour, had sworne solemnly in a frequent assembly of the people (because he would shift off and not goe into his province) that he had occasion to celebrate sacrifices in a certain place and upon set daies, which could not be performed (as they ought) if hee were at sea. And the same (as I take it) cannot be well done during his absence now that hee is Consull no more than whiles hee was Pretour. Howbeit, if the Senate be of opinion and judge, that more consideration is to be had satisfie Caius  Licinius his will now in his Consullship, then regard of the oth he tooke before in his Pretorship, yet will I notwithstanding accommodate my selfe to the pleasure of the Senate. The LL. were consulted with hereabout, who judging that it were a proud part to denie him the governement of a province, unto whom the people of Rome had graunted the dignitie of a Consulship, commanded the Consuls to cast lots. Thus Macedonie sell to P. Licinius, and Italie to C. Cassius.

Then they put to lotterie also the conduct and emploiment of the legions: whereby the first and  third were to be transported into Macedonie, the second and fourth to remaine in Italie. In the mustering and choise of souldiours, the Consuls went more neerely and streightly to worke by sarre, than customably they used at other times. As for Licinius, he enrolled the elder sort also, as well for souldiours as centurions; and many there were who voluntarily entred their names, because they saw how those thrived well and grew rich, who had served either in the former Macedonian warre, or against Antiochus in Asia. Now when as the marshal-Colonels called forth the centurions by name one after another, and the principall first, there happened to bee three and twentie centurions of them, who before time had (...) Ovid 3 Fast. in these verses. Inde pares centum denos iec, evit in orbes Romulus, Hastatos in^-tuitquedec^n^ Et totidem Princ^ps, totidem Pilanus habebat Corpora, legitimo quisque merehat equo. And that is was the checsest place of (...) in (...) appeareth and Ligothinus in his O^ation s^icorring.Prinupilares, and led in the cheefest and best place, etc when they were cited, they called unto the Trib. of the Com. for to be releeved by their lawfull assistance. But two of that fellowship and societie of Tribunes, namely, M. Fulvius Nobiltor, etc M. Claudius Marcellus, referred them over to the Consuls, alledging, that by right, the knowledge of these matters pertained to those who had plenarie commission to take musters, and to manage the war-affaires. But all the rest of the Tribunes avowed that they would assume it into their owne hands, and determine of that for which they were called unto as competent judges; yea, and if injurie were offered to their fellow-citizens, they would not faile but helpe and succour them. All this was debated in the Tribunes-court. Thither was M. Popilius, a Consular man, called to the hearing of this matter, and thither repaired the centurions and the Consull also.
And when the Consull required that the cafe should bee heard and decided in a generall assemblie, thereupon the people was summoned to meet in publicke together. In which solemne congregation M. Popilius, who had beene Consull two yeeres-before, spake in the behalfe  of the centurions to this effect. These martial men (quoth he) have accomplished their full time of service required by law; they carie about them bodies as wel spent etc crasie for age, as broken by continuall travels: howebeit refuse they will nothing, but are readie to doe their devoir unto the Commonweale. This onely they humbly crave and request, that they may not bee assigned to baser places of commaund, than wherein they have beene emploied alreadie when they bare armes.
Then P. Licinius the Consull commaunded the act of the Senat to be openly read: wherein it was ordained first, To levie warre upon Perseus; then, to enroll as many as they could of the old experienced Centurions for that warre; and last of all, to exempt none from soulderie, but such onely as were above fiftie yeeres of age. After this hee earnestly be sought them in this new warre so neere to Italie and against a prince so puissant, neither to binder the Colonels in  levying souldiours, nor forbid the Consull but that hee might appoint to each man what place and degree was thought to stand most with the good of the Commonweale. And in case there arose any doubt and difficultie in this business, to submit the decision thereof to the Senat. After that the Consull had delivered his mind, Sp. Liguslinus one of them who had appealed to the Tribunes of the Commons, requested both the Consull and the Tribunes to give him leave for to speake a few words unto the people: who having libertie graunted with all their good wills made a speech unto them in this wife. My maisters, you Quirites, I Spurius Liguslinus of the tribe Croftumina,The Oration of Sp. Ligusinus am descended from the Sabines.
My father left me an acre of land, and a little cottage to it, wherein I was borne, bred, and brought up, and where upon at this day I dwell. So soone as I was come to mans estate, my father gave me to wife my cousin germane, his neece  by the brother, who brought nothing with her for marriage-good, but freedome of birth honestie of life, and therewith fruitfulnesse of wommbe, as much (I may say to you) as a rich man of some wealthie house may well maintaine. Sixe sons God hath sent betweene us, and two daughters to them, both maidens mariageable. Foure of our sonnes are men growne, and have put on their mans robe; two are boies still in their pretexia, under seventeene yeeres old. I may selfe was prest to the warres, the yeere when P. Sulpisius and C. Aurelius were Consuls. In that armie which passed over sea into Macedonie, I served in qualitie of a common souldiour for the space of two yeeres against king Philip. In the third yeere T. Iuintius Flaminius, in regard of my forwardnesse assigned me the tenth place of leading among the Hastati in the vaward. After that Philip and the Macedonians were vanquished, and were brought over againe into Italie and  discharged, I went immediately as a volunarie servitour into Spaine with M. Porcius the Consull. And there is not a commaunder alive at this day, who saw farther into a souldior and could judge better of vertue and valour than hee: as they all know full well, who by long warfare have had experience both of him and also of other leaders. Hee being my captaine, reputed me worthie

 to have the first place and leading of the formost centurie of the Hastati. A third time I became a voluntarie againe in the expedition against the AEtolians and king Antiochus; and M. Celius advaunced mee to the captaineship of the Principes, in the very first place of the formost centurie. When king Antiochus was chased, and the AEtolians subdued, we were brought backe again into Italie, and two yeers together I was in pay with the legions that received yeerely wages and allowance. Twice after this I bare armes and served in Spaine, once under Q.Fulvius Flaccus, a second time under Tib. Sempronius Gracchus the Pretor. By Flaccus I was brought home among others, whom for their valiancie and prowesse he thought good to have in traine for the honour of this triumph: and at the request and entreatie of Tib. Gracchus I accompanied of him into his province. Where, within few yeeres space I had the leading of the first companie of  the Pilani or Triatijin inthe rereward. Foure and thirtie times have I been rewarded with presents at my Generals hands, in token of vertue and prowesse. Sixe civicke coronets have I received: two and twentie yeeres full have I followed the warres, and more than fiftie yeeres old I am. Now if neither I had served out all the yeeres required by law, nor might plead exemption and immunitie by mine age, yet seeing I am able to shew soure souldiours for one, my soure sonnes [I say, for my selfe alone] me thinkes it were reason, o P. Licinius, that I were now freed and discharged. And all this I pray you take, as spoken for the behoofe of my cause. Now as touching my person thus much. So long as any man who hath authoritie to enroll souldiours, shall judge mee sufficient and able to beare armes, I will not goe about to make excused and shift it off. And looke what place the Colonels and marshals that shall suppose me worthie of, it lieth in their good and pleasure  to assigne me unto it but to performe that no one person in the whole armie surmount me in valour, that shall be my owne endeavour; like as not only my captaines, but those also who have served with me are able to testifie, That I ever have so caried my selfe and performed as much. And you likewise my fellow souldiours, albeit you practice and keepe in ure the priviledge and benefit of appealing to the Tribunes, yet meet and reason it is, since in your youthfull daies ye never did ought in any place against the authoritie of the Senat and the Consuls, yee now also in your declining age bee at the disposition of the Senate and the Consuls; yea, and to esteeme all places worshipfull, wherein you shall defend and maintaine the Commonweale. When hee had thus said, the Consull highly commended him, and from before the people brought him into the Senate. And there also by the advise and authoritie of that honourable house; thanked hee was;  and the marshal-Colonels, in regard of his vertue, appointed him to be the principall centurion of the Pilani in the first legion. So, the rest of the centurions renouncing their appeale to the Tribunes, yeelded obedience in the master and levie abovesaid.
To the end that the magistrates and great commaunders might goe more timely into their governments, the Latin feasts and holydaies were published to be holden upon the 1 day of Iune. Calends of tune. Which solemnitie being finished, C. Lucretius the Pretour tooke his journey to Brondusium, having sent before all necessarie furniture and provision for the fleet. Besides those armies which the Consuls levied, a commission was directed our to C. Sulpitisi Gala the Pretour, to enrolisoure legions of Romane citizens with the ordinarie full proportion of infanterie and cavallerie, and to chuse out of the bodie of the Senate soure Colonels for to commaund them. Also  to levie of Latin allies fifteen thousand footmen and twelve hundred horse, and to take order that this armie should bee readie to goe whether soever the Senate thought good. P. Licinius the Consull at his owne instant request (that over and above the armies of citizens and allies, hee might have an addition of auxiliaries) obtained of Ligurians two thousand, of Candior archers an uncertaine number, namely, as many as the Candiors upon request would send. Moreover, certain Numidian horsemen and elephants: for which purpose L. Posthumius, Albrinus, I.T crentius Culleo and C. Aburius were sent in embassager to Masanissa and the Carthaginians. Semblably it was thought good to send three embassadours into Crete, to wit, A. Posthumias Albinus, C. Decimius, and A. Litinius Nerva.
At the very same time there arived embassadours from king Perseus. But suffred they were not  to enter into the cittie; considering that both the Senate had ordained, and the people assented alreadie, to make warre upon their king and the Macedonians. So, admitted they were into the temple of Bellona before the Senate, where they delivered their message in this manner: That king Perseus marvailed why there were armies transported over in Macedonie? And if the Senat might bee intreated so much, as to recall them home, the king would make satisfaction for the

wrongs done unto their allies, in such sort as the Senate in their discretion would appoint. Now  there was in the Senat-house at that time Sp. Carvilius, sent backe for that very purpose out of Greece from Cn. Sitinius. Hee made report and remonstrance, how Perrhoebia was forced by armes, and certaine citties of Thessalie woon; with other exploits that king Perseus had either performed, or els was in hand to enterprise. To which chalenges the embassadors were commanded to make answere. But after they were seene once to salter in their speech, saying, they had no further commission than that they had delivered alreadie; they were willed to relate unto the king their maister, That P. Licinius the Consull would shortly bee in Macedonie with an army, unto whom the king might addresse his embassadours, if he minded to do as he said and to make amends. As for sending any more to Rome, there was no need nor cause, for as much as they would not suffer any of them to passe through Italie. When they were dismissed with his short  dispatch, P. Litinius the Cosull had in charge, to command them to depart out of Italie within eleven daies, and to send Spurius Carvilius for to guard them all the way to the sea-side untill they were shipped. These occurrents passed in Rome before the Consuls were gone into their provinces.
Now by this time Cn. Sicinius (who ere that hee left his magistracie, was sent before as sarre as to Brundusium to the fleet and the armie) having put over into Epirus five thousand foot and three hundred horse, was encamped before. Nymphaeum in the territorie of the Apolloniares. From thence he sent certaine colonels with two thousand souldiours, to seize the sorts and castles of the Dassarerians and Illyrians, by occasion that they of their owne accord made meanes and sent for garrisons, to the end they might bee better guarded and secured from the violence and  invasion of the Macedonians bordering upon their confines,
Some fewe daies after, Q.Martius, A. Aitilius, P. and Ser. both Cornely and Lentuli, together with L. Decimius, who all had bin sent in embassie into Greece, brought with them to Corcira one thousand footmen; where they both parted between themselves their severall quarters whither they would go, and also their souldiours. Decimius was sent to Gentius king of the Illyrians, with commaundement, If he saw him any waies comming on and enclined to entertaine amitie with the Romanes, to sound him and give the assay, yea and to drawe him into the association of this war. The two Lentuli were sent into Cephalenia, from thence to traverse and crosse over into Peloponnesus, and before winter to fetch about and compasse the coast of the Westsea. Martius and Attilius were assigned to visit Epirus, AErolia and Thessalie. From thence they  were enjoined to haue an eie into Baeotia and Eubaea, and so to saile over into Pelopnnesus, where they appointed to meet with the Lentuli. But before that they departed from Cotcyra, letters were brought from Perseus, wherein he demaunded what reason the Romanes had either to transport any forces into Greece, or to seize upon citties? Thought good it was to returned him no answere by writing, but onely by word of mouth thus much to say unto the messenger that brought the letters, That the Romanes did it for the defence and safeguard of the said townes. The Lentuli as they rode their circuit visiting the citties and townes of Peloponnesus, exhorting the States and communalties thereof indifferently one as well as another, To aide the Romans at this present against Perseus, with sembleable courage and like fidelitie as they had stood with them first in the warre against Philip, and afterwards in that with Antiochus; might beare in their, publicke assemblies much muttering and grumbling threat. The Acheans (who from the very beginning of the Macedonian warres had bene altogether for the Romanes, and during the war against Philip, enemies to the Macedonians) tooke it in great disdaine that they were reputed in the same range with the Messenians and Eleans, and no better than they who had borne armes against the people of Rome, for Antiochus their enemie; and who but the other day, beeing enrolled into the communaltie and counsell of the Archaeans, complained that they were deliuered unto the victorious Achaeans, as the recompence and guerdon of their conquest. Martius and Artilius as they went up to Gitana a towne of Epirus, ten myles from the sea, in a generall counsell holden there of all the Epirotes, had audience with great contentment of them all. Foure hundred of their yong and able lustie men they sent into the Oristians countrie to lies in garison  for defence of those Macedonians who by them were set at libertie. From thence they held on their progresse into AEtolia: and after they had sojourned there some few daies (whiles a new Pretor was elected in the roume of him that was deceased, and Lyciscius appointed the governor, a man knowne for certaine to favour the Romans) they passed over into Thessalie. Thither repaired the

 ambassadours of the Acarnanians and the banished persons of Aetolia. The Acamanians were enjoined to utter and declare before them what they had committed and done against the people of Rome, being in veagled and deceived by the promises of the two kings Philip and Antiochius during the warres against the one and the other; since occasion was now presented u. to them, for to make amends and salve all that was amisse. For if upon their ill demerits toward the people of Rome, they had made triall and tasted of their clemencie, they might now by good deserts prove their bountie another while. As for the Boeotians, they were reprooved and upbraided for entring into association with Perseus: and when they seemed to lay the whole fault upon Ismenias a chiefetaine of one of the two factions, and certaine cities and States which being of a different opinion, were drawn to the side; Side ye so? (quoth Martius againe) and that shall soone appeare,  for we will permit every communaltie and citie to answere apart and severally for themselves the best they can.
Now was the Diet of the Thessalians holden at Larissa: where, as the Thessalians tooke good occasion and sound ample matter of thanksgiving to the Romanes, for the libertie which by their goodnes they had obtained: so the Romane legates had as copious an argument to render them thankes, for that first in the war with Philip, and afterwards of Antiochus, they had bin so mightly aided by the Thessalian nation. Thus by this mutual rehearsall of pleasures and good turnes given and taken, the hearts of the multitude were enkindled with a servent zeale to decree and ordaine whatsoever it pleased the Romanes to desire. After this counsell was dissolved, there came embassadours from king Perseus into Martius, upon a special assiance of the private friendship  and hospitalitie which had passed between his father king Philip, and the said Martius [and his father.] These embassadours began their speech with a commemoration of the said familiar and inward acquaintance, requesting him to permit the K. for to have accesse unto him, and to commune together. Martius answered, that he also had heard his father speake of the limitie and mutual hospitalitie betweene him and king Philip: in regard and remembrance of which neere bond of familiarie he was the more willing to take upon him the charge of that embassage and commission. As to the parlie, he would not have differed it at all, if hee might commodiously have wroght it: and now for this present the promised (so soon as he possibly could) to send his courriers before to advertise the king, that they might come to the river Peneus, wheras the passage lieth from Omolium over to Dium. And verily at that time, Perseus was retired from Dium into  the inland quarters of his realme, and had gathered some pretrie gale of hope, in that Martius had given out, how for love of him he had undertaken this embasse. After some few daies they repaired to the place appointed. The king came accompanied with a great traine as well of his friends, as his courtiers and pensioners which guarded his person. The legates likewise were attended upon with no lesse a troupe, by reason as well of many that followed them from Latissa, as also of divers embassages from the States which assembled at Larissa, and were desirous to carrie home with them certaine newes of the sequele, which they should heare with their owne cares. Every man had an inward desire setled in his heart to see the manner of the meeting of this nobel king, and these high commissioners from the soveraigne state and mightiest thieft people of the whole world. Being come to the enterview one of another, they stood still on eitherside of  the river, which onely parted them asunder. For a while there passed entercourslers betweene, whiles they made it straunge on both parts, who should passe the river first for the Macedonians stood somewhat upon the roiall majestie of a king; and the Romanes were as respective to the reputation of the people of Rome, considering with all, that Perseus sought the means and made first motion for this parley. Whereupon, to end this controversie, Martius cast out a mery word, What needs all this (quoth he) let the younger come to the elder without more adoe, and the son to the father: this he spake for that himself also was surnamed Philip. The K. soone condescended thereunto. But then arose another doubt and difference, namely with what number he should passe over. The K. thought it meet and convenient to come with his whole traine: but the legates would have had him either to bring over with him 3 persons and no more; or else if he were minded  to passe with so great a companie, to put in hostages for assurance, that during the time of the parley no outrage should be committed. So Perseus sent as pledges, Hippias and Pentachus, the principal and most especial friends that wer about him, whom also he had emploied in the embassage. Now were these hostages required, not so much for a gage and pawn of securitie, as that it might appeare unto the allies there present, that the K. in meeting and communing with The Romane

commissioners, should not keepe state comparable with them, but abate somewhat of the port  and majestie which they carried. Their mutuall greeting and salutation was nothing strange, as betweene enemies; but kind and amiable, as among familiar friends. Which done, they sat them downe upon their chaires set readie for them.
After they had thus sitten a while in silence and said nothing,The oration of (...) to Ling T^S^^^. Martius begun in this manner: You expect (I suppose quoth hee) that were should answere to your letters which you sent to Corcyra, wherin you demaund, Why wee are come in embassie and commission after this manner with armed souldiors, and plant garrisons as wee doe in every citie? To which question of yours not to answer at all, I feare me you would take it to be pride in me; and againe to answere a truth, I doubt it will be too harsh and unpleasant to your cares. But seeing that hee who breaketh a covenant must be chastised either by word or sword, (like as I had rather that any other but my selfe should have commission to make warre  upon you;) so I will bee so bold (howsoever it fall out) to speake rough and tart unto you as to my friend: and herein will I follow the maner of Physicians, who for the health of their pacients, otherwhiles minister bitter medicines and apply stinging corrosives. Since time that you first attained unto the crowne, the Senat thinketh you have done but one onely thing of all that you ought to have done, namely, that you sent your embassadors to Rome for the renew the league; and yet they judge you had done better in not renewing it, than after it was renewed, to violate the same. Chased you have out of the realme The K. of the Sapeans (...) Pausanians in Achaecis. Abrupolis, a consederate and friend of the people of Rome. The murderers of Artetarus you have received and entertained, yea and given the world thereby to understand, that you were well pleased (to say no worse) with his death: and killed they have a prince most sast and faithfull to the Romanes, of all others in Illyricum.
Thorough Thessalie and the territorie of Malia, you have marched with an armie against the tenor of the league, as far as to Delphi: and more than that, contrarie unto the said accord, sent you have aid and succor to the Bizantines. With our allies the Baeotians, you have entred into a secret association, and bound the same with an oth, which by right you ought not to have done. Who it was the murdered the Thebane embassadors Eversa and Callicritus who came directly from us, I had leiser enquire than charge any man and declare. The civill warres in AEtolia, the massacres of their princes and States, unto whome may they be imuted in any likelihood, but to your people? As for the Dolopians, wasted they were by your selfe in person and by no other. It grieveth me the goeth to my heart, to speake who it is that king Eumenes challengeth and burdeneth with this, That in his returne from Rome into his owne kingdom, he was like to have  been killed as a beast for sacrifice, and that at Delphi, in a sacred and hallowed place, even before the altars. As for the secret practices which your host of Brundusium hath disclosed and set abroad, I know right well, that not onely you have received letters thereof from Rome, but your owne embassadors also have told you all by word of mouth. You might have soone avoided all this, and heard nothing thereof from me, if you would have sorborne only to aske and demand, Wherefore out forces were transported over into Macedonie, and why we sent garrisons into our consederate cities? But since you would needs put out such a question, more pride it had beene in us to have held our peace, than to utter the plaine truth as wee have done. Verily for mine owne part, in regard of the hospitall and friendly courtesies that have passed between your father and us, I favour you and will gladly make the best of your cause: and would to God  had some good occasion ministered from your selfe, to sollicite and further your suite before the Senate.
To these challenges and imputations,The (...) of king Perseus. the king framed his answered in this wise: Content I am to plead my cause before you, the parties appellants and judges both, which would be found (I doubt not) good, if it were debated and handled in the presence of indifferent and equall arbitrators. And first, as touching those matters which are objected against me, they are such as in part, I wot not well, whether I may not glory in them, or at least-wise nor blush in the confessing and avowing thereof. As for the rest, as they are charged upon me in bare words, so plaine words may serve flatly and simply to denie them. For say, that this day I were subject unto your lawes and by them to have my triall, what can either that promoter of Brundusium, or king Eumenes enforme against me, but it will appeare, that they accuse me not so much with matter of truth, as exhibite onely slaunderous and reprochfull tearmes? A like matter ywis it is, that neither Eumenes had any other enemie but me, (he I say, who hath done such wrong and injuries to so many, both in common and also in particular:) nor I could find a sitter person to serve my

 turne in the execution of my projects but this Rammius, a fellow that I never had seene before, nor was everlike to see againe hereafter. I must (forsooth) give account and answer for the Thebanes, who as it is well knowne, perished by shipwracke: as also for the murder of Archarus; and yet therein I am no deeper charged than thus, that the murderers of him lived in exile and were shadowed within my realme. Now surely, this hard conclusion and unreasonable condition I will not refuse to under-goe, in cafe you also will be content to take upon you and avow all those crimes and facts, for which they stand condemned, who as banished persons have sled either to Rome or into Italie: but in case both you and all other nations will disavow and disclame that, I also will be one among the rest. And in good faith, to speake uprightly, to what end should any man be banished from one countrey, if hee may not find a place in another, and be permitted  there to live in exile? And yet (so soone as ever I found by advertisement from you that they were within Macedonie) I for my part, made diligent search untill I had them, and then I commaunded them to depart out of my kingdome, yea and expressely forbad them for ever setting foot againe within my dominions. And thus much verily concerning the criminal matters objected unto me as a defendant pleading at the barre. Now let us argue and debate the rest, enforced and laid against me in qualitie of a king, namely, which concerne and touch the accord contracted between me and you. For it the words run in this sort and are thus written in the foresaid covenants of accord, That I may not be suffered to defend my selfe and my realme, no not if any enemie of mine levie warre against me; than I must confesse indeed, that the league I have broken, in that I stood upon my guard and defence by force of armes against Abrupolis, an associate  of the people of Rome. But is it were lawfull for me so to doe by warrant of the accord, and allowed also by the law of nations, by force to repell force; what should I lesse, nay what could I else have done I pray you? when Abrupolis had laid wast the frontiers of my kingdome even as sarre as to Amphipolis, led into captivitie many persons free-borne, carried away a mightie number of slaves, and driven before him many thousand head of cattraile; should I have sitten still and suffered him untill he had come armed to Pella, even unto my royall pallace? But some man may haply say, You did well indeed and justly, in making, head and pursuing him by force of arms; mary, vanquished he should not have been, neither ought he to have suffered those calamities which follow men vanquished. Why? if I have endured the hazard and fortune therof, provoked as I was to warre, how can he justly complaine of rasting the like, beeing himselfe the  cause and first motive of all? I will not use the same maner of defence (o Romans) to this, that by force of arms I have bridled and repressed the Dolopians: for if I have not done by them according to their demerits, yet I am sure I have delt by the vertue of the right I have over them, being as they are of mine own kingdom, under my obeisance, and made subjects to my father even by a decree of your own drawing. And yet, were I to render a reason of my proceedings against them, I say, not unto you nor unto my allies, but even to those who like not of any hard and cruel command so much as over bondslaves; can I be thought to have exercised more rigour against them, than equitie and reason would beare? For, Euphranor, whom I deputed governor over them, they killed in such sort, that death is too good for them, and the least punishment of all others that they have deserved. And as I marched forward in my progresse from thence to visite the cities of  Larissa, Antron and Pylleon, I ascended up to Delphi, there for to sacrifice, to the end that I might discharge my conscience and pay those vowes which I had of long time owed. Now, to aggravate matter in this also against mee, it is said moreover, that I was there with my armie, and intended (no doubt) for to seize cities into my hands, and put garrisons into fortresses; for which at this present I complaine of you. Call the States and citties of Greece together to a generall assembly, through which I passed. Let any one man come forth and make complaint of the least harme and wrong done by any of my souldiours; then will I not refuse to bee reputed and censured for one who under presence and colour of divine sacrifice, went about another thing. Wee sent indeed garisons to the AEtolians and Bizantines, yea, and with the Baeotians wee contracted amitie. But these things, in what sort and for what purpose they were don, my embassadors have  not only declared, but also excused oftentimes before your Senat: where I found some umpires to heare and decide my cause, although not so indifferent and favourable to mee ward, as your selfe are, o Martius, my fathers old friend and familiar. For as yet Eumenes my accuser was not come to Rome, who by false furnises and suggestions, wresting at his pleasures every thing to the worst, to make all suspicious and odious unto you, went about to make you beleeve, that Greece

could not possibly be restored to freedome, and enjoy the fruit of your gracious benesire, so long  as the kingdome of Macedonie stood entier and upright. Well, the world, you shall see, will ruin about; and anone one or other wil be here, to make remonstrance and prove, That to no purpose Antiochus is removed and confined beyond the mountaines of Taurus; that Eumenes is become much more greevous and unsupportable to all Asia than Antiochus ever was; and that your allies cannot be at rest nor live in quiet, so long as hee keepeth his roiall court in Pergamus, a citadell (as it were) overlooking and commaunding all the neighbour cities bordering thereupon. Right well I know, o Q.Martius and your A. Attilius, that whatsoever either you have objected against me, or I answered for my defence and purgation, is such as the cares and affections are of the hearers; neither what I have done, nor what mind and intension I have carried in mine actions will bee so much regarded, ashow you take every thing either done or intended. Mine owne conscience beareth med witnesse, that witting and willing I have non; how, if for want to knowledge  and for sight I have beene overseene and done somewhat amisse, it may been corrected and amended by this present rebuke and chassiment. This I am sure, my trespasse is not incurable; neither have I committed ought; that you should deeme worth to bee pursued by warre and force of armes. And if yee doe; then surely it is fore sought, that there goeth this name abroad throughout all nations of your elemencies and gravitie both, if I say for so slight occasions which hardly are worth the complaint and the reasoning about, you be readie to enter into armes and levie warre upon your consederate princes.Martius for that time accorded to his speech, and moved him to addresse embassadors to Rome, being of advise and opinion himselfe to the all meanes to the very last point, and to let slip nothing whereof some hope of good might arise. It remained  only to be debated in counsel, how embassadors might passe in safetie. And to this purpose, when it was necessarie for the K. to request a suitecase of arms, albert Martius himselfe was willing and desirous thereof (for that his drift was to nothing else by all this conference and parley) yet he seemed to make a hard matter and difficultie of it, and to doe a speciall favour and pleasure unto Perseus in graunting his petition. The truth was, the Romanes yet were not readie, nor throughly appointed at this present for the warre; they had neither armie puissant ynough, nor captains sufficient wheras Perseus (but that he was blinded in al his counsels with a vain hope of peace) had all things prepared and in readinesse, and might then have begun to wage war, as in the best and most opportune season for himselfe, so the worst and unfittest of al other times for his enemies.
After this parley and the abstinence of warre assured faithfully on both parts, the Romane  commissioners were appointed and resolved to go into Baeotia, where there was begun alreadie some trouble and commotion, by reason that certaine States of the Baeotians were departed from the societie of the common Councell, eversince it was reported backe, how the Romane Legates made answere that it should appeare and bee seene, what citties they were indeed which tooke no pleasure to have any association with the king. And first, the embassadours from Cheronea; afterwards, from Thebes encountered them upon the way, who assured them, that they were not present in that Diet and Counsell, where this association was concluded. To these embassages no answer for this time was made, but willed they were onely to give their attendance and follow them to Chalcis.
At These great variance there was, which arose by occasion of another strife and  debate. In their solemne assembly for the election of the Pretour of the Baeotians, that part which had the repulse, in revenge of that injurie and disgrace, assembled the multitude and made a decree at Thebes, That the Baeotarches should not bee received within their citties: in such sort, as like banished men they retired to Thespium; from whence (for received there they were incontinently without any stay) being called againe to Thebes upon better advisement and chaunge of mind, they made an ordinance; That is to the number of twelve private persons held any converticle or publicke meeting together, they should bee condemned to exile. After this, Ismanias the new Pretour, a noble personage and of great puissance, by vertue of a decree adjudged them In their absence for to loose other lives. To Chalcis they were fled, and from thence to the Romanes at Larissa they went: where they  declared that Ismenias was the cause of their association with king Perseus. Vpon that foresaid difference, they grew to hote contention, yet embassadours from both parts came to the Romanes, as well the banished persons and accuses of Ismenias, as also Ismenias himselfe. But so soone as the Romane Legates were come to Chalcies; the States and heads of other

 cities (who every one by a speciall decree of their owne had renounced association with king Person) joined with the Romanes; whereat they tooke exceeding great contentment and joy. (...) thought it meet and reason that the Baeotian nation should be committed to the protection of the Romanes. Whereupon arose a tomulations sray, and but that he sled into the Tribunall of the Legates to save himselfe, he had escaped narrowly from being killed by the said exiled persons, with the helpe of their supports and favorits.
Also the very citie of Thebes, which is the capital place of State within Baeotia, was in great trouble and uprore; whiles some drew to the king, others enclined to the Romanes. Beside, there was a multitude of Coronaeans and Haliartians gathered together to maintaine the ordinance and decree as touching the association with the king. But such was the resolute persistance of  the principall and cheese men, who shewed by the late calamities of Philip and Antiochus, how great the forces, and how happie the fortune was of the Romane empires, that the same multitude relented, and being overruled, passed a new decree, to reverse and cancile the former confederacie with the king; sent those that were the motifes and persuaders of contracting that amitie to Chalcis for to satisfie and content the Roman. Legates; yea, and to conclude, were of advise to recommend the citie to the faithful patronage of the said commissioners. Martius and Attilus took great pleasure to heart the Thebanes sing this note, they persuaded with them severally apart, and gave them counsell to sell embassadours to Rome for the renewing of this amitie: but before all things they tooke order for the restoring of the banished persons: as for the authors of the confederacie contracted with the king, they by their owne decree condemned. Having thus by this  meanes infringed and made frustrate the Diet of the Baeotians (the thing which above all they most desired) they tooke their journey to Peloponnesus, together with Ser. Cornelius, whom they had sent for to Chalcis. For their sakes a counsell was holden at Argos, where they demaunded nothing else of the Achaean nation, but onely to furnish them with a thousand soldiors. This garrison was sent to the defense of Chalcis, untill the Romane armie were transported into Greece. Martius and Attilius having thus dispatched all the affaires that they had to doe in Greece, in the beginning of winter returned to Rome
.
Then was there sent from thence about the same time an honourable embassie to the Isles in Asia. These embassadors or Legates were three in number, to wit, T. Claudius; P. Posthumius, and M. Iunius. They in their circuit and visitation exhorted all their allies to take armes against Perseus,  for the Romans. And the mightier and more wealthie any citie was, the more earnestly travailed they there; because the inferiour states were like to frame and sort themselves suitable to the example and authoritie of the greater and superiour. Now of all others the Rhodians were reputed of most import and consequence everie way, for that they were able not onely to favour with their countenance, but also maintaine and aid with their forces this warre: and by the persuation of Hergesilus they had gotten togither a fleet of fortie saile.
The Hergesilus their soveraigne magistrate (whome they call Pyrtanis) had by many reasons prevailed with the Rhodians, to abandon the hope they had by entertaining these KK. (which they had found by often experience how vaine it was) and to hold themselves to the societie and alliance of the Romans; the surest hold of all others at that time in the worlds, as well for strength of forces as trustie assurance  and fidelitie. There is intended war by them (qd.hd) against Perseus, and no doubt the Romans will require of us the same provision and furniture of ships and sea forces, which they have seene in their warre lately against Antiochus, and before that, against king Philip: and then you will be to seeke, and forced in great hast to provide a fleet, when in were more time it should be set out and sent forth, unlesse ye begin be times to repaire and rig your ships, unlesse, I say, you set in hand to furnish the same with saults and mariners. And with so much more endeavour ought yee thus to doe, that by your deed and effectuall emploiment, you may refuse and disproove the false imputations where with Eumenes hath charged you. By these remonstrances induced they were, in so much as at the arrivall of the Roman legats a foresaid, they were able to shew unto them an armanda of 40 ships readie rigged and well appointed, that they might know and see, they  looked not for to be exhorted thereunto. And this embassage was of great moment and importance also to gain the hearts of the States in Asia. Only Decimius returned to Rome without any effect of his errand and commission, nay hee ran into an ill name and obloquie, upon suspition that he had received certaine bribes of the princes in Illyricum.
Perseus upon the conference and communication had with the Romanes, retired into Macedonie

and sent his embassadours to Rome, to treat about the conditions of peace begun alreadie  with Martius: to other embassadours also of his he gave his letters to carrie to Bizantium and Rhodes: the tenor of which letters was one and the same directed to them all: namely, That he had communed with the Romane legates, but he had so placed and couched as well what he heard as what he spake, that it might seem he gave not one foot unto them but gained the better hand in that dispute and debating with them.
These embassadors added moreover and said unto the Rhodians, that they hoped assuredly there would be a peace, for that they by the motion and advise of Martius and Attilius were addressed in embassie to Home. Now if the Romans, say they, against the covenants of accord proceeded to levie warre, then the Rhodians were to endeavour with all the credite and power they have, to reunite the peace againe; but if with all their praier and intreatie they might not prevaile, then they were to looke about and labour this one point, That the might and puissance of the whole world were not devolved into the hands of that one people. And as this imported and concerned all the rest, so the Rhodians especially, who furmounted other States in dignitie and wealth, both which should be obnoxious and enthralled, if there were regard and respect made of none but the Romanes. The letters of the king and words of the embassadors, were entertained with friendly, audience, other effect they tooke none to change their setled minds: for now the authoritie of the better part began also to carrie the greater sway. But this answere was returned to them, and that by way of decree, That the Rhodians withed peace with all their hearts: but if it should come to warre, their king and maister was neither to expect nor yet to exact any thing at their hands, to disjoine the ancient amity which they held with the Romanes, and which they had acquired by many and great deserts, as well in warre  as in peace. In their returne from Rhodes, they went to the cities of Baeotia, and namely to Thebes, Coronea and Haliartus, from whom it seemed a thing extorted forcibly against their will, that they were disbanded from the king and clave to the Romans. The Thebans stood firm and immooveable, although they were somewhat discontented with the Romanes, both for condemning their cheife and principall citizens, and also for restoring the banished persons. But the Coronean and Haliartians upon an in-bred and setled favor by kind unto the kings, sent embassadours into Macedonia, requesting a garrison for their defence against the excessive pride of the Thebanes. To this embassage the king thus aunswered, That a garrison hee might not sent, by reason of the truce made with the Romans: howbeit he advertised them to maintaine and guard themselves against the injuries of the Thebanes all that ever they could: but yet so, as they gave  the Romanes no cause to be their heavie friends, and so to proceed in rigor against them.
Martius and Attilius being come to Rome, made report of their embassie within the Capitoll, in such manner, as in nothing they gloried more, than in deluding and deceiving the king, by meanes of a cessation from armes, and a pretended hope of peace. For so well appointed was hee and furnished with all provision for warre, and they contrariwise so unprovided every way, that hee mought easily have possesed himselfe of all places of opportunitie and advantage, before that their armie could passe over into Greece. But now having this respite and time of the truce, as the king would come nothing better provided, so the Romanes might begin the war, more fully furnished with all things convenient. Moreover they related how they by their comming distracted and set a jar in the generall counsell of the Baetians, so as by no means anymore  hereafter they can be rejoined to the Macedonians by consent and accord.
The greater part of the Senate approved this service of theirs as performed with singular discretion and dexteritie: But the old Senators and those that held in remembrance the ancient maner and custome of the Romanes, said plainly, That in all the course of that embassie, they could see no Romane practise and dealing at all. Our ancestors (say they) were wont to war not by wait-laying and secret ambushes, not by skirmishes in the night season, ne yet by false semblant of running away and suddaine turning their face againe at unawares upon their unprovided enemies; neither fought they to glorifie themselves by subril flights more than by true vertue and valour: Their use and manner was, to intimate and publish was before they made any: yea and to denounce and proclaime the same; otherwhiles also to assigne and appoint the very place where they went to strike  a battaile. According to this plaine and faithfull dealing, they detected and disclosed unto king Pyrrhus, the physician that would by poison have taken away his life: by the same they delivered bound unto the Faliscians the vilanous traitour that would have betraied the children of their K. These are the Roman fashions (say they) not to use the cunning casts and slie shifts of the Carthaginians,

 nor the crasrie pollicies of Grecians, who ever reputed it more glorious and honorable by fraud to compasse, than by force to surpasse the enemie. Indeed otherwhiles for the present time, more good is done and greater matters are effected by guile and pollicie, than by valour and vertue: but to say a truth, the courage of that enemie is for ever conquered, who is forced to contesse that he was vanquished not by cunning, not by venture, but in just and lawfull warre by maine strength and close fight at handie gripes. Thus spake the auncients, who had no great liking to the new-found devises of these politicians. Howbeit that side of the Senate which made more reckoning of profit than of honestie, carried it away and imported so much, that not onely the first embassie of Martius was approved, as well performed, but also himselfe was sent back againe with certaine Quinqueremes, with a mandate also and commission to deal in the rest according  as he should thinke to stand with the good of the common weale. They dispatched likewise Aul. Attilus to seize Larissa in Thessalie; for feare least if the terme of truce were expired, Persius should send a garrison thither, and hold in his hand the capitall citie of Thessalie. The said Attilus had a warrant to receive two thousand footmen of Cn. Sicinius for to effectuate that enterprise. Also P. Lentulus lately returned out of Achaea was allowed the conduct of 300 souldiours of the Italian nation, to the end that at Thebes he should endevour to bring all Baeotia under the obedience of the Romanes. When all things were set in this forwardnes, albeit they were at a point and fully resolved to make warre, yet thought good it was to give audience unto the embassadours of Perseus in the Senat; who rehearsed and related in manner the same reasons which were delivered by the king in the late conference and parlie. Much ado they made and laboured  hard, to acquit the king of the imputation laid to his charge, for seeking the death of Eumenes; but with final probabilitie or none at all: for the thing was too apparant. In the end they fell to praier and intreatie: howbeit no eare was given unto them, with any such mind and heart, as could bee either instructed or inclined. In stead thereof, warned streightly they were to depart immediately foorth of the liberties of Rome, and within thirtie daies out of Italie.
After this, P. Licinius the Cos. who was charged with the province of Spain had commandement given him to assigne unto the armie the soonest day that he could, for to meet in one certaine place. C. Lucretius the Pretour who had the conduct of the fleet, tooke his leave of the citie with 40 Quinqueremes: for advised it was, that the rest of the ships which had beene repaired,  should be staied at home for to be emploied otherwise about the citie. And the Pretour sent his brother Lucretius, before with one Galeace or Quinquereme, and commission to receive of the allies that shipping which by covenant they were to find; and with them neere the Iland Cephalenia, to joine with the rest of the armada: to wit, from the Rhegines one trireme gallie, from the Locrians twaine, from the Vrites four. With which he coasted along Italie, and having doubled the utmost point of Calabria within theAdriati^^e. Ionian sea, he arived at Dyrrhachium. There he found ten gallions or barkes of the Dyrrhachians, twelve of the Issaeans, and fiftie foure belonging to king Gentius, which he tooke all with him along, making semblance that he supposed they were provided of purpose for the service of the Romanes: with this fleet by the third day hee fell with the Ile Corphu: and so forward he made saile and arrived at Cephalenia. C. Lucretius the Pretor,  having losed to sea from Naples, crossed the strengths of Sicilie, and on the fiftieth day cut over likewise to Cephalenia. Then the fleete strucke anchor, expecting as well the arrivall of the land forces, as also that the hulkes and vessels of carriage which were scattered upon the seas from the rest of their companie, might overtake them.
It happened about this time, that Pub. Licinius the Consull having conceived and solemnly made his vowes within the Capitoll, departed in his coat of armes from the citie. A solemnitie at all times verily this is, done with much dignitie and majestie: but especially with exceeding great pleasure and contentment of the beholders; when the Consull is accompanied with a stately traine at his first setting forth, to encounter some great and famous enemie, renowned as well for vertue, as qualitie and fortune: for at such a time men assemble and gather together,  not onely in regard of dutie to acquit themselves of their devoir, but also upon a desire they have of the verie shew and fight presented unto their eies; namely, to see their captaine to whose conduct and counsell they have committed the managing and defense of the common-weale. Moreover, they take occasion thereby to thinke of the hazard of warre, how adventurous is the event and how doubtfull the issue of battaile in the field. They call to mind the alternative course of

good fortune and bad; and namely, how by the blind ignorance or the unadvised rashnesse of  leaders, many soiles and overthrowes have happened; and contrariwise by politicke wisdom and hardie courage, great matters have been effected and happy victories atchieved. And what mortall man is he that knoweth, of what mind and cariage good or bad, how fortunate or unluckie the Consull is, whom they send forth to war: whether he be like soon to be seen again, in triumphant wise with his victorious armie mounting up the Capitoll unto those gods, of whom now he taketh his leave: or shall give occasion to the enemies in the same manner to rejoyce? As for Perseus the king, (against whome this expedition and journey is taken) a prince hee is highly renowmed both by the Macedonian nation (so famous for fears of armes,) and also by his father Philip, who among other fortunate archievements of his, was ennobled by his war against the Romans. Moreover, the verie name of Persius himselfe (since time that first the diadenie was  set upon his head) was in every mans mouth, and no talke continually but of him and the expectation of this warre. With these and such like cogitations (I say) a mightie number of men of all sorts and degrees attended and accompanied the Consull at his departure. With him were sent two Colonels or knight-marshals above the rest, who had been Consuls, namely, C. Claudius and Q. Mutius: also three brave and lustie young gallants, to wit, P. Lentulus and the two Manlij, both surnamed Acidini, the one sonne toThis M. Manlius seemeth to be, plebe^^ getis^^^ that there (...) before, That no Manlius Patririus ^ig^^ the rame ^. Mar^^^^s. (...) that (...) ^^e M^ul^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) li^pi^. M. Manlius and the other to L. Manlius. The Consull thus accompanied, first went to Brundusium to the armie, and from thence passed the seas to Nymphaeum, and so encamped in the territorie of Apollonia.
Perseus some few daies before, upon the returne of his embassadours from Rome, who had cleane put him out of all hope of peace, held a councell; wherein for a good while the matter  was debated with great varietie of sundrie opinions. Some were of mind, that in case the Romans enjoined them either to yeeld a tribute, or to forgoe some of their lands; yea if they imposed upon them some fine by way of amends and satisfaction: in briefe, whatsoever else they set downe and ordained, to doe and suffer all for to redeeme their peace, and not to refuse any condition were it never so hard, but to take heed and provide in any wise, that Perseus put not himselfe not the realme upon the dangerous hazard of so great a jeopardie. For if hee held still the maine point and continued in quiet possession of his kingdome, in time and space much good might happen; by meanes whereof he should be able not onely to licke himselfe whole and recover his losses, but also become hereafter dread and terrible even unto those of whome now he standeth in feare.
But the farre greater part caried with them a more courageous spirit  and gave advise accordingly. For they affirmed, That if Perseus parted with ought and yeelded never so little, he must make account with all to quit the free-hold of his whole kingdome soone after. For tis neither money not land (say they) that the Romanes want; but this they wore full well, That as all things els in the world, so especially great monarchies and empires are subject to many accidents and casualties: right well they know also, how they have quelled and bruised the puissance of the Carthaginians, and for to yoke their necks and hold them downe, have set up a mightieking to be their neighbour and to commaund them; yea and that Antiochus and all his race is remooved and chased beyond the mountaine Taurus. There remaineth only now the realme of Macedonie, which is both seated in a neere region, and also (if the fortune of the people of Rome should happen to saile) seemeth able to give heart and courage to her kings at  this day, answerable to that of their noble progenitors in former times. And therefore whiles the state standeth entire and unfoiled, Perseus ought to resolve, whether he had leiser by forgoing one thing after another, strip himselfe in the end of all his goods and lands, and so turned cleane out of his kingdom, be driven to request at the Romans hand either Samothracia or some other such petie Isle, where, in qualitie of a private person he may survive his roiall estate and live to old age in base contempt and needie povertie: or els, to take arms in the defence and maintenance of his royall place and dignitie, like a prince of valor and courage; and either abide all hazards whatsoever the fortune of the field shall plunge him into; or after victorie atchieved deliver the whole world from the dominion and imperious seignorie of the Romans. And no greater wonder and miracle is it to hunt the Romans out of Greece, than it was to chase
Anniball out of Italie: neither see wee in good faith (say they) how by any reason it can well stand, that he who resisted with all his might and maine his owne brother, that would have made himselfe king against all right and law, should now to straungers and aliens render the possession thereof, which hee came so well and truly by, and wherein he is so rightfully inversted? Finally, in war and peace howsoever,

 men make questions, disputing and arguing too and fro; yet this conclusion they all graunt and agree upon, That as there is nothing more shameful and dishonest, than to abandon and loose a kingdome without battaile, so there is nothing more glorious and honourable than for the maintenance of princely dignitie and regall majestie, to hazard all fortune whatsoever. This counsell was holden at Pella, the auncient pallace wherein the Macedonian KK. kept their royall court. Why then (quoth hee) on Gods name, since you are of that mind and resolution, let us take armes and to the field: whereupon he sent his letters into all parts to his gallants and captaines, and assembled and drew all his forces to Citium a towne of Macedonie. Himselfe in person after he had perfourmed a magnificent sacrifice (like a king) of an hundred head of beasts to the honour of Minerva, surnamed Alcida, he departed accompanied with a number  of his courtiers, pensioners, and yeoman of the guard to Citium. To which place were gathered alreadie all his forces, as well Macedonians as auxiliarie strangers. Hee pitched his campe before the towne, and embattailed all his armed men in the plaine. Hee was in all fortie thousand strong; whereof one halfe well-neere consisted of those whome they call Phalangiae, and those were commaunded by one Hippias of Berrhaea. Besides, there were two choice companies (for the flower of age and strength of Bodie) selected out of the whole number of targuettiers, called Cetrati. This regiment, themselves called by the name of The legion; and the same was under the conduct of Leonatus and Thrasippus bothOr, Elymiotti, according to Torneb, in Adversariis. Eulyestanes. The rest of the targuettiers to the number of three thousand or verie neere, were led by Antiphilus of Edessa. The Paeonians, those also of Pacoria and Pastrymonia (places subject unto the Thracian) and the Agrians,  togither with some inhabitants of Thracia entermingled among them, amounted also to the number of three thousand. Didas of Paeonia had levied and armed them, even the man that murdered young Demetrius. There were besides, two thousand Frenchmen in armes under the leading of captaine Asclepiodorus. From Heraclea likewise out of the Sintians country, there were three thousand Thracians free-men borne, under a leader of their own. The like number well-neere of Cretensians followed their commaunders, Susus of Phalasarna, and Syllus of Gnosos: also Leonides the Lacedemonian, had the charge of five hundred out of Greece, but a mixt companie they were of divers nations. This Leonides was said to have bene of the bloud roiall, a banished person, condemned in a frequent assembly and counsell of the Achaeans, for certaine letters which he sent to Perseus, and were entercepted. The Aetolians and Boeotians who in all  made not above five hundred, were conducted by Lyco an Achaean. These auxiliaries or aid-soldiours of so many states and nations mixt and blended together, grew fast upon the number of twelve thousand armed men. As for the cavallery, he had levied out of all Macedonie three thousand horse or thereabout. Colys king of the Odrysians, the sonne of Scathes, was thither come with a thousand choosen men of armes, and almost as many footmen. In summe, the whole armie arose to the number of 39000 foot and foure thousand horsemen. And this was held for certain, that the like army was never raised by any king of Macedonie, unlesse it were that again, with which Alexander the great passed over into Asia. Twentie yeeres now and sixe werecome and gone, since time that peace was graunted unto Philip at his owne suite and request: during which space betweene, Macedonie being in rest and quietnes, had brought sooth a goodly frie  of fresh youth: a great part where of was of sufficient age to beare armes; and by the continuall skirmishes which they maintained with the Thracians their neighbours, were rather whetned than weakened, and more enured than wearied; and in one word lived ever in practise of martiall fears: wherby it came to passe, that all things were prest and in readinesse for the war, which Philip first, and Perseus afterwards projected to wage against the Romans.
This armie stirred and advaunced a little, not in manner of a full march as to a present battaile; but onely for this, that they would not be seene to have stood still in their armies: and thus armed as the souldiors were, Perseus called them to an audience, intending to make an oration unto them. Being mounted up to his Tribunall, he stood there with his two sonnes about him, one of either hand, whereof the elder (named Philip) he adopted to be his child, whereas indeed  by nature he was his brother; but the younger (whom they called Alexander) was his owne naturall sonne. Then and there he exhorted his souldiors to fight manfully, and laid before them what wrongs and injuries the people of Rome had done both to his father and also to himselfe.
As for my father (quoth he) forced he was by all kind of indignities to enter into armes and begin warre againe;Perseus to his soldiors. but in the very preparation therof, he was suddenly surprised and strucken

with death. To my selfe at one time were embassadors from them sent to treat of peace, and armed  souldiours also for to seize upon the cities of Greece. Afterwards, by a deceitfull shew of a parley, under colour of reconciliation and peace making, we were born in hand and drawn out a whole winter, to the end that they might gaine time to prepare for warre. And now is the Consull comming with two Roman legions having either of them some three hundred horse besides, and with a proportionable number (and that is the most) of allies, as well foot as horse. And say that the KK. both Eumenes and Masanissa joine with their aidforces, yet can they not amount above the number of seven thousand. Now that yee have heard what the strength is of the enemies, regard and compare your own armie, namely, how far both in number, as also in goodnesse and qualitie of souldiours, you surpasse them; being your selves from your childhood and infancie warriours trained in practise of armes and warfare, wrought, framed and hardened in so many battels: where  as they be new and raw souldiers taken up in hast and enrolled now the first time against this present service. As for the auxiliaries of the Romans, what are they but Lydians, Phrygians, and Numidians? but we to set against them, have to aid us Thracians and Gauls, the most courageous nations under heaven. For harnish and weapons, they have no other than such as every poore souldior is able to provide for himselfe: but the Macedonians are furnished out of the kings roiall armorie and arcenal with such armors of proofe, as my father in many yeers caused to be made with great care, and to his no small expence. The Romans be far from their provisions, and the same exposed to all the casualties of the sea: but we, besides the revenues and issues out of the mines of metall, have laid by both coine and corne sufficient to serve for ten years. The Macedonians have store and soison in great abundance heape-full of all things necessarie, and bee provided as well by  the gracious favour of the gods, as the carefull diligence of a king. It remaineth now that ye carrie that mind and courage with you, which your noble progenitors bare before you, those I say, who after they had conquered and subdued all Europe, passed into Asia, and by force of armes made way and discovered that part of the world that was never heard of before, and gave not over to win ground still and make more conquests, untill they were barred by the red sea, and could find no more land to conquer. But now beleeve me, fortune hath denouced a triall by warre, not for the purchase of the utmost bounds and marches of India, but for our free hold and possession, for our inheritance even of Macedonie. These Romanes, when they warred against my father, pretended a goodly title, and made a glorious shew to the world, as though they would deliver Greece, and establish it in freedome: but now in open and plaine tearmes they shoot at Macedonie, intending to bring it into servitude; to the end there might be no king neere neighbor to the Romane seignorie, not any nation renowmed for martiall prowesse, permitted to beare armes and have weapon in hand. For, these things and no lesse, forced shall yee bee to part with, and deliver up unto these prowd LL. together with king and kingdome, in case yee surcease war; and to doe whatsoever they will commaund you. All the while that he delivered this speech, there might be heard secret succlamations oftentimes, sufficiently testifying the generall assent of them all: but at these last words they lift up their voices and cried out aloud, part for anger and indignation menacing the enemie, part for courage and resolution exhorting the king to be of good cheare and take a good heart; in so much as hee was constrained to give over, and make an end of his Oration: onely he commaunded them to bee readie for the remove, and to put themselves  in the journey against the enemie: for by this time advertised he was that the Romans were dislodged from Nymphaeum. After this assembly was dismissed, he gave audience to the embassages from the States of Macedonie: for, come they were to make promise and offer both of money and graine to maintaine this warre, every one according to their abilitie. Thanked they were each one, and released of all that charge, with this answere, that the kings provision was sufficient. Onely hee commaunded them to find waines and carts for carriages of the peeces of ordinance, the engines of batterie, the darts, quarrels, and other shot, whereof a mightie deale hee had provided; and in summe, all the instruments and furniture of warre. Then he set forward with his whole armie marching toward Eordea, and neere unto the lake which they call Begarites, he encamped. The next morrow he advanced to Elimea upon the river Haliacmon. After this  having passed over the mountaines named Cambunij through a streight and narrow passage, hee descended to those that inhabite Azorus, Pythous and Doliche, which quarter is called Tripolis. These three townes staied somewhile in suspence, by reason that they had given their hostages to the Larissaeans: but in the end, overcome with the fear presented before their eies, were

 content to yeeld themselves into his hands. Perseus used gracious words to this people, making this account, that the Perrhaebians would doe the like: and in very deed he entred upon the cittie (which surrendred at his first arrivall) without any doubt or stay at all made by the inhabitants within. As for the town Cyretiae, he assaied to batter it, and the first day he was repulsed in a sharp skirmish at the very gates made by the townesmen that put on armes, drew to an head, and made resistance. But the morrow after when he had assailed the citie with all his forces, they submitted all to his mercie before night. The inhabitants of the next towne to it, Mylae, presuming upon their fortifications, and standing upon this, That their citie was imprenable, were so prowd and lustie, that they could not be contented to shut the gates onely against the king, but most rudely and malapertly spared not to cast out reprochfull taunts and gibing tearmes against his owne  person and the Macedonians. Which manner of dealing, as it envenomed the enemies and edged them the rather to enforce and follow the assault, so it kindled themselves the more (upon dispaire of all pardon and mercie) to maintaine and make good their place, and stand more resolutely in their owne defence. Whereupon for three daies together the towne was assailed by one part, and defended by the other with mightie courage right valiantly. The Macedonians were so many in number, that by turnes they releeved the assault without any difficultie, and entred one in the place of another. But the townesmen who evermore day and night guarded the walls, without any chaunge and new supplie, were not onely overcharged with many wounds, but also wearied and enfeebled with continuall travell and want of sleepe. The fourth day, when at one instant the skaling ladders were reared against the walls in every quarter, and the gate assailed with  greater force and violence than before, the inhabitants being driven from the courtaine and battlements, ran all to ward the gate, and made a suddaine fallie upon the enemies: which proceeding more upon inconsiderate and blind anger, than any true and assured confidence of their owne strength, caused them (few in number and wearied) to bee discomsited and put to flight by the enemies fresh and in heart, who entred pell mell with them into the said gate standing wide. open. Thus was this citie taken and ransacked. The bodies also of the free borne persons, as many as remained after the bloudie execution, were sold in market. Perseus after hee had rased, ruined and burned a great part of the towne, dislodged and departed from thence to Phalanna, and the next day following went onward, and marched to Gyrtone. But being advertised that T. Minutius Rufus and Hippias the Pretour of Thessalie were entred thither with a garrison, hee passed  besides the towne and never made offer of any assault. But hee surprised Elatia and Gonnus, by reason that the townesmen were strucken with exceeding feare upon his suddaine arrivall. These two townes are situate upon the very streight which leadeth to Tempe, but Gonnus especially. And therefore hee left it guarded with a strong garrison both of foot and horse, as also fortified with a triple trench and rampier. Himselfe in person went onward stil to Sycurium, minding there to attend the comming of the enemie: and withall he commaunded his armie to forage and purvey come every way all over the territorie of the enemies lying under him. For Cycurium is seated upon the hanging of an hill toward the very foot of the mountaine Ossa, having upon the South side the plaine champion of Thessalie under it, but behind on the backe Macedonie and Magnesia. Over and above these commodities, the place is very healthfull and plenteous of all  good things, watered also with many quicke and runnings springs round about.
The Romane Consull having his armie on foot about that time marching toward Thessalie, at the first found good way and readie passage through Epirus: but afterwards when hee was passed over once into Athamania, he met with a rough countrey and rugged soile, and in maner insuperable: so as with exceeding great difficultie and by short journies hee had much adoe to reach unto Gomphi. And if at that time, whiles his men and horses were encombered and tainted, the king had made head in battell arraunged, taking the vauntage of time and place against him, leading as he did an host composed but of rude and untrained novices, the Romanes themselves cannot: denie, but it would have gone very hard with them, and a great overthrow they must needs have received in that conflict. But when they were come once to Gomphi without  any skirmish, besides the joy which they conceived, for that they had escaped and overcome that daungerous passage, they began also to contemne their enemies, for that they knew not their owne good, and were so ignorant of the opportunities which they had. The Consull after he had duly sacrificed (as it appertained) and distributed the allowance of corne among his souldiours, so journed there some few daies for the rest and repose both of man and beastwhere, hearing that

the Macedonians taunged and over-ran the countrey of Thessalie, wasting and spoiling the territorie  of the Romane allies, he led his souldiors now sufficiently refreshed unto Larissa. And having marched from thence within three miles of Tripolis (which they call Scea) hee pitched his tents, and lodged upon the river Peneus.
At the same time Eumenes arrived by sea at Chalcis, together with two of his brethren, Attaius and Athenas^s, leaving at Pergamus a third brother Phileterus, for the defence of his realm. From thence, accompanied with Attalus and a power of foure thousand foot and a thousand horse, hee came to the Consull, and left at Chalcis two thousand footmen, commaunded by Atheneus. Thether also repaired other aids which came into the Romanes from all the States of Greece, but most of the particulars were so small as now they are growne out of remembrance. The Appolloniates sent three hundred horsemen and a hundred footmen. From the Aetolians  there came to the mountnance of one Cornet of horsemen, even the whole Cavallerie that the said nation could make. Likewise all the Cavallerie of the Thessalians which exceeded not the number of three hundred that served in the Romane campe, and quartered apart. The Achaeans sent one thousand men of their youth, armed for the most part after the Candiot maner. And much about this time C. Lucretius also the Pretour, who had the conduct of the ships that anchored in the rode of Cephalenia, after he had given charge to M. Lucretius his brother, to make saile with his fleet beyond the cape of Malea, and so to passe to Chalcis, himselfe went abourd unto a trireme galley, and sailed toward the gulfe of Corinth, for to be seized first of the countrie of Baeotia, and to prevent all matters there. Hee made way but slowly, because of the infirmitie and weaknes of his bodie. M. Lucretius being arrived at Chalcis, and advertised that P. Lentulus lay against the cittie of Haliartus, sent a messenger, commanding him in the name of the Pretor to raise the siege and dislodge from thence. The leiutenant not withstanding he had set into that service with the help of the youth of that part of Boeotia which tooke part with the Romans, retired from before the wals. The levying of this siege gave occasion of a new enterprise: for incontinently M. Lucretius besieged and invested Haliartus with his owne sea-forces to the number often thousand fighting men, together with two thousand souldiours from king Eumenes, wherof Athen^eus had the charge: and as they were now upon the point to give an assault, the Pretour came in unto them from Creusa. And very neere to that time, there arrived also at Chalcis certaine ships from the allies, namely two Quinquereme galeaces of Carthage, two trireme gallies from Heraclea in Pontus, foure from Chalcedon, as many from Samos, and five quadrireme  gallies of Rhodes. All these vessels the Pretour sent backe againe to the allies, and cased them of that charge, because there was no sea-service to bee performed in any place. Q. Martius also came by sea to Chalcis, after he had woon Halops and assaulted Larissa called Cremaste.
This was the state of Baeotia, when Perseus (as hath bene said before) lay encamped at Sycurium: who after he had from every coast thereabout gotten together all the graine that he could come by, sent certaine companies to give the wast unto the territorie of the Phoceans, supposing the Romanes might be surprised, when they should be drawn farre from their owne campe to the succouring of their distressed associates. But perceiving that they stirred never the more for all that tumult: he dealt among his souldiours all the prey, but onely of men and women: now the bootie stood most upon cattaile, wherewith they made good cheere. After this, but neere about  one and the same time, the Consull and king Perseus both, debated in their counsell, how and where they should begin the warre. The king had taken great heart and courage by occasion that the enemie suffered him to make such havocke and doe his pleasure in the Pheraeans territorie. And therefore his resolution was, to march directly against the Romane campe, without giving more time and making any farther delay. The Romanes likewise for their parts were of opinion, that all forslacking now would greatly prejudice their reputation among the consederates, who tooke it exceedingly to the heart, that they had not succoured the Pheraeans. As they fate consulting what to do, (now Eumenes and Attilius both were present at this counsell) there came a messenger in post hast with newes that the enemie approached nere at hand with a mighty army. Wherupon the counsell breake up, and presently the signall was given to arme. And advised it was in the  meane while, that there should goe forth a hundred horse, and as many darters and foot out of king Eumenes his companies.
Perseus about the fourth houre of the day, being come within a mile and somewhat more of the Romane leaguer, commanded the ensignes of the footmen to stand. Himselfe in person with

 the men of armes and light armed souldiours advaunced forward, and so together with king Cety and the captaines of the other auxiliaries, they two marched before. Now when they were within halfe a mile from the campe, they might discover the horsemen of their enemies. Two corners they were, most part Gaules, under the conduct of Cassignatus; besides the loose and light armed forlorne hope, to the number wel-neere of a hundred and fiftie, and those were partly Mysians and partly Cretensians. Here at the king made a stand, not knowing well the number of the enemies: and anone out of the regiment that hee had with him hee crew two wings of Thracian horse, and as many Macedonians; likewise two cohorts of Cretensian and as many Thracian footmen. Hereupon ensued a skirmish: but for as much as they were matched even in number, and no succour came in to rescue from the one part of the other, it ended likewise in  doubtfull ballance of victorie. Of Eumenes his part there died about thirtie: in which number Cassignatus the commander of the Gauls was slaine. So for that time Perseus retired his forces to Sycurium: but the next morrow the king marched with them againe to the selfe same place, and much about the foresaid houre. Certaine carts and waines laden with water followed after: and by reason that for a douzen mile space, all the way was water-lesse and full of dust withall, hardly bestead (as it should seeme) they had ben for very drought and thirst, in case they had been charged and put to skirmish, at the time when they were first in fight. But considering that the Romans kept quiet, yea and had reduced their corps de guard within their rampier, Perseus likewise retired with his forces into his campe. This did the enemies for certain daies together, hoping ever that the Romane cavallerie would charge upon the taile of the arriere guard in their retreat: and when  by that occasion the skirmish was once begun, and that they had trained and drawne them farre from their campe; then, they mought with ease wheresoever they were, turne upon them and make head, having the ods of them in horsemen and light armed souldiours. But the king seeing this would not speed, encamped neerer unto the Romanes, and fortified the compasse of halfe a mile. From whence betimes in the morning by the breake of day, after hee had embattailed his infanterie in the usuall place, he led all his cavallerie and light armed men toward the campe of his enemies. The Romanes seeing a greater dust raised by more in number, and the same neerer than ordinarie it had beene, were mightily afraid within their campe. But at the first they would hardly beleeve the messenger that brought the newes: for that continually all the former daies the enemie used not to be seene untill the fourth houre of the day, and now the sun was but newly  risen. Howbeit afterwards (I say) when about the gates there were thicker alarmes given, and more and more running from thence, and that now there was no doubt at all of the matter, there grew an exceeding trouble and hurliburly. The marshals, colonels, captaines, and centurians, betooke themselves into the quarter about the Pretours pavillion: and the souldiours ran every man to his owne tent. Perseus had embattailed his men lesse than halfe a mile from the rampier about a little hill which they call Calicinus. King Cotys had the charge of the left wing, with all those of his owne nation. The rankes of the cavallerie stood marshalled alunder one from the other, by reason that the light armed souldiours were bestowed betweene. In the right wing were placed the Macedonian horsemen, and the Cretensians likewise entermingled among them. Milon of Berrhaea led these light armed soldiours: but Meno of Antigonia commanded the horsemen,  and the whole regiment of that part. Next to those wings the cavallerie of king Perseus was arraunged together with the selected aid-souldiours of many and sundrie nations: and the same were conducted by Patrocles of Antigonia, and Didas the governour of Paeonia. In the middest of all was the king himselfe: having about him band called Agema, and certaine cornets of horsemen named [the sacred wings.] Before him he planted the slingers and darters, who both together amounted to the number of 400: and over them he appointed for to be their leader one Ion of Thessalonica, and Timanor the Dolopian. In this manner as is before said, stood the kings forces embattailed. The Cos. having put his infanterie in order of battaile, sent out his cavallerie likewise with the light armed companies, who were set in array before the campe. C. Licinius Crassius the Consuls brother had the leading of the right point, with all the Italian horsemen  and the footmen lightly appointed intermingled among them, M. Valerius Lavinus in the left, commanded the horsmen of the Greeke associats, together with the light armed soldiers of the same nation. Q. Matius conducted the battailon in the mids with certain extraordinary chosen men of armes. Before their guidons, 200 horsemen of the Gaules stood in ordinance: and of the auxiliaries of king Eumenes, three hundred Cyrtians, and four hundred Thessalian horse. Not far

from thence were raunged, somewhat above the left point king Eumenes himselfe and his brother  Attalus, with all their power were planted behind, even betweene the rereward and the trench. Thus stood both battailes much after this manner arraunged, and having of either side a like strength in manner of horsmen and light-armour, they encountred and charged one another; and then the conflict was begun by the forlom hope of loose shot, to wit, the flingers and darters that went before. And first of all others the Thracians, faring like wild and savage beasts who had been long pent up within some grates and cages, with a mightie crie advaunced forth and ran upon the Italian horsemen in the right wing, to the end that they might trouble and amase them; being otherwise a nation fearlesse, as well by nature as for long experience and practice of warre *** The footmen with their swords assaied to cut off the heads of their pikes; and one whiles they bought their horses, and another whiles they ran them into their  flankes. Perseus rode into the mids of the battaile, and at the first shocke forced the Greekes to turne aside and give way: and when the enemie pressed moreover hard upon them behind, behold, the Thessalian horsmen who were placed in the rereguard for succour, and stood somewhat apart and severed from the left wing, who at first were beholders onely of the fight (as keeping without the daunger of the charge) afterwards stood them in verie good stead, even as they were the point to goe downe and have the worse. For as they retired leisurely without breaking their rankes, after that they once joyned with the aids of Eumenes, they both yeelded the opportunitie to their allies who were disbanded in the rout, to retire in safetie within their rankes: and also espying their owne vantage, when the enemies pursued not so thick in troupes, they adventured to put themselves forward beyond, and so stated many of those their allies whome they  encountred and received in their flight. Neither durst the kings men, being now also disarraied and dispearsed here and there in following the chase, come to hand-fight and joyne battaile with those, continuing so well in order as they did, and marching firme and strong together; whereas the matter had been dispatched and the warre brought to a finall end, in case the king who want the better in horse-fight, had never so little come in with helpe and succour. For as heo encouraged his souldiours to fight, there came in place very sidy and in passing good time, the A strong battailion of footmen. Phalanx, which Hippias and Leonaius (because they would not be behind-hand in this hardie enterprise) brought of their owne accord in great hast so soon as ever they heard of the winning-hand of the Cavallerie.
And whiles the king wavered in doubtfull suspence, betweene hope and feare of this so great an adventure, Evander the Cretensian, whose service Perseus had used in  the await laid for king Eumenes at Delphi, seeing, that main barrell marching heavily armed under their ensignes, ran unto the king and earnestly advertised him to take hee, least that presuming too much and bearing himselfe over confident of this good speed of his, he brought not unadvisedly the maine chaunce of all his estate, into a needlesse and unnecessarie hazard. For if (quoth he) you can be content with the happie fortune of this faire day and so rest, either you shall have the meanes to make and honourable peace, or else (if you had leiser prosecute the warre) to win exceeding many allies to beare armes with you in the field; who no doubt will follow the traine of your good fortune. To this way stood the kings mind ever, and thither hee soone enclined. Therefore having commanded Evander for his good advise, hee commaunded the ensignes to retire, and the footmen to returne into the campe: likewise to  sound the retreat unto the guidons of the men of armes. In this battaile 200 Romane horsemen that day lost their lives, and no sewer than two thousand footmen, and fast upon two hundred of the Cavallerie were taken prisoners. Of the kings side, there died not past 200 horsemen and fortie of the other.
After that the victorious enemies were upon their return into the camp, all were journd and glad in generall, but above the rest the Thracians shewed themselves in joy for this their victorie, over insolent: for they returned singing full merily, and carried the heads of their enemies fixed upon their speare points. But the Romanes were not onely sad and heavie for this unfortunate but fearfull also least the enemie should forthwith assaile their camp. Enmenes gave counsell to dislodge and remoove to the other side of the river Pencus, that it might serve them  in stead of a defence and bulwarke, untill such time as the amated soldiours had recovered their spirits and taken heart againe. The Consull was ashamed and abashed to bewray his feare; howbeit, over-ruled with reason, he set his armie over the river in the dead time of the night, and encamped on the farther banke. King Perseus the morrow after advaunced forward to bid the enemies

 battell, but perceiving they wer lodged beyond the river, he confessed that he had saulted indeed, for that he had not followed his victorie the day before but more overseen a good deale he was in lying still and taking repose that night; for without troubling any else of his own men, he might have sent out the light armed soldiors only to set upon the enemies as they passed over the river in hast and fright, and so defeated a great part of their forces. Now, the Romanes shook off their feare for the present, considering they were incamped in a sure place: but among other damages, the blot especially of their honor and name grieved and troubled them. And as they sate in councell before the Consull, everie man for his part laid all the blame upon the AEtolians, who first began to be afraid and runne away; and whose example of feare the other allies of the cities of Greece followed: for it was said, that five principall men of marke among  the AEtolians, were seene and noted firstof all other to have turned their backes. But the Thessalians were praised in a full assembly of the whole armie; and their captaines for their venue and valorous service were honoured with presents. The spoiles of the enemies were brought before king Perseus; out of which hee bestowed freely upon some, brave and gorgeous armors; upon others, goodly great horses; and finally, certeine were rewarded with the prize of good prisoners. Targuets there were above a thousand and five hundred, cuiraces and corslets not so few as a thousand; besides, a farre greater proportion of murrions, swords, and shot of all sorts. Great matters these were, considered in themselves; but much more amplified and set out by the king himselfe with a speech that hee made in a frequent audience of his annie assembled togither, after this or the like manner.
You see alreadie by this (quoth he) what  you may judge before-hand of the finall issue of this warre: discomsited yee have the better part of your enemies, to wit the Romane Cavallerie, wherein they tooke themselves to be invincible. For their horsemen are the very gallants and bravest of their youth; their gentlemen of armes (I say) are the seminarie and nource-garden of their Senate. From them they chuse their nobles and peeres to make consuls of, yea, and Generals of the field another day. And the spoiles of these wee have erewhiles divided among us. Neitheris the victorie lesse which yee have gained of the Insanterie and legions, who although by night they made an escape from you, yet in hasting to passe over the river, they resembled a fort that had suffered shipwracke at sea, and in fearfull hast for their lives have swum and overspred the river every where with their bodies. Sooner shall we and with greater case, I trow, get over Peneus, to chase them thus alreadie overcome,  than they did, making such hast for feare: and being once set on the other side, wee shall out of hand assaile their campe, which we mought have forced and woon this day, but that they tooke them to their heeles and fled. But if they will come to a field and trie the quarrell by the swords points looke yee for no other issue of the conflict with footmen, than was before of the other with horsmen. These words, both the horsmen (who bare upon their own shoulders the spoils of their enemies lying slain before their eies in open view) heard with great pleasure and contentment, as measuring the hope of the future speed by the fortune passed; and also the footmen enflamed now with the glorie of others (and namely those that were of the Macedonian Phalanx) wished with all their hearts to have the like occasion offered unto them, wherein they might not onely shew their valiant service before the king, but also win semblable glorie of their enemies. Thus
 the assembly was dissolved, and the morrow after the king marched forward and encamped upon Mopselus, which is an hill situate in the mid way betweene Tempe and Larissa. The Romanes removed their campe into a place of more securities, howbeit not farre from the banke of Penens. Thither repaired Misagenes the Numidian, with a thousand horse, and as many foot, besides two and twentie elephants. Now as king Perseus during these daies, sat in counsell what course to take as touching the maine conduct of his affaires, when his courage was now well abated and not so lustie for his late victorie, some of his friends were so hardie as to advise him to use this good fortune of his for the obtaining and compassing of some honourable peace, rather than upon a vaine hope to carie his head a lost, and engaged himselfe and his whole state into some hazard and jeopardie, out of which hee should not bee able to recover and retire into safetie. For to keepe a  meane and moderation in prosperitie, and not over-confidently to trust upon the present flattering fortune, is the part (say they) of a wise man indeed and truly happie. And therefore the best course is, to send certaine men of purpose unto the Consull, for to renew the league upon the same conditions, with which your father Philip had accepted peace here to sore of T. Quintius the conquerour. For neither (say they) can the watre be taken up with greater honour and reputation,

than after so memorable a battell; nor ever will there bee presented more firme and assured  hope of a peace to continue for ever, than upon this occasion, which will worke and mollisie the Romanes as a man would have them, to come on and assient to any accord, considering they are well tamed with the infortunitie of this battell. But in case the Romanes upon an inbred peevishnes and engrassed pertinacitie of theirs, should not hear reason, but refuse an indifferent end, then both God and man shal be witnesse, as wel of the moderation of Perseus, as of their pride and insolent frowardnes. The K. was willing enough to give eare to this, and indeed never misliked such discourses; and therfore the advise was approved by the assent of the most part: wherupon embassadors were sent to the Cos. and in a frequent councell assembled, had audience given them. Peace they demaunded, and promised that Perseus should pay unto the Romans as great a tribute as Philip had covenanted for; and likewise quit-the same cities, pieces, and territories, which Philip had given up and surrendred. To this effect spake the embassadours; who being retired aside, the Romans debated in councell, and in the end, Romane constancie imported and had the upper hand: for in those daies the manner and use was, in time of adversitie to beare all out and set a good countenance, but in prosperitie to hold an even hand and to use governance. So agreed it was to returne this answer, That peace might be graunted with this condition, That K. Perseus should permit full and free power to the Senate of Rome, for to dispose both of his person and the kingdome of Macedonie at their good pleasure. When the embassadors had made relation hereof, this constant resolution and invincible persistance of the Romanes made them to wonder againe, as being not acquainted with their manners and fashions: and most of them for bad to make mention anymore of peace, saying, That the Romanes would be glad shortly  to seeke for that of their owne accord, which now at this present they loathed and rejected when it was offered. But Perseus mightily feared, that this arrogant spirit of theirs, proceeded from the confidence they had in their owne forces; in so much as he gave not over so, but assaied to tempt the Consull, if haply by augmenting the summe of mony, he might buy peace at any price and reckoning whatsoever. But seeing him nothing to come downe, not to alter one jote from the first answer; in despaire now of all peace, he returned to Sycurium from whence he came, purposing once againe to trie the hazard of the field. Now the same of this late sight of cavalterie was flowne over all Greece, and discovered the minds and affections of men: for not onely they that tooke part with the Macedonians rejoyced to heare this newes, but also very many of them who were obliged and beholden unto the Romans for benefits and favors received at their hands, and some likewise who had tasted of their violence and proud government. And this they did for no other reason at al, but only upon a foolish and perverse affection, like to that wher with the common people ordinarily is carried away in the beholding of disports and triall of maisteries, even to favour evermore the weaker and him that taketh the foile.
At the same time Lucretius the Pretour had with most forcible meanes assaulted the citie of Haliartus in Baeotia: and albeit the besieged defendants within were releeved by no forraine aid, but onely the youth of the Coronaeans (who at the beginning of the siege entred the cittie) nor hoped for any to come; yet they stood out and made resistance with courage of heart more than with strength of hand: for they issued forth many times, and sallied upon the fabrickes and engines of the enemie, yea, and when the ram approched hard to the wall, they let fall therupon a mightie  weight and counterpoise of lead, and so depressed and drave it downe to the ground. And if haply the enemies who ran with the ramme against the wall, avoided that devise of theirs, laid batterie, and shooke it in some other place; the townesmen within, raised presently with great speed another mure, piling up hastily the stones one upon another, which they found lying among the very ruines of the breaches. The Consull seeing this manner of service by way of ordenance and batterie, to become slow and tedious, commaunded to divide ladders amongst every companie, and purposed to invest the citie round about with the Escalado; supposing that the number which he had would be sufficient to exploit this enterprise, because on that side whereas the towne is enclosed with a marish, it was bootlesse (or rather unpossible) to assault it. Himselfe in person presented two thousand elect souldiours before that part, whereas two turrets, and  all the wall betweene was beaten downe and overthrowne; to the end, that in the very instant, whiles he assaied to enter at the breaches, the townesmen should run all thither to repulse him, and in the meane while the walls void of defendants might in some part or other hee skaled and woon. But they within bestirred themselves lustily to give him the repulse. For having piled in the

 very open breaches a mightie number of faggots made of drie vine cuttings and such small brush, they stood readie with flaming firebrands and burning linkes, threatening ever and anon to kindle the same and set all on fire, to the end, that being defended from the enemie by the meanes of fire betweene, they might have time to oppose an inner countermure against them. But by mischance this devise and enterprise of theirs was empeached. For there poured down on a suddaine such a mightie shower of raine, that the fewell would not easily take fire, and looke what was set a burning, it soone was quenched againe. By which meanes not onely the passage was made open betweene the smoking faggots drawne apart one from another here and there, but whiles they all intended wholly the defence of that one place, the walls were taken at one instant by ladders reared up against many and sundrie parts thereof. In the first heat upon the winning  of the citie, old and young, such as channced to come in their way, without any respect at all of age were put to the sword. The armed souldiours fled into the castle, and the next day being past hope to make good the place, they yeelded and were all sold under the girl and in portsale, to them that would bid most, to the number of two thousand and five hundred men or very neere. The ornaments and beauties of the citie, as statues, images, painted tables and pictures, and whatsoever was found in the pillage to beare a better price, was caried to shipbord, and the towne it selfe rased from the very foundations, and laid even with the ground. From thence the armie was conducted to Thebes: which being woon without any resistance he put into the hands of the banished persons, and those that tooke part and sided with the Romanes; but those of the contrarie faction, such as favoured the king and the Macedonians, hee sold by whole families in  ouvert market to the best chapmen. Having performed these exploits in Baeotia, he retired himselfe to the sea side to his ships.
Whiles these affaires passed thus in Baeotia, Perseus lodged for certaine daies in campe at Sycutium. Where being advertised, that the Romanes made great hast to inn the corne newly reaped downe, and to carie it from all parts of the fields unto the leaguer, and that every souldior before his tent cut and shred off the ears as they lay bound in sheaves, to the end they might thrash and drive out the cleaner corn, by which occasion they had made great heaps of straw throughout all parts of the camp, he supposed it was an easie matter to set all their tents and pavillions asire. Wherupon he commanded to provide torches, links and balls made of tow besmeared with pitch and tarre: thus provided and furnished, he set out at midnight, that by the dawning of the day, he  might put this devise in execution without being descried before. But al came to nothing; for the formost corps de guard although they were surprised with this sodaine comming, by their trouble and affright awakened and raised all the rest, and immediatly the alarme was given; so as at one instant the souldiors were readie and well appointed at the gates, and upon the rampier bent and prest for to defend the campe. Perseus likewise incontinently turned about with his ensignes, putting his fardage and carriage before, and then commaunded the infanterie to march after: himselfe with the cavallerie and light-armours staied behind to fortisie and guard the rereward, supposing (as it fell out indeed) that the enemies would make after to charge upon the taile of the march. His light armed souldiers had some short skirmishing especially with the forlorne hope and loose avant courriers, but the horse and footmen both, retired without any impeachment into the camp.  Thus when all the corne was cut downe about those quarters, the Romanes dislodged and remooved into the territorie of Crannon, which as yet was not endammaged. Whiles they lay encamped in securitie and mistrusting nothing (because the enemies were so far off, and by reason that the way between Sycurium and Crannon was so difficult for want of water;) behold all on a suddaine early in the morning by day light, the kings cavallerie and light armed souldiours shewed themselves upon the hils that overlooked them from above, and put them into great trouble. Departed they were from Sycurium at noon the day before, and had left the infanterie behind, about the breake of day upon the plaine next thereto. For a while he stood upon those said hils, hoping that the Romans might bee trained forth to an horse-fight. But perceiving them not to stir at all, he sent one on horseback to commaund the footmen to retire again to Sycurium, and  himselfe in person followed streight after. The Roman horsemen made after a pretie distance off, if haply they could spie any vauntage in one place or other to charge upon them, disbanded and straggling a sunder. But when they saw that in their dismarch they kept close together, following their guidons and keeping their rankes, they also returned into the campe. After this, the king wearie of making so long journies, dislodged and removed to Mopsium. The Romans

for their part likewise having mowed downe all the corne of Crannon, passed into the territorie  of Phalanneum. The king having intelligence by a rennegate revolt, that the Romans were scatered all over the fields, and reaping the standing corn without any guard of armed men, made a rode with one thousand horse, and two thousand Candiots and Thracians: who marching with as great hast as possibly they could, set upon the Romanes at unawares all unprovided; where he tooke a thousand carts or there abouts, together with their teemes, most of them laden, and upon 600 men besides. The guard and convoy of this bootie into the campe hee committed to the charge of three hundred Cretensians. Himselfe having rallied his cavallerie dispearsed here and there busie in execution, and reunited with all the rest of the footmen, led them to the next corps de guard or garrison of the enemies, supposing that with little a do they might bee surprised and vanquished. L. Pompeius a Colonell had the commaund of them, who seeing his  souldiours affrighted with this suddaine comming of the enemies, retired with them to an hill neere at hand, for to defend himselfe by the vantage and strength of the place, considering that otherwise in number and forces he was too weake. Where after he had cast his men into a ring, for to ward against the shot of arrowes and darts by a roufe and fence of targuets couched close together over their heads: Perseus having environned the hill round about with armed men, commaunded some to mount up and assay to win the place on all parts; if possibly they could, and then to fight close hand: to hand: others he charged to launce their darts and shoot their shafts thick at them a farre off. The Romans were be set with a double fear; for neither could they maintaine skirmish and fight close together, because of those who laboured to climbe the hill: and say they had broke any rankes with excursions and outrodes upon them, yet were they  exposed and lay open to the shot of arrowes and darts. Most hurt they had by certaine weapons called Cestrosphendonae [sling-darts.] A new kind of dart this was and lately devised in the time of this very warre. It had a sharpe head of yron the length of two hands breadth, and the same set fast in a stele which was halfe a cubite long, and about the thicknes of a mans finger: for to flie direct and streight, three feathers it had about it in manner of a shaft: the sling from the middle part had two cords of an unequall size: now when as the slinger swong it about, as it lay even poised in the greater capacitie of the leather thong, our flew the dart and was driven with violence like a bullet. Many of the souldiers being very sore wounded as well with this weapon as all other sorts of shot, so as now for wearines they were scarce able to beare their owne armour: the king was earnestly in hand with them to yeeld and submit, assuring them upon his faithfull word their  lives, yea and otherwhiles promised them rewards and recompences. But there was not a man whose heart enclined once thereto. Now as they stood thus stiffe and resolute to die, there shone upon them a little comfort and some hope of evasion beyond all their expectation. For certain of the forrages and corn purveiors, who hapned to flie for resuge unto the camp, brought word unto the Consull, that the corps de guard aforesaide was besieged round: whereupon being moved with the jeopardie wherein so many citizens stood (for about nine hundred they were, and all citizens of Rome) he went forth of the campe with the cauallerie and light armed souldiours, and unto them joyned certaine new succours of the Numidians as well horse as foot, together with the elephants: and gave commandement to the martiall colonels, that the ensignes of the legions should follow after. Himselfe in person marched before toward the hill aforesaid, taking  with him a certeine number of skirmishers, for to strengthen the light armed auxiliaries. Eumenes, Attalus, and Misagenes also the king of the Numidians, flanked the Cos. on either side. When as the besieged Romanes had a sight once of the formost ensignes of their friends and fellowes, they tooke comfort and courage againe upon their former extream dispaire. Perseus, who had purposed in the first place, not to spend any long time in laying siege to this corps de guard, but to content himselfe with the fortunate successe which at a venture hapned, in that he had taken and slain some of the sorragers: secondly (when he was in some sort entred into that action) to depart (whiles he had meanes thereof) without any dammage received, as knowing that hee had no strength, to speake of, about him: yet pussed up and caried as it were above the ground with the conceit of his late good hand, both staied in person to attend the enemies comming, and also  sent out in all hast, for the [Macedonian] Phalanx. Which comming later than the present necessitie required (albeit in great hast they hurried) it fell out so, that they were to encounter (troubled and disordred as they were in running) their enemies that were well appointed and provided aforehand. And the Cos. who had prevented them, presently welcommed them with battaile. At

 the first, the Macedonians made resistance; but afterwards beeing in no respect equall unto the enemies, after they had lost three hundred footmen, with foure and twentie of the most forward and bravest horsmen out of that cornet which they call Sacra (amongst whom Antimachus also their leader died) they endevoured to retire and be gone. But the way by which they were to passe, was more troublesome to speake of, than the skirmish and battaile it selfe. The Phalanx beeing sent unto by a messenger in hast, and conducted as hastily, encountred affront in a certeine streight a troupe of prisoners, and likewise the waggons charged with come. Who being laid at to give way, thereupon arosea great trouble as well of the one part as the other; whiles no man tooke heed how to match in ordinance: but the armed souldiours cast down and overthrew the heapes of sardage and baggage, for otherwise there could no way bee made: and the draughtbeasts  being pricked and provoked forward, raged and made soule worke in the prease and throng. Hardly and with much adoe were they dispestered and rid of this confused and disordered companie of captives, when they met with the king his companie and the horsemen discomfited. In which place, the noise which they made crying unto the Phalanx, Backe againe, Backe againe, made a fright among them, as if there had bene something readie to fall upon their heads: in such sort as if their enemies durst have entred into the streight and pursued farther after them, no doubt they had received a great overthrow. But the Consull contenting himselfe with a meane good hand, in that he had rescued and recovered his corps de guard from off the hill, retired with his forces into the campe. Some write that there was a great battaile sought that day, and how eight thousand enemies were slaine, and among them Sopater and Antipater two of the kings  captaines. Also that there were taken prisoners about two thousand foure hundred: and militarie ensignes seven and twentie carried away. Neither was the victorie easily gotten but cost bloud, for not so few as foure thousand and three hundred were slaine of the Consull his armie, and five guidons of the left wing lost. This journey recomforted the Romanes, but daunted and quailed Perseus in such sort, as after he had staied a few daies at Mopselum, especially about enterring the bodies of his dead souldiours, and left a sufficient garrison at Gonnos, he retired his armie into Macedonie, leaving also at Phila one of his owne captaines named Timotheus, with some small forces, whom he commanded to assay the Magnesians and the borderers adjoyning. When he was come to Pella, he dismissed his armie out of the field, and sent them to their wintering harbours, but himselfe together with king Cotys went to Thessalonica.
 Thither newes came, that Atlesbius a petie king of the Thracians, and Corragus a captaine under king Eumenes, had invaded the marches of Cotys, and were maisters of the countrie which they call Marene. And therefore supposing that hee must needs discharge Cotys to looke to the defence of his owne realme, he bestowed rich presents upon him at his departure: and gave him 200 talents for sixe months wages of his cavallerie, whereas at the beginning he purposed to bee at the charge of a whole yeeres pay.
The Consull after he heard that Perseus was gone, approched with his armie neere to Gonnos, and there lodged; if haply he might force and gaine that also Situate it was over against Tempe, at the very mouth and gullet of the streights, and is the very frontier town, yeelding both a most assured defence and strength to all Macedonie, and also a commodious passage for the Macedonians  to enter into Thessalie. And beeing a place imprenable, as well for the naturall site thereof, as the strong garrison therein planted, he gave over the enterprise. So turning and bending his way into Perrhaebia, after he had forced Mallaea at the first assault and put it to the ransacke; and received Tripolis with the rest of Perrhaebia, yeelded by composition; he returned to Larissa. And then having sent Eumenes and Attalus home into their owne countrie, and bestowed Misagenes and the Numidians in diver citties of Thessalie neere at hand; to remain there for the winter time, and distributed part of his forces throughout all Thessalie, in such sort, that not only they had all commodious wintering, but also served in stead of garisons to the cities. Q. Mutius his lieutenant he sent with a regiment of two thousand men to guard. Ambracia and keepe it in obedience. All the consederates of the Greeke citties, save onely the Achaeans he licensed to  depart. With one part of his armie he went into Thessalie in Phthia, where he rased down to the ground Preleum, abandoned of the inhabitants. But Antrona he woon with the good will of the townesmen. Then afterward hee approched before Larissa-with his forces. The cittie was lest desolate, for all the people were retired into the fortresse, the which hee began to assault: and first the kings garrison of Macedonians quit the place: of whom the townsmen being forsaken and

left to themselves, submitted incontinently. Then he stood in doubt whether he should assaile  Demetrias first, or haue an eye and looke into the troubles and state of Boeotia. For the men of Thebes being grievously molested and annoied by those of Coronaea, had sent for him into Baeotia: at whose praiers, thither he conducted his armie; and besides, Baeotia was a country more commodious to winter in than Magnesia.


THE XLIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the three and fortith Booke.
DIvers Pretours were iudicially condemned, for demeaning themselves with crueltie and (...) in the administration of their provinces. P. Licinius Crassus the Proconsull, woon by force many cities in Greece, and cruelly rifled them. For which rigour of his, the captives whome be had sold under the guirland in ouvert market, were by an order directed out of the Senate, restored afterwards to their former estate. The Admirals of the Romane fleetes committed many outrages and enormities against their allies. Besides, there are comprised in this booke, the prosperous affaires of king Perseus in Thrace, after bee had vanquished the Dardanians and subdued Illyrician, whereof Gentius was king. The troubles which began in Spaine by meanes of Olonicus, were appeased by his death. M. Aemylius Lepidus, was by the Censors created president of the Senat.

THe same sommer, wherein the Romanes wan the victorie with horse-fight in Thessalie, the lieutenant being sent into Illyricum from the Consull, compelled by force and armes two rich townes to yeeld; unto which neverthelesse he gave all their goods againe, to the end that by an opinion of this clemencie, hee might win the hearts of the inhabirants of Camus, that strong citie. But when he saw that he could not constraine them to render, no more than force them by siege; because his soldiors  should not seeme to have been wearied for nought in the besieging of two townes, he sell to rifle and ransacke that, which before hee left untouched. The other Consull C. Cassius neither performed any memorable exploit in Gaule, which was his province by lot; and having endeavoured to conduct his legions through Illyricum into Macedonie, all his desigument came to no effect at all. That the Consull was entred upon this journey, the Senat was certified by the embassadours of the Aquileians: who complained that their colonie newly erected was seeble, and not as yet wel secured among those fierce nations of the Istrians and Illyrians: and with all they made suit, that the Senat would provide and take order, that the said colonie might be fortified: and when the question was put unto them, Whether they would be content that commission should be directed unto C. Cassius in that behalf? they answered, That the  said Cassius, having assembled his armie at the Rendez vous in Aquileia, was departed through Sclavonia into Macedonia. This at first was thought incredible, and every man supposed verily, that he had been gone to levie warre, upon the Carnians haply or the Istrians. The Aquileians were able to reply no farther, nor affirme more upon their knowledge than this, That allowance

 of corn was made for the soldiors to serve thirtie daies, and that guides were sought and brought out, who knew the waies out of Italie into Macedonie. Here at the Senat (yee may be sure) tooke great snuffe and was highly displeased, that the Consull should be so hardie as presume to leave his owne province for to passe into that which belonged to another, and to lead his armie an unknowen and new way, and the same daungerous, through straunge and forreine countries, thereby to open passage as it were, for so many nations to come into Italie. Whereupon in a frequent assembly of the Senatours, there passed a decree, That C. Sulpitius the Pretour should nominate three embassadours out of the bodie of the Senate, for to depart out of the citie that present day, to make all the hast they possibly could to overtake the Consull wheresoever hee was, and to give him warning to levie no warre against any nation without direct warrant from  the Senate. And these Embassadours went, namely, M. Cornelius Cethegus, M. Fulvius, and P. Martius Rex. The present feare as touching the Consull and the armie, was the occasion that the care of forrifying Aquileia was deferred for that time.
After this, were the embassadors of certaine States in both provinces of Spaine admitted to come into the Senate: who complained of the covetousnes and pride of the Romane officers and governours among them; humbly beseeching the Senate upon their knees, Not to suffet them (being allies and consederates) to be more shamefully pilled and spoiled than the verie enemies. Among other indignities for which they shewed themselves aggrieved, notorious it was, that the said magistrates had taken bribes, yea and used extortion in wringing mony from them. Whereupon a commission was graunted to L. Canuleius the Pretour (unto whom Spaine  by lot was fallen) to ordaine five judges or commissioners (and those out of the raunge and degree of Senatours) for every person of whome the Spaniards claimed to recover such monies; and likewise to permit the plaintifes to take unto them what advocates and counsell they would. Then, after those embassadours were called againe into the Senat, this decree and act of the Senate was read unto them, and willed they were to nominate their advocates; who named foure, to wit, M. Porcius Cato, P. Cornelius Scipio the sonne of Cneus, L. Aemylius Poulus the sonne of Marcus, and C. Sulpitius Gallus. And first they tooke commissioners to proceed against M. Titinius, who had been Pretour in the hither province of Spaine, when Au. Manlius and M. Iunius were Consuls. Twise was the cause of the accused partie adjourned to a farther time, but at the third session he was quit and found unguiltie. Then arose some variance and dissention between  the embassadors of those two provinces. The States of this higher Spaine, tooke for their patrons and advocates, M. Cato and Scipio; they of the farther and lower Spaine, made choice of L. Paulus and Gallus Sulpitius. They of high Spaine convented before the delegate judges, P. Farius Philus; the other of base Spaine, M. Matienus. Philus had ben L. deputie there three yeers past, when Sp. Posthumius and Q.Mutius were Consuls; but this Matienus two yeeres before, during the Consulship of L. Posthumius and M. Popilius. Charged they were both of them with right grievous matters and imputations, and a farther day graunted of a finall judgement: but when they were to answere judicially againe, they made default, and for excuse it was alledged, that they were both out of the country; and so they departed into voluntarie exile, Furtus to Praeneste, and Matienus to Tibur. The voice went, that the patrons of the plaintifes would not  suffer them to follow processe still against such noble and great personages: and the suspition hereof was more pregnant, by reason that Canuleius the Pretour let this matter fall, and began to take musters and levie souldiours for the warre; and so forthwith directly went into the province, to the end that no more men should be brought into question and troubled by these Spaniards. By this meanes, all former matters past were buried in silence and no more speech made of them; but for future time, the Senat tooke order and provided for the Spaniards so well, that they obtained an immunitie, That no Romane magistrate should have power and authoritie to set the price upon any graine, nor force the Spaniards to sell the Vicesimes at what rate he pleased to set downe: also that there should be no commissioners appointed within their townes for  the gathering and receiving of the revenues and mony issuing from thence. Besides, there came another embassie of a sort of people out of Spaine, after a new and straunge manner: for there were above four hundred persons, avouching themselves the children of Romane souldiors and Spanish women not joyned in wedlocke: who appeared before the Senate and be sought them, for to allow them a citie to inhabit. Whereupon ordained it was, That they should enter their names and be matriculated before their Pretour L. Canuleius: and looke whomsoever of them

he affranchised and made free, those they thought meet to be sent to Carteia neere the sea side, and there planted: also that those Carterians, who were willing still to keepe home and remaine there, should be priviledged as Coloners and so enrolled, and to enjoy besides a portion of lands assigned unto them. This was a Latine colonie, and was called the colonie of the Libertines.
At the same time there came as Embassadour out of Africke, Gulussa the sonue of Masanissa, and likewise the Carthaginian embassage. Gulussa first was brought into the Senate; who declared what his father had sent unto them against the Macedonian warre: promising with all, that if it pleased them to impose more upon him, hee would be readie to performe the same in remembrance of the benefits received from the people of Rome: finally, he gave the LL. of the Senate a cave at by the way, to take heed that the Carthaginians deceived them not in the end: for that resolved they were, and went in hand to prepare a great navie, under pretense of sending it to the Romanes against the Macedonians; which if it were once readie tigged and furnished, it was in their choice then, to make whome they would either friends or foes.
Being entred the campe and shewing the heads alost, they stuck such a feare, that if immediately the armie had come forward and advaunced against them, the campe might have been woon: and yet even then as it was, they fled amaine: and some there were who gave their opinion, to send embassadours to treat and with praiers to intreat for peace. Vpon the newes reported hereof, many cities submitted and were surrendred. Such as made excuse, and laid the fault upon the follie of two persons only, who had of their owne accord offered themselves to be punished, obtained pardon of the Pretour. And then forthwith hee went in expedition against other citties;  but finding them all readie to doe whatsoever they were commaunded, hee passed quietly with his armie through that countrey in peace, which but a while before was all up in armes and on a light fire. This lenitie of the Pretour, which he used in taming and subduing this most sierce and proud nation without effusion of blood, was by so much more acceptable to the LL. of the Senate and the whole bodie of the people, as the Consull Licinius and the other Pretour Lucretius had warred in Greece with greater crueltie and avarice. As for Lucretius, the Tribunes of the Commons accused him daily in their ordinarie orations before the people for his absence: Notwithstanding his excuse was alleadged, that absent he was, and emploied about the affaires of the State. But in those daies, so unknowne were things done hard by, that even at that present he was at his ferme within the territorie of Antium, and busie in conveighing a conduct of water  out of the river Loracina to Antium: the charges wherof he defraied with the money raised out of the sale of prizes taken from the enemies. Some say that he bargained to have that peece of worke effected, for the summe of a hundred and thirtie thousand Asses. Moreover he embelished and adorned the temple of Aesculaptus, with the painted tables found in the pillage. The envie and ill will, the obloquie also and dishonour like to grow to Lucretius, turned upon his successor Hortensius, by occasion of the embassadours of Abdera, who in piteous wife complained with teares before the Senate, that their towne was by Hortensius forced and ransacked: How the cause of this ruine and destruction of their cittie was no more but this, that being enjoined by him to make paiment of a hundred thousand Denarij, and allowance of fiftie thousand Modij of wheat, they requested some respite of time, wherein they might addresse their embassadours, as well to  Hostilius the Consull as unto Rome, concerning this imposition. For searcely were they come unto the said Consull, but they heard how their cittie was forced, the principall citizens thereof beheaded, and all the rest sold in portsale under the guirland. These were greevous indignities in the sight of the Senate, whereupon they passed the same ordinance in the behalfe of the Abderites, rites, that the yeare before had beene directed in the like case as touching the Coronaeans; and commaunded the Pretour Q.Maenius to publish the said decree before the publicke assemblie of the people. In like manner two Commissioners were sent, namely, C. Sempronius Blasus, and S. Iulius Caesar for to reestablish the Abderits in their freedome: who also had in charge to signifie from them, both to the Consull Hostilius, and also to the Pretour Hortensius, That the Senate judged the hostilitie offered unto the Abderites injurious, and the warre unlawfull, and therefore  that all such as were brought into servitude, should be sought out and restored again to libertie.
At the same time presentation was made unto the Senate of certaine complaints against C. Cassius who had been Consull the yeare before, and at that time was emploied in qualitie of a Colonel-marshall together with A. Hostilius in Macedonie. Likewise there arrived the embassadours,

 of Cintibilus a petie king of the Gaules. A brother of his having gaudience graunted in the Senate made a speech, wherein he complained, that C. Cassius had given the wast to the lands and territories of the people inhabiting the Alpes, who were their allies and consederates, and from thence had led away into capritive many thousand persons. And much at one instant there came the embassadors of the Carnians, Istrians and Iapides with complaints against Cassius, That first hee had enjoined them to furnish him with guides for to shew and direct him the best way to march with his armie into Macedonie, and so departed in peace from them, as if he had ment to war elsewhere: but afterwards out of the midway of his journey, he returned upon them, and in hostile manner over ran their frontiers, robbing, spoiling and burning wheresoever he went; and to this day they cannot devise and know the reason, wherefore the Consull should hold them for  enemies and deale so cruelly by them. As well the prince of the Gaules aforesaid being absent, as these embassadours in place received this answere, That as touching the outrages for which they shewed themselves greeved, the Senate neither knew thereof beforehand, that ever they were intended, ne yet approved of the same, since they were committed. But against al right and equitie it were to condemn unheard in his own defence, and absent, such a personage as he is, namely a man who had ben Consul; considering also that his emploiment about the C.W. is the occasion of his absence. When C. Cassius is once returned out of Macedonie, then if they would shew themselves and accuse him face to face, the Senate would heare the cause and take knowledge accordingly, yea, and endevour that they should be satisfied and contented. Moreover, thought good it was, that these nations should not be dispatched onely with this bare answere, but that embassadours  also should be sent: two unto the foresaid king beyond the Alpes; and other three to the people above named, for to acquaint them with the resolution of the lords of the Senate. And they gave order besides to send presents to each of the embassadours to the valour of two thousand asses over and above, to the two princes that were brethren, these gifts following, to wit, two chaines of gold weighing after they were wrought five pound of gold: also five peeces of plate in silver, amounting to the weight of twentie pound: two bard horses with their henxmen and lackies: likewise horsemens armours and their castockes: and liveries likewise for all those of their traine, as well bond as free. These were the things sent unto them. But at their owne request granted it was besides, that they might for their mony buy each of them ten horses, and be allowed to transport them out of Italie. The embassadours sent with the Gaules beyond the mountaines,  were C. Laelius and M. Aemylius Lepidus: to the other nations, C. Secmius, P. Cornelius Blasio, and T. Memmius.
Moreover, there met together in Rome at once, the embassadours of many States both of Greece and Asia. And first the Athenians were brought into the Senate, who related, That they had sent unto the Consull P. Licinius and the Pretour C. Lucretius, what shipping they had, and all the fighting men they were able to make: but seeing they had no use of them, they had raised a levie of a hundred thousand Modji of corne. Which, albeit their land was but barren for tillage, and the very husband men themselves lived of forraine corne brought in unto them, yet they had made meanes to doe accordingly, because they would not seeme to be wanting in any dutifull service: and willing they were yet, and prest to performe whatsoever they would require.  The Milesians for their part said, That hitherto they had done nothing, marrie they offred themselves to be readie to accomplish all that the Senate should commaund them toward this warre. The Alabandians shewed, That they had built aRome a goddesse temple to the citie of Rome, and ordained besides, that in the honour of that goddesse there should be a solemnitie of games and plaies exhibited every yeere. Also, that they had brought with them for a present, a crowne of gold weighing fiftie pound, to set it up in the Capitoll as a gift and offering to Iup. Opt. Max. and withall, three hundred horsemens shields, which they were minded to bestow upon those, unto whom it pleased them to appoint and commaund. Their petition was, that they might bee permitted to offer their present in the Capitoll, and there to sacrifice. The men of Lampsacus came with a golden crowne weighing sourescore pound, protesting, That they had quit and abandoned Perseus, so  seone as ever the Romane armie was arrived in Macedonie, notwithstanding they owed alleageance unto Perseus, and were homagers to his father Philip before him. In which consideration, as also for that they had performed their devoir to their full power to the Romane Generals, they requested no other favour to be gratified withall, but to bee received into the amitie of the people of Rome: and in case there should be peace concluded with Perseus, that they might bee excepted

and exempted in the accord, for being reduce under his obedience. The rest of the embassadours  had a gracious answere returned unto them. As for the Lampsacenes, order was given to Q.Maenius the Pretour, to enter and enroll them in the number of allies. Every one of these embassadours were rewarded with a present worth two thousand Asses. The Alabandians were appointed to carrie backe with them into Macedonie their shields aforesaid, and to deliver them unto A. Hostilius the Consull. Over and besides, the Carthaginian embassadours out of Astick, made relation that they had brought from thence ten hundred thousand Modij of wheat, and five hundred thousand of barley, which they had a shipbord at the sea-side, readie to carie the same wheresoever the Senate would appoint. This benevolence of theirs they accompanied with good words, saying, they knew well that this gift and recognoisance of their dutie, was inferior either to their own good wil, or the demerits of the people of Rome. Howbeit many times heretofore  they had shewed themselves to doe the part of thankfull, faithfull, and trustie allies, in all things tending to the profit and good of both states. In like sort the embassadours of Mosauissa promised the same proportion of corne, with 1200 horse, and twelve elephants, assuring them in his name, to doe whatsoever the Senate would impose and should be thought needfull; and that with as free an heart as the benevolence offered of his owne accord. Thankes beeing given both to the Carthaginians and also to the king, requested they were to transport over into Macedonie to the Consull A. Hostilius, those things which they had promised. To the embassadours were sent by way of presents, two thousand Asses a peece. The Cretensian embassadours, related how they had sent into Macedonie such a number of Archers, as the Consull P. Licinius had imposed upon them: and when they denied not upon the question asked, that there served  more archers of their under Perseus than with the Romanes, this answere was made unto them, That if the Cretensians would well and truly and in good earnest preferre the friendship of the people of Rome before that of king Perseus, the Senat of Rome likewise would give them answere as certaine and assured allies: in the mean while, they should let their countrie-mento understand, that it was the will and pleasure of the Senate, that the Cretensians should with all speed possible call home all those souldiours whom they had in any garrison of king Perseus. The Candiots being dismissed with this dispatch, then the Chalcidians were called in: and at the very first sight of them it soone appeared upon what tearmes of necessitie they were driven to send an embassage: when Aticcion the chiefe man among them, by occasion that he was lame with the gout in his feet, was brought into the Senate in a litter.
In which extremitie diseased as he was, there was no  pleding of any excuse by his infirmitie, nor craving pardon, since he was to go without, when he had all done. He began by way of preface and praeamble, saying, he had nothing left alive but his tongue, for to deplore and bewail the calamities of his country: then he went forward, and first shewed what courtesies and good turns the State wherin he lived had performed to the captains generall and armies of the Romanes, both of old, and also of late in the warre against Perseus. After this, he declared what parts of pride, covetousnes, and crueltie, first, C. Lucretius a Romane Pretour had exercised upon his countrie-men, and afterwards what L. Hortensius practised, at that time above all others: also how the Chalcidians were resolved to endure all calamities, were they more grievous than those which they presently suffered, rather than they would yeeld to Perseus. And as for Lucretius and Hortensius, they knew full well, that it had bene better and more for their  safetie to have shut their gates against them, than to receive them into their citie. For such as had excluded them forth, as namely they of Emathia, Amphipolis, Maronea, and Aenus, remain still entier and in good estate; but with us (say they) the temples have bin robbed of all their beautifull ornaments, and utterly spoiled by these sacriledgers. C. Lucretius hath carried all away, by water over to Antium, and hath led away into bondage and captivitie the persons free borne. So as the goods and fortunes of the allies of the people of Rome, both have bene and daily are pilled and rifled. For according to the use and fashion brought up by C. Lucretius, Hortensius likewise houseth his marriners as well in summer as winter, and our houses are full of a rable of these sailers and sea-men, in such sort as our wives and children bee forced to converse among such groomes as make no account at all what either they say or doe. Hereupon thought good it was, to send for Lucretius into the Senate, that he might see his accuser, answere face to face, and purge himselfe of these chalenges. But when he was come in place, be heard much more in presence, than had bene spoken against him in his absence. Over and besides, there shewed themselves and joined together against him, two other more stout adversaries and bitter accusers, to wit,

M. Iuventius T alva and Cn. Ausidius. And these two not onely coursed him before the Senat, but also having drawne him perforce into the generall assembly of the people, and charged him before them with many reproches, tooke out processe also and arrested him to make his appearance and answere judicially at a day before the people. Then Q.Maenius the Pretour, by order from the Senate, answered the Chalcidians in this manner: Whereas yee alleadge and say, That yee have well deserved of the people of Rome both heretofore and also in this present war now in hand, the Senat knoweth all that to be true, and accepteth the same thankfully in the best part, as of right they ought. As touching your grievaunces and complaints for the levyed parts which C. Lucretius hath plaied, and which L. Hortensius still practiseth (both Pretours of Rome) the same neither have bene nor are committed and done by the will and allowance of the people of Rome.  For who would not judge so of it, that knoweth how they levyed warre upon king Perseus and his father Philip before him, for to enfranchise Greece and set it at libertie, and not that their allies and friends should thus hardly be intreated by their magistrates and governours sent from hence? Write therfore they would unto L. Hortensius the Pretour, to let him understand that the Senate is not well pleased with these prankes of his which the Chalcidians complaine of. Also if any free-borne persons were become thrall and bound, that withall convenient speed he should take order to seek the map and restore them again to their former freedome. Last of all, that they deemed it meet and reason, that no sailer or martiner, but onely the maisters of ships should bee lodged and enterteined in your houses. And these were the contents of the letters written unto Hortensius, by commaundement from the Senate. Vnto the embassadours were gifts sent, to  every one as much as came to two thousand Asses. As for Miccion; he was allowed his carriage in chariots at the charges of the cittie, and order given that he should with all ease ride in them to Brundusium. As for C. Lucretius, when the day of appearance was come, the Tribunes commensed an action against him before the people, to be fined at a million of Asses. And in a generall assembly and Sesston holden for this purpose, cast hee was and condemned by the suffrages of all the tribes, even thirtie five and no sewer.
In Liguria no memorable exploit was that yeere performed: for neither the enemies entred into armes, nor the Consull led his legions into their countrie; and when he was assured of peace for that yeare, hee discharged the souldiours of two Romane legions, within 60 daies after his first comming into the province. As for the armie of the Latine allies, hee brought it early into  the citties of Luna and Pisa there to winter: and then himselfe with the cavallerie visited most of the citties in the province of Gaule.
In no place was there any warre but in Macedonie: how beit they had in suspition Gentius and the king of the Illyrians. Therefore the Senate ordeined to send from Brundusium eight ships readie rigged and fully furnished, unto the lieutenant C. Furius atLissa. Issa, who was governour of the Iland with the guard and strength of two Issean vessels; in which were put abourd and shipped two thousand souldiours, which Q.Menius the Pretour by a warrant directed out of the Senate, enrolled in that quarter of Italie which lieth opposite to Illyricum. In like manner the Consull Hostilius sent Appius Claudius into Illyricum with foure thousand footmen, for to defend the people in those parts: who not content with those forces of his owne which hee had brought with  him thither, demaunded here and there aids and succours of the allies, until hee had put in armes eight thousand men of divers and sundrie nations. And after hee had made his progresse through all that region, hee set him downe and rested at Lichnidum a citie of the Dassaretians. Not sarre from thence there stood a frontier towne called Vseana, and for the most part raunged under the obedience of Perseus. There were within it one thousand citizens, and a small garrison of Cretensians for their better safeguard and defence. From thence there came to Claudius secret courriers, advertising him, that if he would approach neerer with his armie, there would be some readie at hand to betray the towne into his hands: and woorth the adventure it was (say they) and would quit for all the paines: for able it was with pillage to enrich not himselfe and his  friends only, but also all his soldiors. The hope of this cheat, fitting so well his covetous humour, so blinded his spirit and understanding, that he had not the sence to keep with him any one of those courriers that came unto him, nor the wisedome to demand hostages for assurance of this enterprise which was to be exploited by stealth and fraud, ne yet the forecast to send our escouts and espies, or so much reason and mother-wit as to require their oth and bond of faithfull promise. Only at the day appointed he departed from Lychnidum, and within twelve miles of that cittie

toward which he went, he encamped. Then by night at the reliefe of the fourth watch, he removed  and set forward, leaving behind him a regiment of some thousand, for the guard of the camp. At length, to the citie they come, disordered in a long traine, marching nothing close, but farre asunder loosely one from another and scattered, by reason that in the night season they went many of them out of the way. This negligence of theirs was the more, when they saw no man appearing upon the wals: but so soon as they were approached within ^ dor^s cast, the inhabitants issued forth at once out of ^ ga^es, and togither with the (...) of them that ^^llied for^^, a mightie noise and outcrie besides arose from the wals, of women howling, yelling, and ringing brasen basons and bells on every hand; besides, the confused multitude of the base people and bondslaves togither, set up most hideous and dissonant cries. These manifold (...) presented from all parts, were the cause that the Romans could not abide and stand out H^ first ^^^pest and violent  storme, as it were, of their fallie and cha^ge. Downe they went therefore, and were slaine more in flight than fight; and scarce two thousand men^^^ the lieud^^^^^ himselfe; escaped and recovered the campe: for the longer way they had (...), the more meanes and opportunitie had the enemies to chase and overtake ^ great number of the^, wearied upon the way. Appi^s stayed not so long in the campe, untill Hee had (...) that were dispearsed in the rou^, (which had been the onely way to have saved (...) were s^aggled in the fields) but immediatly retired with the broken reliques of his armie (...) ^his overthrow, to Lyclinidum. This infelicitie and such other like misfortunes Happening in M^^edonie, were made knowne at Rome, by occasion of Sex Digitius a colonell, who was (...) home for to celebrate a solemne sacrifice. In regard whereof, the LL. of the Senate ^^^ring to receive some greater ignominie  and dishonour, addressed Embassadour into Macedonie, M. F^lvi^s Flaccus and M. Caninius Rebulus, to make a true report upon their knowledge how the world went there. Also that A. Hostilius the Consull should publish the assembly generall for the election of Consuls, so as it might be holden in the month of Ianuarie^ and then repaire himselfe with all convenient speed to the citie. In the meane time, M. Retius the Pretour had in charge, by vertue of an edict, to call home into the citie all Senatours from ev^rie quarter of Italie, unlesse such as were absent about the affaires of the state: also to give streight warning to them who now were at Rome, not to absent themselves farther than a mile from the citie. These things were done according to the advise of the Senate. So the grand assembly for the election of the Consuls,ad. quintum cilendas Sep^ Idauls, that (...) [Septembris] it should be [Februarij:] and then it is the 28 of ^ann^r^^: which ^^sidering the precedent mesiage and the subsequent cir^, sui^^^^ better to the storie. was holden the 28 day of August, wherein were created Consuls, Q.Marti^s Philippus the second time, and  Q.Servilius Caepio. Three daies after, the Pretours also were chosen, namely, Caius D^ci^^us, M. Cla^dius Marcellus, M. S^l^itiu^ Gall^s, C. M^rtius Figulus, Ser. Corneli^s Lentulus, and ^. Fonteius Capito. Vnto these Pretours elect, besides the two charges within the cittie of civill jurisdiction, these foure provinces and governments were assigned, to wit, Spaine, Sardinia, Sicilie, and the admiraltie of the navie.
At the verie end of Februarie, the embassadours aforesaid returned out of Macedonie; who recounted the acts archieved fortunately by Perseus the sommer past, and in how great f^are the allies of the people of Rome stood, after so many citties reduced under the obcisance of the king. Moreover, that the Consull his armie was disfurnished of men, by reason that so many of them made friends to be discharged, and so for favour had their passe-port and were dismissed: the fault herein, the Consull laid upon the militarie Tribunes or Colonels, and they againe upon him. The LL. of the Senat perceived well, that they made but light of the shamefull soile received by the inconsiderate rashnesse of Claudius, in saying, That there were but verie few souldiors lost of the Italian nation; and those for the most part taken up in hast and enrolled on a suddaine. The Consuls elect so sonne as they entred into their magistracie, were commaunded to propound unto the Senate concerning the province of Macedonie, and to them were assigned the governments of Italie and Macedonie. This yeere was leape yeere, and the third day after the feast Terminalia,To the god of R^n^d, T^rminus. Solemnized (...) toward the end of Febru^rie the last month of the yeere, (...) ^^p^arech b^ Ovid. Fast.2. Qui sequitur ^anum vet^ris ^uit ultimus ann^ Tu quoque saerotum, Termine, finis eras was the day inserted betweene, which happened upon the calends [of March.] Within the compasse of that yeere certaine priests, to wit, L. Flaminius, and two Pontifies or bishops, L. Furius Philus, and C. Livius Salinator, departed this life. The colledge  of these Pontifies, elected T. Manlius Torqustius in stead of Furius, and Marcus Servilius in the roume of Livius.
In the beginning of the yeere next following, after that the new Coss. Q.Martius and Q.Servilius, had mooved in the Sena^as touching their provinces, advised it was, That with all speed

 possible they should either agree betweene themselves, or else cast lots for the governments in Italie and in Macedonie. And before that the lots determined this matter so doubtfull and uncertaine, to the end that nothing afterwards should be done for favour partially, thought good it was, to ordaine before-hand a competent and sufficient number of souldiors for the supplement of the armies in both provinces, namely, for Macedonie 6000 footmen of Romans, and as many of Latine allies; 250 horsemen Romans, and 300 allies: also to casse the old souldiours, so as in every Romane legion there should not be above 6000 foot and 300 horse. As for the other Consull, he was not gaged with any certaine stim of Romane citizens, to be levied for the full accomplishment of his legions. Onely this was determinately set downe, That hee should enroll two legions, and either of them to containe 5200 foot and two hundred horse: but for footmen  of Latines, hee had a greater number allowed thanhis colleague, namely, ten thousand foot and sixe hundred horse. Moreover, commaundement was given to enroll foure legions more; to be led foorth into the field, upon what need and occasion soever should fall out. The marshall-colon^ls of the armie the Consuls might not bee permitted to elect, but created they were by the people. The allies of the Latine nation were enjoined to set out sixteene thousand foot and a thousand horse. And this power was onely to be in a readinesse at an hours warning, for to be led forth as occasion should be offered. Their principall care was about Macedonie. Ordained also it was, That for the service at sea, there should bee enrolled to serve the navie, of Romane citizens (such as were libertines and newly enfranchised) out of all parts of Italie one thousand, and as many out of Sicilie. And unto whether of the Consuls the province of Macedonie  fell, he should give order for their transportage thither, to the armada wheresoever it was. For Spaine there were three thousand Romane footmen and three hundred horsemen appointed to make up the decaied bands. There also, a certaine number was set downe for every legion, to wit, five thousand foot and three hundred and thirtie horse. Moreover, that Consull whose lot was to governe in Spaine, had commission to l^vie of the allies foure thousand footmen, and three hundred horse.
I am not ignorant, that from the same prophane negligence and irreligion, wherby commonly men now a daies are of beleefe, that the gods portend and foresignifie nothing to come by signs and tokens; it proceedth also, That no prodigies which happen, should any more, either bee published and reported abroad, or recorded in the annales and chronicles. Howbeit, for mine  owne part, in writing of these actes and monuments of ancient times, I know not how, but me thinkes I carie a mind, that is become (as it were) antique also; yea, and some scrupulous devotion ariseth in my spirit, which moveth me to account the things not unworthie to have place in my histories, which those sage fathers and most prudent personages in old time thought meet to be considered off by the State, yea, and to require publicke explation. Wel, to proceed, from Anagnia were two fearefull sights reported that yeere, namely, That a burning and blazing flame was seene in the skie; and a cowknowne to speake, kept and nourished at the publicke charges. at Minturnae also much about those daies, the welkin seemed to be on light fire. At Reare there fella shower that rained stones. In the fortresse at Comes the image of Apollo wept three daies and three nights continually. In the citie of Rome, two sextains or keepers of the temples made  report, the one, That in the church of Fortune ther was a serpent seen by many men, crested with a mane: the other, That about the chappell of Fortuna Primigenia,Cum primogenitis ^averet: when shee was good to the full borne. Ba^t. Marlianus. which standeth upon the Capitoll hill, there hapned two divers and different prodigious signs, namely, That in the chappell yard there sprung up a palme tree; and all one day it rained bloud. Two other strange things there were, whereof there was no regard nor account made; the first, because it chanced in a privat place; for T. Martius Figulus reported, That there grew up a palme or date tree in his courtyard: the second, because it happened in a forrain place: for spoken it was, That at Fregellae in the house of M. Atreus, a launce or speare which he had bought for his sonne a souldiour, burned in the day time for two houres space and more, yet so, as the fire consumed nothing thereof. In regard of those publicke prodigies, the Decemvits had recourse to the books of Sibylla: who out  of them declared, That the Consuls should sacrifice fortie head of greater beasts, and they shewed also to what gods. They added moreover and gave advise to hold a publicke procession, and that all the magistrates at every shrine and upon every altar of the gods should sacrifice greater beasts, and the people weare guirlands and chaplets of flowers. All things were executed accordingly, as the Decemvirs suggested and directed.
After this the assembly was published for the chusing of Censours. In election there were for  this dignitie of Censureship, the very principal persons and of best note in all the citie, C. Valerius L^vinus, L. Posthumius Albinus, P. Mutius Sc^vola, C. Iunius Brutus, C. Claudius Pulcher, and Tib. Sempronius Gr^cchus. These two last rehearsed the people of Rome chose for Censors. When as by occasion of the Macedonian warre, a greater care was had about the taking of musters, than at other times before, the Consuls found much fault with the common people, and complained unto the Senate, that the young and able men for service being called, would not answere to their names. But C. Sulpitius and M. Claudius two Tribunes of the Commons, maintained the cause against them in the behalfe of the Commons, saying, That it was no hard and difficult matter for Consuls to levie souldiours: marie, for corrupt, affectionate and popular Consuls, it was not so easie a thing, and namely, such as would be sure to enroll no souldiours against their wils. And to the end that the LL. of the Senate might know this to bee a truth, they should see the Pretours (if the Senate were so content, and thought well thereof) whose power of commaund, and authoritie of government wasThe civile Pretours within the citie were allowed but are Lictors, and the provinciail abroad in forraine parts not above sixe ^peece, whereupon Polybius calleth a Pretour (...), where us ech Consull had everie where twelve. lesse than the Consuls, to go through with the musters without empeachment. So that charge was committed to the Pretours with the great assent of the Senatours, but not without some backbiting and detraction of the Consuls. And the Censours for to assist and set forward that affaire, made it knowne, and protested in the full assembly of the people, that they would publish an act, as touching the review and estimate of every mans havoir an habilitie, that besides the ordinarie oth of all citizens, they should sweare to these points in this forme following: Art thou under sixe and fortie yeeres of age? then by vertue of the edict made by the Censours C. Claudius and Tib. Sempronius, comeforth and shew thyselfe  at the musters so often as there shall bee any levie taken: and what Censours soever shall happen to be in place, thou shalt appeare and be enrolled, in case thou wert not a prest souldiour before. Moreover, because the voice went, that many soldiors of the Macedonian legions were absent from the armie, and had obtained large pasports without limitation of return, and that through the corruption and favour of the Generals, they published an edict as touching the souldiours enrolled for Macedonie, when P. Aelius and C. Popilius were Consuls, or anytime after, That as many of them as remained within Italie, after they were enrolled and registred first under their hands, should within thirtie daies repaire againe to their colours into the province: and whosoever of them were at the disposition of father or grandsir, their names should be presented and declared before them. Semblably, they would take knowledge of their causes who were cleane  dismissed and cassed: and look whomsoever they judged to have obtained their discharge by any speciall grace and favour, before they had served out their full time by law required, they would commaund them to be enrolled souldiours againe. By vertue of this edict of the Censors, as also by their letters sent out and divulged abroad in all incorporate townes and places of resort for market and merchandise, there assembled together and came to Rome such a multitude of lustie, young, and able men, that their unusual and extraordinarie number was chargeable and comberous to the citie. Thus besides the former levie taken of those that were to bee sent and emploied in supplie of the old armies, foure legions more were enrolled by C. Sulpitius the Pretour, and within eleven daies the musters were accomplished and ended.
Then the Consuls cast lots for their provinces. For the Pretours had their governments allotted  unto them before, and the sooner, by reason of the civile causes whih required their jurisdictions. The one over the citizens was fallen to C. Sulpitius, the other over forrainers to C. Decimius, M. Claudius Marcellus obtained the regiment of Spain, Serg. Cornelius Lentulus of Sicilie, P. Fenteius Capito ruled Sardinia, C. Martius Figulus had the conduct of the navie. And then, I say, to Q Servilius one of the Consuls fell the government of Italie, and to Q. Martius the other of Macedonie. This Martius so soon as the Latine feasts were solemnised, departed toward his province immediately. After this, upon the motion of Capio to the Senate to know their pleasure, which two legions of the new hee should conduct into Gaule? the LL. ordained, That the Pretours C. Sulpitius and M. Claudius should give unto the Consull, which it pleased them of those legions that they had enrolled. This hee tooke to the heart, that hee a Consull was  thus subjected to the will of the Pretours; yet after the Senate was risen, hee stood waiting at the Tribunall of the Pretours, and required them according to the order set downe by the Senat, to assigne him his two legions. But the Pretors submitted the choise thereof to the Cos. himselfe. This done, the Censors tooke a review of the Senat, and chose new Senators: and M. Aemylius

 Lepidus was elected president of the Senat; and these were the third Senators that made choise of him consequently one after another. Seven were displaced and deposed from their Senators dignitie. Now in taking the number of the people, and in assessing them, they compelled to returne into Macedonie those who were departed from the armie there: and by meanes of this assessement, they soone knew who were absent from their companies: they examined them for what causes they were discharged from soldierie; and whose licence they judged not to be grounded of good and sufficient reason, those they forced to take the militarie oth againe in this maner and forme: According to the edict of C. Claudius and Tib. Sempronius the Censors, thou shalt well and truly sweare, to returne willingly and with all thine heart, into the province of Macedonie; and this shalt thou doe to thy power without fraud or covin. In making the review of  them that served on horsebacke, their censure was executed with great rigour and extremitie. They tooke from many their horses of service: upon which occasion having given offence to the whole estate of knights and gentlemen of Rome, they blew the coales and kindled the fire of illwill and heart-burning against themselves: by a certeine edict of theirs besides, wherby they intimated, That none of them who in the time that Q. Fulvius and Au. Posthumius the Censors had taken to farme the revenews, fruits and profits of the citie, or undertaken at a price the publicke workes and provisions, should be so hardie as to present themselves to their speare set up, either to be fermers or undertakers, no not to bee parteners, or have anything to doe with those that were in such negotiation, commerce and bargaine. The old Publicanes and fermers had oftentimes complained hereof to the Senate: but when they could obtein no comfort from them;  to moderate and abridge this infinite power of the Censors, at length they met with a Tribune of the Commons, one Rutilius, to stand with them and defend their cause; a man who upon a particular and private quarrell of his owne was offended and bare a grudge against the Censors. And this was the occasion: They had commaunded one of his late vassals and enfranchised retainers, to pull downe a wall standing in the street Sacra overagainst a publicke edifice; pretending that the said wall was built upon the cittie ground. The man a private person, called unto the Tribunes for their lawfull helpe and favour: but when as none of them all but onely this Rutisius would meddle in the matter and interpose their helping hand, the Censours sent to straine and take gages for to bind him to answer the cause, and before the bodie of the people intended an action against him, and set a greevous fine upon the head of that partie aforesaid. By meanes  I say of this debate begun upon such an occasion, when as the old publicans betooke themselves for succour to this Tribune, presently there was a bill preferred and subscribed with the name of the said Tribune alone, in this forme, That what publicke revenewes and profites of the State, C. Claudius and Tib. Sempronius had to ferme let for a rent, or what publicke workes and provisions they had put out to bee made and purveied at a price, the same leafes and bargaines should not stand for good but bee cancelled, and new demises drawne and made. Also that it might bee lawfull for all men indifferently either to bee fermers or undertakers of the premisses. And the said Tribune assigned a day for a generall assembly and session, to have this bill to bee cast by the voices of the people. When the day was come, the Censours advaunced and put themselves forward to dissuade and plead against the bill. So long as Gracchus spake, hee was  heard with patience and silence. But at Claudius when he opened his mouth, they hissed and kept a muttering, so as hee was forced by an oiez made by the crier to procure audience: which being made, the Tribune found himselfe grieved and complained, that the people there assembled were withdrawne and called away from him, to the prejudice of his authoritie and honour, and with that flang out of the Capitoll where this assembly was holden. The next day hee kept a great coile and made a foule stirre: first he interdicted the goods of Tib. Gracchus as condemned and accursed, for that in setting a fine, and streining gages of him, who had appealed to a Tribune, and in not obeying and condescending to his opposition, hee seemed to set light by his Tribunes authoritie, and prejudice his reputation. As for C. Claudius, he arrested him to answere at a day, for that he had withdrawne the assembly from him: nay, hee professed that  he would endite both the Censors of treason or felonie in the highest degree, and required of Sulpitius Pretour for the cittizens, a day of assizes for their judicial triall. The Censors refused not to have this matter put to an issue with all speed, and to be tried by the dome of the people. So the time for the hearing and determining of this hainous crime of majestic or treason aforesaid, was assigned thein ante 8 and 7 Calendas Octobris. that is, the 23 and 24 of September. daies immediately before the eight and seventh calends of October. Vpon

this, the Censours incontinently ascended up into the Porch of Libertie: where after they had  made sure and sealed the publicke registers and records, shut up and locked all the offices of the Chauncerie, and discharged for the time the publicke clarkes and proto-notaries attending upon that court, they protested that they would not goe in hand with any publicke affaires of state, beforce the sentence and judgement of the people were passed upon them. The day came, and Claudius; first pleaded his owne cause and spake for himselfe: and when of twelve Centuries that were of gentlemen, eight had found the Censor guiltie and cast him, yea and many other centuries of the first Classis. Then presently, the principall persons of the citie in the very sight of the people, changed their weed, laid away their rings, and went about from one to another in humble manner, to crave the commons to be good unto the Censors. But that which most of at either staied or reversed the definitive dome against him, was (by report) Tib.Gracchus himselfe  the other Censor: for that when the commons cried from all parts, that there was no daunger growing toward Gracchus, hee sware by expresse words, That if this colleague were condemned, hee would (without attending the judgement of the people as touching himselfe) accompanie him into banishment. Howbeit the defendant and accused person, was driven to this neere point and hard exigent of extremitie, that he came within eight centuries of being cast and condemned. Thus when Claudius was acquit, the Tribune said hee would not trouble and molest Gracchus.
This yeer at the earnest suit of the Aquileian embassadors unto the Senat, for to have the number of their colonies encreased; a thousand and five hundred families (by vertue of a decree granted out of the Senate) were enrolled: and for the conducting of them to Aquileia, were sent as  Triumvirs or commissioners these three, to wit, T. Annius Luscus, P. Decius Subulo, and M. Cornelius Cethegus. The same yeere C. Popilius and Cn. Octavius embassadours, who had bene sent into Greece, having first red and published at Thebes the arest and ordinance of the Senate, carried it afterwards throughout all the cities of Peloponnesus, to this effect, That no person should contribute toward the warres, and put into the hands of the Romane magistrates, more than that which the Senate had set downe. This put them in good hope and assurance for the future time, that they should be eased of those charges and expenses, by which they were impoverished and wasted, whiles every one imposed upon them some taxation or other, and never gave them repose. In the Achaean generall counsell holden at Argos, they had audience given them and were heard in gracious sort: from whence leaving this most loiall and faithfull nation in  singular good hope of happie estate for the time to come, they passed into AEtolia. There was as yet no sedition broken out there; but all were in jealousie and suspicion one of another, and full of naturall accusations: in regard of which jarres and troubles, the embassadours onely demaunded hostages, and without any other end made, went directly into Acamania. The Acarnanians graunted unto these embassadours a Diet to bee holden at Tyrrheum: where some debate was betweene the partakers of divers factions. Some principall men of the States, required that there should be garrisons received into their cities, to bridle the wilfull follie of those that enclined to the Macedonian nation: others gainsaied this course, and be sought the contrarie, for feare least that peaceable and confederate citties should be put to receive that disgrace and dishonour, which usually falleth upon knowne enemies and those that are conquered  by foce of armes. And this request was reputed just. Then the embassadours returned to Larissa unto Hostilius the Pro-consull, for from him they were emploied in embassage. Octavius he reteined still with him: but Popilius together with a thousand souldiours or very neere, he sent to Ambracia, there to lodge for the winter time.
Perseus in the beginning of winter durst not go forth of the frontiers of Macedonie, for feare least the Romanes would invade with violence his realm in some place or other, if they found it void and disfurnished. But toward the midst of December about mid-winter, when by reason of the deepe snow the mountaines are unpassable and unsuperable from out of Thessalie, thinking he had then a fit season and opportunities to cut off the hopes and breake the hearts of the neighbour-borderers, that when he should be averted another way and busied in the Romane warre, he might be secured of daunger from them: considering that from the parts of Thracia hee had peace with Corys; and likewise from Epirus side (by the means of Cephalus, who suddainly of late was revolted from the Romans:) moreover having newly vanquished the Dardanians in warres and seeing onely that quarter to infest and annoy Macedonie, which regardeth and asfronteth

Illyricum; and that those Illyrians also were not quiet and at peace, but readie to give entrance unto the Romanes; but if he had subdued and tamed those Illyrians which were next unto him, then king Gentius also, who a long time hung betweene in doubtfull tearmes, might bee induced and drawne wholly into societie with him: he revolved at length, and with ten thousand footemen heavily armed, whereof part were Phalangitae, and other two thousand lightly appointed; and five hundred horse, he made a rode and presented his forces before Stubera: from whence after he had provided himselfe of come to serve for many daies, and given order that the ordinance and engines of batterie should follow after; at the third daies end he lodged neere Vscana, the head cittie of all that land Penestia. But before that he offered any assault, he sent certaine of purpose to sound and sollicite the affections, one while of the captaines of the garrison, and another  while of the townesmen. Now there lay within the cittie, together with the manhood and youth of the Illyrians, a garrison also of the Romanes. And when he saw that they brought no news of any peaceable dealing from thence, he began to bend his forces against them, and assaied to invest them round about, and so to force the cittie. And albeit both night and day without any rest and intermission, they preased upon the inhabitants, and evermore one succeeded another; whiles some reared ladders against the walls, others threw balls of fire against the gates, yet the defendants of the citie held out and endured that furious and violent tempest: because they hoped that neither the Macedonians lying abroad were able any long time to endure the rigor of the cold winter; nor the king on the other side could have so much release and relaxation from the Romane warre, as to stay there and make his abode. But after they perceived once the mantilets  approch, and the frames of turrets and fabrickes erected, their persistance was over-matched and they began to relent. For besides that in plaine force they were the weaker and notable to resist, distressed also they were for want of corn, neither had they store of any other provision, as being taken on a suddaine, and looking for nothing lesse than siege at such a time of the yeere. Therefore when they were past all hope to be able any longer to resist, C. Carvilius Spoletinus and C. Asra^ius were sent from the Romane garrison, to crave of Perseus, first that hee would permit them to depart in their armes, and to carrie with them their bag and baggage: secondly, if they might not obteine so much, that he would but give them assurance of life and libertie. The king was more free and liberall to promise, than fast and faithfull to performe. For after he had commanded them to goe forth, and carrie with them all that was their owne: the fust thing that hee  did was to disarme them and tak away their weapons. ****** They were not so soone departed out of the town,
 but both the company of the Illyrians, to the number of five hundred men, and also the inhabitants of Vscana rendred themselves and their citie. Perseus when he had put a garison in Vscana, led away the whole multitude of the yeelded townsmen (and those were wel-nere as many in number as his own army) and transported them to Stulera: where, after he had sent the Romans (al besides their chieftains) who were 4000 fighting men, into sundrie cities to be kept in wards, and sold the Vscanians and Illyrians; he led his armie back into Penestia, intending to be maister of Oeneum, a town seated otherwise commodiously, and withall it is the very key and highway that openeth passage into the countrie of the Labeates, within the realme of king Gentius, and where he kept his roiall state. As he passed by a strong boroughtown  wel inhabited, named Draudacum, one about him that was well acquainted with the coasts of that countrie, put into his head, that bootlesse it was and to no purpose to win Oeneum, unlesse he had Draudac also in his hands, as being a towne situate more commodiously in all respects. Whereupon he advanced forward, and so soone as ever he presented his armie before it, incontinently all the inhabitants submitted and yeeldeed. Being much animated and encouraged with this surrender of theirs, which they made farre sooner than he hoped or loosed (...); after that he perceived how terrible this redoubled armie of his was, all the way as hee marched hee brought under his subjection eleven other castles and strong holds, upon the like feare that they were put into. Violence he used against very few of them; the rest yeelded willingly: wherein were taken fifteene hundred Romane souldiors, placed there in severall garrisons. In great stead and to very  good use served Carvilius Spoletinus in all their parlies; whoevermore gave it out, that there had bene no crueltie nor rigor exercised upon him and his fellowes. At length the king came before
Oeneum, which could not possibly be woon without a set and full siege. For the town had far more youth and able men within it than the rest, was fortified with a stron^ wall about it and defended of the one side with the river called Artatus, and of the other with an exceeding High

hill, and the same of hard and difficult accesse. All these things considered, the townesmen were  in good hope to be able for to make resistance. Perseus, having entrenched the towne and cast a rampier round about it, began likewise to raise a terrace and mount from the upper part thereof, to that height as might surmount and over-top the walls. But during the time that this peece of worke was in hand and brought to perfection, a great number of the inhabitants within were consumed by divers and sundrie adventures, whiles they skirmished oft and sallied forth, endeavouring both to defend their owne walls, and also to empeach the fabricks and devises of their enemies. And those that remained alive, what with toilesome labour night and day, and what with many a wound, were past all service and good for nothing. So soone as the terrace and mount aforesaid was raised close unto the wall, both the kings cohort (whom they call Nicatores) mounted up into it, and also with ladders the assault was given unto the citie in many  places at once. All that were above fourteene yeeres old hee put to the sword: their wives and small children he cast into prison. The rest of the boorie and pillage fell to the soldiors share. As he returned from thence with victory to Stubera, he sent as embassadors unto Gentius, Pleuratus the Illyrian (a banished person who sojourned with him) and Apateus a Macedonian of Berrhaea. Them hee gave in charge to declare unto Gentius, what he had archieved against the Romans and Dardanians the sommer past, togither with the late exploits performed in that winter expedition; and withall to persuade the king, for to be knit in amitie with him and the Macedonians. These embassadours having transmounted the top of the hill Scordus, and traversed the wilds and wolds of Illyricum, (which the Macedonians of purpose had laid wast and desert, to the end, that the Dardanians might have no easie passage either into Illyricum or Macedonie) after much paine and travaile they arrived in the end at Scodra. Now was king Gentius at Lissus, and thither were these embassadours sent for, where they delivered their message with gracious audience: but they went away with an answer to no effect; namely, That he wanted no will, and his heart was good enough to warre upon the Romanes; but his coffers were emptie, and he lacked money especially, to goe in hand and enterprise that which hee desired. This answer they related unto king Perseus at Stubera, at what time as he was most busie in selling of his captives taken in Illyricum. Then forthwith were the same embassadours addressed againe unto him, accompanied with Glaucias one of the kings guard and squires of his bodie, without any mention made of money, and that was the onely meanes to induce the bare and needie barbarous prince to levie warre. After this, Perseus ransacked the citie Ancyra, and once againe reduced  his armie into the Penestines countrey, and having strengthned the garrisons in Vscana, and in all the forts and peeces about it, he returned into Macedonie.
L. Calius a Romane lieutenant, lay in guard for the defence and rule of Illyricum, who ^urst not stirre so long as king Perseus was in those quarters; but in the end after his departure, hee endeavoured to recover Vscana in the Penestines countrey, but was repulsed from thence by the garison of the Macedonians there, and caried away nothing but many a drie knock and bloudie wound, and so retired with his forces to Lychnidum: from whence, some few daies after, he sent M. Trebellius Fregellanus into the Penestines countrey, with a strong and sufficient power, for to receive hostages of those cities who faithfully had persisted in amitie and friendship. Hee commaunded him also to go forward to the Partines (lor they likewise had covenanted to put in pledges) for that of both these nations, the said hostages might be exacted and gotten without any stirre and trouble. The hostages of the Penestines were sent to Apollonia, but those of the Partines to Dyrrhachium, which in those daies was more usually called by the Greeks, Epidamnus.
App. Claudius, desirous to rase out the blemish and make amends for the dishonour received in Illyricum, set in hand to assault Phanotesa fort of Epirus, having brought thither with him the Athamattes and Thesprotians (over and above the Romane armie) to the number of 6000 men; but he got nothing there but travaile for his paines, by reason that the place was valiantly defended by Gl^vas, left there with a strong garison by K. Perseus. Perseus likewise made an expedition to Elimea; and after he had taken a solemne survey of his armie about it, hee conducted his power to Stratus at the request of the Epitores. This Stratus then, was the strongest cittie of  all AEtolia. Situate it is upon the gulfe of Ambracia, neare the river Achelous. He advaunced thither with ten thousand foot and not above 300 horse: of them hee tooke the fewer with him in number, by reason of the streight passages and rugged waies. Being come at the third daies end so farre as to the mount Citius, after hee had with much difficultie passed over it, the snow

 lay so deepe, that hardly and with much adoe could hee find a convenient place to encampe in. From thence he remooved, more for that he could not there abide and remaine, than for any intollerable way and weather hee met with all in his dismarch and journey forward: so with passing great travaile and trouble, of his beasts especially, the second day he arrived at the temple of Iupiter called Niceus, and there lodged. Then, after he had taken an exceeding long journy, he abode at the river Arachthus, being staied there by reason of the deepe water during which time, he made a bridge over and transported his forces; and when hee was gone a daies journey onward, he encountered on the way Archidamus a principall person of the AEtolians, by whose meanes the citie of Stratus was to be delivered up unto him. And that day hee lodged upon the frontiers of AEtolia: from whence the next morrow hee journeyed as farre as to Stratus;  where, having encamped neere the river Achelous, hee looked that the Aetolians would run out unto him by heaps at all their gates, to yeeld themselves unto his protection: but in stead thereof he found their gates shut, and a garrison of Romanes received into the citie that very night when he came, togither with the lieutenant C. Popilius. For the chiefe of the citie (who induced and enforced by the authoritie of Archidamus whiles he was present in place, had sent for the K.) became more slacke and negligent, by occasion that Archidamus was gone forth to meet with him, and therby gave advantage and opportunitie to the adverse faction, to send for Popilius with a thousand footmen from Ambracia. In verie fit time and to right good purpose came Dinarchus also a captaine of the AEtolian Cavallerie, accompanied with sixe hundred foot and a hundred horse. Knowne it was for certain, that he marched toward Stratus, as intending to band and  take part with Perseus; but changing his mind togither with the turning of fortune, hee joyned with the Romans, and banded against him for whom he set out at the first. Neither was Popilius, among these wavering and inconstant spirits, more secured than he should be: and therfore incontinently gat the keies of the gates into his hands, and possessed himselfe of the guard of the walls. As for Dinarchus and the AEtolians, togither with the youth and able men of Stratus, he bestowed them all in the fortresse, under a colour of guarding the same. Perseus, having assaied to parly with them from the hils which commaunded the higher part of the cittie, finding them perverse and obstinate, and seeing them readie to set him farther off with shot of their darts, encamped five miles off from the cittie, beyond the river Petitarus. There, hee called a councell; in which, Archidamus togither with the revolts and renegates of the Epirotes, exhorted him there  to sojourne and continue: but the chiefrains of the Macedonians contrariwise were of advise, that there was no striving with that troublesome and daungerous season of the yeere, considering their provisions were not readie; and the assailants were like sooner to feele the scarsitie and want thereof, than the defendants: in regard whereof, and especially for that the enemies wintered not far from thence, hee dislodged and remooved to Aperantia. The Aperantians by reason of the great credit and reputation of Archidamus among them; received him with a generall consent. And the same Archidamus was made captaine there over a garison of eight hundred souldiors. And so the king returned into Macedonie, with lesse trouble both of his men and beasts, than he came thither. Howbeit the bruit blowne abroad, that Perseus led his forces against Stratus, caused Appius to levie his siege from before Phanotes. And Clevas with a  brave regiment of lustie men well appointed, followed hard after him, and at the foot of the hiles which were almost unpassable, hee slew well-neere a thousand of them as they marched heavily armed and encombred, and tooke prisoners about two hundred. But after that Appius was passed those streights and come into the plaine called Eleon, he lay encamped there some few dayes: meane whiles Clevas, accompanied with Philostratus the chiefe commaunder of the Epirotes, passed over into the territorie of Antigonea. The Macedonians went about to rob and spoile: but Philostratus with his cohort sate him downe in await, under a covere and hidden place for the purpose. And when as those of Antigonea issued forth in armes, and charged upon the forraiers as they raunged over the fields, and dispearsed in straggling-wise; pursuing  them too eagerly in their flight, they chaunced to engage themselves over farre within the valley where the enemies lay in ambush: and there, to the number of a thousand of them lost their lives, and almost an hundred were taken prisoners. And so the enemies having sped well in all their enterprises, remooved their campe close to that of Appius, to the end that the Romane armie might doe no violence and outrage upon their friends and allies. Thus Appius spending the time in these parts to no purpose, and doing no good, after hee had

discharged the companies of the Chaonians, and as many of the Epirotes as were with him, returned  into Illyricum with his Italian souldiours: and when hee had distributed them among the consederate cities of the Partynians, there to winter, returned himselfe to Rome by occasion of a certaine solemne sacrifice. Perseus sent to Cassandrea for to lie in garrison there, a thousand foot and two hundred horse, whom hee had caused to come againe out of the countrey of the Penestines. And they that returned from Gentius related still the same song from him, yet never rested hee nor gave over to rempt and importune him, sending embassadors after embassadors unto him, knowing right well, that in him rested great importance: yet could not hee by any meanes possible bring the man to expend ought and to be at any charge, in a matter every way of greatest consequence.


THE XLIIII. BOOKE OF THE  HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the Cittie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the foure and fortith Booke.
QVintus Martius Philippus passing through wilds and woods, entered into Macedonie and  surprised many cities. The Rhodians sent embassadors to Rome, threatning to aid Perseus, unlesse the people of Rome would conclude peace and contract amitie with him: whereas was taken great scorne and disdaine. Now when the charge of this wave was committed to L. Aonylius Paulus the Consull now the second time for the yeere following, Paulus before the publike assembly of the people praied unto the gods, that all inselicitie and cursed fortune comming toward the people of Rome, might bee averted from thence, and light upon his owne house. And so having taken a voiage into Macedonie, vanquished Perseus and subdued all Macedonie. A little before he should strike a battel, C. Sulpitius Gallus a martial Colonel, fore-warned the armie that they should not wonder and be troubled in mind at the eclipse of the mome which was to happen the next night following. In like sort Gentius the king of the Illyrians having entred againe into armes, was overcome in field by Anicius the Pretour: and having submissed himselfe unto him, was with his wife, children, and kindred, sent to Rome. From Alexandria there arrived  the embassadors of Cleopatra and Prolomeus king and queene of Aegypt, complaining of Antiochus king of Syria, for that he warred upon them. Perseus having sollicited Eumenes king of Pergamus, and Gentius king of the Illyrians to aid him, was by them abandoned, for that he made not true pairment of money according to his promise.

IN the beginning of that spring which immediately followed the winter wherein these occurrents happened, Q.Martius Philippus the Consull came to Brundusium with five thousand men, whome hee intended to transport over the seas for the supplie of his legions. And M. Popilius (one who had been Consull) and other brave gallants of noble parentage as well as himselfe, followed after the Consul to be martiall-Tribunes in the Macedonian legions. Also about the same time C. Martius Figulus the Pretor, and admirall of the navie, repaired to Brundusium. Who weighing anker, loosed to sea from Italie together, and arrived the next day at Corphu; but the morrow after that, they put within Actium, an haven

 of Acarnania. From thence the Consull set saile for Ambracia, where hee disbarked and travelled by land to Thessalie. But the Pretor having doubled the point of Leucas, entred the gulfe of Corinth; and leaving his vessels at Creusa, journeied likewise by land to Chalcis unto the naval forces, making such expedition that he crossed through the middest of Baeoria in one day. At the same time A. Hostilius lay encamped in Thessalie, neere to Palaepharsalus. Who albeit hee had performed no memorable exploit of warlike feats, yet he had reclaimed his souldiours from all licentious loosenesse where with they were corrupted, and raunged them within good order of militarie discipline. Also by his faithfull carriage in government, hee had entertained and kept the love of the allies still, yea, and protected them from all manner of wrong and injurie. Now when he was advertised of the arrivall of his successour, he assembled with all diligence his  forces both men and horse, and gathered together all armour, as well offensive as defensive: and so with a brave armie right well appointed, he went forth to meet the Consull upon the way. As their first encounter and meeting was honorable, and besitting as well their own reputation as the great estate of the Roman name, so for the managing of the affairs afterwardThe place is here defective, but may be supplied, as Sigonius thinketh, in this manner as you see, betweene these markes[ ] [it was very expedient to the Consull Philip: For the pro-consull turning to his own armie, exhorted the soldiors to performe valiant service; and so when he had delivered it to the Consull, returned to Rome.] Some few daies after the Consull, made an Oration in a solemne audience of all his souldiours: Wherein first hee began with the particide of Perseus, committed upon the person of his owne brother, but projected against his very father.
Then he proceeded forward and declared the wicked and divellish meanes whereby he attained to the crowne, also his practises of poysoning, his  bloudie murders, how hee laid await for king Eumenes his life by way of detestable brigandage and robberie: moreover, the injuries offered to the people of Rome, and the sacking of associate cities against the covenants of accord. All which dealings of his he should find one day (quoth he) by the issue of his affaires, how odious and cursed they are in the sight also of the immortall gods. For the gods are evermore favourable and gracious to pietie and fidelitie, the only means whereby the people of Rome is mounted to that pitch and height of felicitie. Then hee compared the forces of that State which alreadie compassed the round world, with the strength of Macedonie; he set armies to armies, making remonstrance how far greater was the puissance of Philip and Antiochus before, and yet was it defeated utterly by no greater power than the Romans now were able to shew. Having thus enkindled and enflamed the courages of his soldiors by this maner  of exhortation, he began to debate in counsell as touching the principall and maine point of the whole war. And thither repaired unto him from Chalcis, the Pretor C. Martius, after he had taken the charge of the armada and sea-forces. Resolved it was and concluded to make no longer abode in Thessalie, and there to loose time, but presently to dislodge and remove directly into Macedonie: that the Pretour also should endevour and cast, how at one and the selfesame time hee might infest and annoy the sea costs of the enemies. Now after that the Pretor was dismissed and sent away, the Consull commaunded his souldiours to bring every man with him provision for a moneth: and so the tenth day after he had received the conduct of the armie, he removed the campe and set forward. When he had gone a daies journey, he called together the guides, and after hee had commaunded them everyone to declare before the counsell there assembled, which way each  one of them intended to direct the armie, he caused them to void and goe aside: and then debated it was in counsell, which course to take above all others. Some were of opinion to lead by the way of Pythoum; others advised to passe over the Cambunian mountaines, like as the yeere before Hoslilius the Consull conducted his armie; and there were who gave advise to goe neere to the moore and marish of Ascuris. Now there remained yet some part behind of the way, which lay in different still and common to all these places; and therefore their consultation of this point was put over unto the time when they should encampe neere to the parting and division of the said waies. So from thence he led the armie to Perrhaebia, and sat him downe between Azorus and Doliche, for to consult once againe for all, which way to take.
The same time Perseus knowing that the enemie approched, but yet ignorant which way hee  ment to come, determined to beset all the passages with strong guards. Whereupon he sent ten thousand yong and lustie men lightly armed, to the very pitch of the Cambunian hils (which the inhabitants themselves call Volustana) under the conduct of captaine Asclepiodotus. But hee commaunded Hipptas with a power of twelve thousand Macedonians to seize the streights of a certaine sort situate upon the marsh Ascuris, and is called Lapathus. Himselfe in person accompanied

with the rest of the forces, lodged first neere to Dium: but afterwards seeming as if hee  were unprovided of counsell and voide of sense and understanding, hee with his light horsemen made rodes and courses along the strond, one while toward Heraclea, and otherwhiles to Phila; and so backward againe the same way to Dium. In this meane time the Consull resolved fully to lead his armie by that passe, where wee said before that the armie of king Philip encamped sometimes, nere a place called Octolophus. Howbeit he thought good to send out before foure thousand armed men, for to prevent the enemies and bee possessed first of the most commodious places of advantage: this regiment was commaunded by M. Claudius and Q. Martius, the Consuls sonne; and incontinently all the forces in generall followed after. But the way was so sleepe and difficult, so rough, uneven and rugged, that in two daies space, they which were sent before, albeit they were not charged with the carriage of anything, had much a doe to march fifteene myles: where they lodged, and the place which they made choise of was called  the Towre Eudieru. From whence the morrow after they journied seven miles forward, and seized a hill not farre from the enemies campe: where they dispatched a courrier backe to the Consull, to give intelligence, that they were come neere to the enemie, and setled in a place of safetie, commodious also for all purposes; and with all to advise him for to make all possible speed after, for to overtake them and joine together. This messenger encountred the Consull at the Meere Ascurus, when he was greatly perplexed as well for the difficultie of the way which hee was to enter himselfe, as also in regard of the daunger of them whom in so few number hee had sent before, even through the mids of the enemies corps de guards. Where upon he tooke a better heart to himselfe; etc having united all his forces, encamped upon the foresaid hill which his  men alreadie held, on that side which (considering the nature of the ground) was most commodious. And there they might discover within the view of eie, not onely the enemies campe distant from thence little above a mile, but also the whole countrie as farre as to Dium and Phila, yea and all the sea-coast, by reason that the high pitch and top of the mountaine yeelded a prospect farre and neere round about. And this was it that set on fire the souldious hearts, when they beheld the whole weight of the warre, the kings forces altogether, etc the enemies countrie so neere unto them. In which spirit of cheerfulnes when they were earnest with the Consul, and exhorted him to advance directly against the enemies campe, they had but one day granted them to rest after their weari some journey. So upon the third day the Consull leaving part of his forces to guard the campe, led the rest against the enemie. Now had Hippias beene lately sent from the  king to keepe and guard the passage, who since the time that first he espied the Romane campe upon the hill, had prepared the minds of his men to a battaile, and so encountred the armie of the Consull and metit halfe way. The Romanes advanced forth to fight, nimbly appointed; and the enemies likewise were lightly armed, and by reason thereof most fit and provided for to give the charge and begin skirmish. So soone as they astronted and encountred one another, presently they fell to launching of their darts on both sides. Many a wound was given and received of the one part as well as the other by their rash charging at randon, and few of both sides were shine. Thus were their stomackes whetned etc edged against the morrow; and then had they skirmished and maintained fight with greater forces and more deadly fewed, if the ground would have served them to have displaied their battaillons at large: but the top of the mountaine was streight, and  arose to a sharp crest in forme of a coine or wedge; and hardly assourded roume enough for three rankes of armed men affront; and therefore when some few were in fight, all the rest, and specially they that were heavily armed, stood as lookers on. As for the light armour of the one part, they would run forth at the broken cragges of the hill, and ever from the sides joine battaile with the like of the other part; yea and find means to charge their enemie, were the (...) or uneven, it skilled not whether. But after that, more that day also were wounded (...), the night at length parted the fray. The third day, the Romane Generall was to seeked (...) not what to doe; for neither could he stay any longer upon that hill, for want of all the (...) back from thence it was not possible, without dishonor etc danger both. Moreove^ (...) red, the enemie might prease upon him from the upper ground with advantage. The (...) therefore no other means but to amend that which was audaciously enterprised, (...) and hardy persistance in execution; a thing that other whiles proveth well in the end, (...) ceeded from wise and deliberat counsell. And verily to this hard passe and difficult tearm^ (...) were come, that if the Consull had bene to deale with an enemie like to any of the Macedonian

 kings in old time, he might soone have received a great foile and overthrow. But king Perseus as he coasted and ranged with his cavallerie upon the strond nere Dium (albeit for the space of twelve miles wel-nere, he heard the cries and shouts of them that were in fight;) neither reenforced the companies by sending fresh souldiours in place of the wearied, nor shewed himselfe in person at the battaile: (which had bene a thing, I assure you, of most importance) whereas the Romane Generall being above three score yeeres of age, corpulent besides and unweldie, performed himselfe right lustily all militarie services of a valiant warrior; persisting in that to the very end most bravely, which he had begun and enterprised so boldly; and having lest Popilius for to guard the hill top, passed over places that had no tracts at all to direct them, by sending out before, certain men of purpose to scoure and prepare to make passage. As for Attalus and Misagenes, hee commaunded  them both, with the auxiliarie souldiours of their owne nation to guard them that opened the way before. Then hee putting before him in the march the horsemen with the baggage, came behind with the legionarie footmen in the rereguard. No tongue is able to expresse what a toile and painfull labour they found in going down the hill, the sumpter horses with their packes and carriages tumbled so downe one with another: in so much as when they had scarcely gone foure miles forward, they wished in their hearts nothing more, than to returne the way they came, if it had bene possible. The elephants troubled the march as much in manner as the enemies could: for when they were come to a place where they could see no way, downe they cast their riders and governours, laying them along on the earth, and with the horrible braying that they made, affrighted their horses especially, untill such time as a devise was found for  their passage. They began first to make the head or entrance of a bridge at the very brow and edge of a steepe downefall: this done, in the lower ground beneath, they set fast in the earth good strong and long posts of wood, two by two distant one from the other traverse-wise little more than the largenes of one of those beasts. Vpon which rested fast joined [with tennon and morteise] certain rafters like wal-plats 30 foot in length, and those being couched with planks crosse over in forine of a bridge, had earth and mould cast thereupon. A little way off beneath it, such another bridge was made; and so a third likewise, and many more consequently according as the craggie ground was broken and uneven. Now the Elephant from the firme ground entred upon the first bridge aforesaid; but before he was gone as farre as to the foot and end therof, the posts above named were cut a two underneath; to the end that the bridge might fall, and in the easie  reeling therof the beast also gently slide; as it were, and be carried therewith as farre as the head of a second bridge. Thus some of them glid and kept themselves standing upright on their feet, others rested upon their buttockes. Againe, when they were come to the plaine and levell floure of another such like bridge, by the fall of it in manner aforesaid they were driven unto a third bridge beneath it, untill such time as they were come to a more plaine and even valley. In this order the Romanes could rid little more than seven miles that day. And the least part thereof went they upright on their feet, but were faine most-what to tumble and roll over and over with their armour and fardels about them: and thus they gat forward in all kind of paine and trouble; in such sort, that he who induced them to this journey and conducted them therein, could not denie but the whole armie (with a small power comming against them) might utterly have ben  defaited. By night they arrived at a pretie plaine; but the place beeing so enclosed on all sides, they had no space and roume to view round about, whether it were daungerous or no. At length after much adoe and beyond their expectation, they met with a firme peece of ground, whereas as they might take sure footing; and there they were forced the morrow following to attend in the hollow valley the comming of Popilius and the companies left with him; who also were exceedingly sore vexed and plagued with the roughnesse of the way, albeit the enemies troubled and affrighted them no whit at all. The third day, after they had joined their forces together, they tooke their way through a passe, which the inhabitants call Callipeuce. The fourth day they passed over a place that had no more meanes to direct them, than the other before; but by use and experience they were growne more skilfull: and better hope they had, for that the enemie  in no place appeared, but approached neare to the sea. When they were come once downe into the plaines between Haracetus and Lebethrus, the footmen (whereof the greater part kept the hills) pitched their tents and tooke up the valley, and a good part of the plaine wherein the horsemen should quarter. As the king was bathing himselfe, it is said that word came, How the enemies were neere at hand: at which newes he was so skared, that he leapt from out of his bathing

vessell, and in hast gat him out of the bame, crying aloud, That hee was vanquished without  drawing sword and stroke given: neither wist hee for feare which way to turne him, taking sundrie counsels one in the necke of another, and commaunding he knew not what, sometime this and sometime that. In this perplexitie hee sent for Asclepiodorus (one of his two especiall friends) out of the place where he lay in garrison, to goe to Pella where all his money and treasure lay; and by this meanes opened all the avenues for the Romanes to make warre. Himselfe, after he had in great hast bestowed and piled up in his ships, all the gilden images at Dium, to the end that the enemie should make no prize of them, caused with all speed possible to trusse up and to remoove to Pydna; and hereby gave occasion, that the enterprise of the Consull which might have seemed rashnesse (in that he had engaged himselfe so farre, that he could not possibly retire againe without leave of the enemie) prooved in the end no inconsiderate and unadvised  designment. For now the Romanes had the choice of two passages through which they might escape away; the one, by Tempe into Thessalie; the other into Macedonie, by the way neere Dium: both which before were held by the kings guards. So as if a resolute and fearlesse captaine could have held out and endured but one ten daies the first apparence and shew of terror that approached, the Romanes could neither have returned into Thessalie by Tempe, nor found way for conveiance of provision and victuals to the place they were. For Tempe is of it selfe a difficult passage, even without any force of armes to make it daungerous. And why? besides the straight gullet five miles in length, yeelding a very narrow way for one beast to goe charged with burden; the rocks of either hand are so steepe and upright, that hardly a man is able to looke downe from them, but his eyes will dazle, his braines turne, and his head be giddie  withall. Moreover, the sound and noise, yea and the depth of the river Peneus running directly through the mids of the valley, encreaseth the feare so much the more. This place, so petillous of it owne nature, had beene holden and guarded with the kings ga^^isons in foure severall and distant places. The one kept at the verie first entrance, neere to Connus; the second at Condylos, a fort imprenable; the third about Lapathus, which also they call Charax; and the fourth was placed even upon the verie avenue it selfe, about the mids of the valley, where it is at the streightest, and which may be easily defended with ten men, if there were no more. In this maner (I say) the passage being stopped up by Tempe, as wel for portage of provisions thither as for returne from thence, the Romans must perforce have retired again up to the same mountains from whence they were descended. But as they came down and were not discovered, so being (...) they could not possibly have gained them again in open view, considering that the enemies had possessed the tops of the mountains; and no doubt, the difficultie therof besides, which they had tried already, would have cut off all hope of that adventure: so as, being waded thus far into this rash enterprise, there remained no meanes else for them, but to have passed through the mids of the enemies at Dium, for to escape and pierce into Macedonie: an adventure no doubt, (if the gods had not berest the king of his right wits) most difficult and dangerous unto them. For it being so, that from the foot of the mountain Olympus unto the sea, there is little above a mile space betweene: the one halfe whereof, is taken up with the mouth of the river Bophyins; which in this place spreadeth very broad and large; and another part of the plaine; either the temple of Iupiter or the towne it selfe occupieth: the rest besides, being but a verie small place, might have been enclosed and made fast against them with a little trench and rampier^ besides, such store there was of stone readie at hand, and of timber out of the forest, that they might either have raised a mure, or framed turrets and such like fabricks in their way. But the king (whose spirit and understanding was blinded with sodain fear) fore-seeing none of all these things; but diffurnishing every fort of their garisons, made open passage for the current of war, and fled himselfe to Pydna. The Consull perceiving that he had gotten great advantage and many hopes by the follie and negligence of his enemie, dispatched a currier back toward Larissa unto Sp. Lucretius, willing him to seize those forts into his hands about Tempe, which were abandoned by the enemie: and after he had sent Popilius before in spiall to discover all the passages about Dium, and perceived that the avenues were open in all parts, hee marched forwards himselfe, and by the  second gift came to Dium; where he commaunded to encampe under the very temple, to the end, that no violent outrage should be committed in that holy place. Himselfe in proper person entred into the citie, which as it was not great, so it was garnished with faire publick buildings, beautified with a number of goodly images, and passing well fortified besides: in so much as he

 could not well beleeve, that things of such importance were abandoned for nothing, but that there was some secret deceit and treacherie lurking underneath. After hee had staied there one full day, to espie and see that all coasts were cleere the dislodged and marched on: and supposing verily that he should be provided of sufficient store of graine, he advanced forward that verie day to the river named Mytis. The morrow after, he tooke possession of the citie Agassa, which the inhabitants willingly rendred unto him. And to win the hearts of all other Macedonians, (contenting himselfe onely with hostages) he promised to leave them their citie cleere without a garrison; and to permit them to live under their owne lawes, without paiment of any tribute. Being marched onward one daies journey from thence, hee pitched downe his tents fast upon the river Ascordus: but feeling and finding still (the farther he went from Thessalie) more and  more want of all things, he recited backe to Dium; and then all men saw plainly and made no doubt, to what streights hee should have been driven, in case he had been cleane shut out from Thessalie, considering that it was not safe for him to remove far from thence where he was.
Perseus having rallied all his forces, and assembled his captaines into one place, checked and ratled up the captains of the garrisons and guards aforesaid over the passages: but above all he rebuked Aschepiodosus and Hippius most, saying, that those two had betraied unto the Romanes the port gates into Macedonie: whereas indeed no man was more justly to be blamed for that, than his owne selfe.
The Consull after he had discovered a farre off from sea a fleet of Romane ships, conceived good hope that vessels were comming charged with provision of victuals (for now in his campe.  the dearth was great, and brought they were alreadie to extreame want and fearsitie.) But hee was advertised by them who were entred within the harbour, that the hulkes and ships of burden were left behind at Magnesia. Whereupon, being in great doubt what to doe (so hard went all things with him for the present, that hee had worke ynough to wrestle with that onely difficultie, without being farther encombred with any empeachment from the enemie) be hold-in happie time, (...) were brought unto him from Sp. Lucretius, importing thus much; That hee was master of all the forts and holds planted upon. Tempe and round about Phila, where he had found great plentie of corne and other necessaries. The Consull right joious for these good tidings, set his (...) on foot from Dium to Phila, as well to strengthen the garison there, as also to deale corne among his souldiours; which would have required a long time ere it could have beene brought  over to them at Dium.
That departure and journey of his was nothing wel spoken off for some gave out, that the Generall reculed from the enemie for very feare; because that if he had staied there still, he should have been forced to a battaile: others said, that he had no skill in warre, neither in those occurrents, which fortunes wheele turning about altereth every day, offering one new thing or other; who when occasions and opportunities were presented unto him, let the same slip out of his bands, which soone after might not possibly he recovered againe. And verily, he had not so soon (...) the possession of Dium, but he (...) and wakened the enemie, and put in his head now at length to regain those matters, which had ben lost before through his own default. For hearing than the Consull was departed, he returned immediatly to Dium; where he repaired whatsoever  had been demolished and ruinate by the Romans: the battlements of the wals which were cast downe he set up againe in the right place; and in all parts fortified the mure and bulwarks of the citie. Which done, he encamped five miles off on this side Enipeus, intending that the river it selfe (which is verie hard to be passed over) should serve him in stead of a rampier and trench of defence. This river runneth out of the vale from under the mountaine Olympus, and in sommer season is small and shallow, but in winter it riseth high and spreadeth broad by reason of raine: running also with a forcible current and streame, it surmounteth great rockes, and among those stonie crags and shelves maketh many whirlpits: by occasion likewise, that from thence it carrioth away with it into the sea, store of earth, there are many gulfes of exceeding depth: and by reason that it hath eaten a hollow channell in the mids, the banks of ech side are verie high and steep  upright. Perseus, supposing that by the meanes of this river, the enemies were debarred from all passage, purposed in his mind to hold off, and drive out the rest of the sommer in that fort.
But the Consull in the meane while sent Popilius from Phila into Heraclea with two thousand armed fighting men. This Heraclea standeth about five miles from Phila, situate in the mid-way betweene Dium and Tempe, upon a rocke that commaundeth this river. Popilius, before that he

caused his men to approch the walls, sent certaine persons of purpose to persuade the magistrats  and cheese of the citie, to make proofe of the faithfull protection and clemencie of the people of Rome, rather than to trie their rigor and violence. But this motive and advise availed not, because they might discerne the fires from out of the kings campe neere to Enipeus: whereupon, both from the land and sea-side (for the fleet also being thither arrived ankered neere the shore) as well by force of armes as by fabrickes and engines of batterie, they began to assaile the towne. Moreover, certaine young and lustie Romane souldiours (making use now in warre of the exercise which they had practised in the games Circenses) gat over the wal where it was lowest. The maner was in those daies (before this wastfull prodigalitie came up of filling the whole cirque or shewplace with beasts set out of all countries) to devise and seek sundrie forts of publick sights and spectacles to behold; and not in running one course with the chariot, and another on horsebacke, and so  an end, to employ in both races hardly the space of one full houre. Among other seats of activitie exhibited, the maisters and wardens of those exercises and games, brought into the race commonly 60 (and otherwhiles more) lustie young men in armes well appointed. Their training in part represented a shew and apparance of two armies encountering and charging one another, in part also the use and practise of a more gentle and elegant exercise than militarie prosession, and comming neerer to the handling and managing of weapons after the order of sword-sencers. These young gallants, after they had performed other ordinarie runnings and courses, put themselves in a foure-square squadron, with their bucklers or targuets close couched and joined together over their heads, in this manner: They that were formost in the front stood bolt uptight; the second ranke stouped somewhat lower under the other; the third course more than they, and so the fourth, untill the hindmost kneeled on their knees: and by this meanes they resembled a pavoisade rising up higher and higher, like the pent-house or rouse of aedifices. This done, two men well armed, fetching their run filtie foot or there about backeward from thence, and seeming to defie and challenge one another, mounted the foresaid pavoisade, and ran from the nether end up to the top upon those targuets so jointly united and set close and thick together and one while they set their countenance as though they would defend the sides and edges thereof, other whiles in the mids they seemed to performe their devoir and maintaine combat one with another, as upon firme and steadie ground. Like for all the world to this, was there a pavoisade framed and brought close to one part of the wall: and when armed men were mounted upon it, they that stood upon the verie ridge thereof, were as high full as the defendants which kept  the wall: who being once beaten backe and turned downe, two ensignes of souldiours gat over into the citie. The onely difference betweene this pavoisade and the other above described was this, that they onely who stood in the front before and in the flankes, bare not their targuets aloft above their own heads, because their sides and bodies should not be naked and exposed to hurt, but carried them before, after the usuall manner of fighting men in a battaile. By which meanes, neither the arrowes and darts discharged from the wall hurt them affront, nor the shot that light upon their targuet-fence tooke any hold, but glaunced and glid downeward from the top without doing any harme, like to raine water that shooteth from the ridge of an house, and runneth downe the caves. The Consull likewise, now that Heraclea was woon, advaunced forward with his armie thither, pretending as though hee marched toward Dium, and as if after  hee had chased and driven the king from thence, hee minded to passe forward also into Pieria But preparing now against winter, he commaunded to make the waies fit and handsome, for the cariage of provision out of Thessalie, and to chuse out commodious places for garners: also to build certaine houses, wherein they that brought the provision, might lie in couvert and lodge commodiously. Perseus in the end having taken heart againe and gathered his wits together, upon that late fright which had amazed his spirits, wished then with all his heart, that his commaundements had not been obaied, at what time as in a fearefull fit hee gave expresse charge to cast the treasure into the sea at Pella, and to set on fire the arcenall at Thessalonica. Andromicus being sent for the same purpose to Thessalonica made no hast to execute his will, but trifled out the time for the nonce, leaving the king some respite to repent, as it fel out indeed. Nicias was not  so provident and well advised at Pella, in throwing away some part of the money which he there found: howbeit hee thought his fault such, as might in some sort be remedied and amended, for that, all the said treasure in maner was recovered by the means of certain dyvers that fished for it under water, and fetcht it up from the bottome of the sea. But the king himselfe was so ashamed

 of this foolish feare, that in a melancholie hee commaunded those poore dyvers to bee secretly murdered, yea, and afterwards Andronicus and Nicias also; to the end, that no person should remaine alive that was privie to that sottish commaundement of his.
Amids these affaires, C. Martius having losed to sea from Heraclea, and with his fleet sailed to Thessalonica, landed his armed souldiors in divers places of the shore, and made wast in the territorie al about: and when they made sallies out of the citie and charged upon him, after some fortunat skirmishes he chased them backe and beat them within the walls. So as at length he terrified the towne it selfe: but not onely they, who raunging up and downe here and there, unadvisedly approched the walls, were wounded with shot discharged out of instruments of all sorts, planted upon the walls; but those also who were in the ships, were hurt with stones, weighed and  levelled from engines a farre off. Vpon which occasion hee commaunded his souldiours to retire a shipbourd, and leaving the siege of Thessalonica, they passed from thence to Aenia, a cittie fifteene miles off, situate in a fertile soile just over against Pydna. When they had spoiled the territorie lying to that cittie, they coasted along the shore, and arrived at Antigonia. Where, being set a land, first they spoiled the countrey in every quarter, and brought good store of prizes to their ships: but afterwards, as they stragled out of order and disbanded, the Macedonians, as well footmen as horse, ran upon them, and chased them as they fled apace to the sea-side; in which rout they slew upon a five hundred, and tooke as many prisoners. And nothing els provoked the courages of the Romanes (in regard as well of utter despaire otherwise to save themselves, as of the indignitie it selfe, so to hazard their honour) but onely the extreame necessitie wherein they  stood, having no meanes to recover their ships in safetie. Whereupon they turned head, and renewed the fight upon the very sea strond. They also who were a shipbourd, succoured and helped them. In which conflict, two hundred Macedonians lost their lives, and as many were taken prisoners. From Antigonea the fleet weighed anker, and made head toward the territorie of Pallene, where the souldiours were set on shore to spoile the countrey. This territorie appertained to the confines of the Cassandreans, the most fruitfull tract of all those parts which they had coasted and sailed by. There, king Eumenes being departed from Elea with twentie warre ships met with them, and likewise five other couvert ships were sent from king Prusias. The Pretour seeing this good encrease and addition of his forces, took a better heart unto him, even to besiegeCassiandrea^ Cassandrea. This citie was built by king Cassander, in the very streight and gullet which joineth the territorie  of Pallene with the rest of the Macedonian countrey, enclosed of the one side with the Toronian sea, and on the other with the Macedonian. For there lyeth out a banke or shelfe like a tongue into the sea, upon which the cittie standeth, and beareth into the deepe, no lesse in compasse and quantitie than is the mountaine Atho. It butteth full against Magnesia, with two promontories of unequall bignes; of which the greater is called Posideum; the lesse Canastrium. This town they began to assaile in two divers parts. The Roman (Pretor) drew his fortification to a place called Clitae, opposing certaine strong forked stakes for to debar and shut up the way from the Macedonian sea to the Toronian. On the other side there is an Euripe or arm of the sea, from which quarter Eumenes gave the assault. The most trouble and toile that the Romans found,  was in damming and filling up the trench, which Perseus had cast against them a little before. And as the Pretor enquired where the earth was bestowed which was throwne out of the trench aforesaid, because he could see no heapes thereof any where, there were shewed unto him certaine vaults and arches within, which bewraied a new wall, not built to the thickenesse of the old, but with perpend worke, laid with one course of bricke and no more. Whereupon hee resolved to pierce through the said wall, and so to make way into the citie. The which hee thought to execute and performe without beeing discovered, in case hee skaled the wall in another quarter, and by making a shout and alarme there, withdrew all the defendants of the citie to the guard of that one place. There lay in garrison at Cassandrea (besides a sufficient number of serviceable yong men of the citie) eight hundred Agrianes, and two thousand Penestians of Sclavonie, sent from thence by Pleuratus: and both these nations are hardie warriours. Whiles these defended  the walls manfully, and the Romans endevoured with all their might to mount over, the thin walls of the vaults and arches aforesaid were wrought and digged through in the turning of an hand, and gave enterance into the citie. Now if they who brake in, had ben armed (as they were but pioners) the towne had been taken at that instant. But when as the souldiours heard news, that the said worke was finished, they suddainely set up a cheerefull shout for joy, being readie, some in

one place and some in another to rush into the cittie. The enemies at the first wondred what the  meaning should be of that soddain crie: but the captains of the garison, Pytho and Philippus Proco, being once advertised that the towne lay open, supposing that herein consisted the vantage, who could first prevent the other and give the charge, sallied forth with a strong band of Agrians and Illyrians: and whiles the Romans rallied themselves some from this place, and others from that, and were called together for to enter the cittie with banner displaied, they set upon them unreadie as they were and not ranged in any good order, put them to flight and chased them as farre as to the trench, where they overthrew them, and laid them one upon another by heapes. Sixe hundred or very neere were there killed: and all in manner whome they could reach betweene the wall and the trench were sore hurt. The Pretour thus overtaken in his own enterprise, was not so hastie as to project any new dessignes; neither sped Eumenes any better, albeit at one time he  assaulted the cittie both by land and sea. Whereupon they accorded both, to set good strong guards, for to impeach the passage of al garisons out of Macedonie thither; and (since apert force tooke no better effect) to assaile the walls with fabrickes and engines. As they were busie in preparation thereof, there arived ten frigots of the kings, sent from Macedonie with certaine select auxiliarie Gaules. These when they perceived their enemies ships riding at anchor, sailed in single raunge one after another, as close as possible they could to the shore in the darke night, and so entred the cittie. The bruite that went of this new succour and garrison, forced as well the Romanes as the king to give over the siege; so fetching a compasse about the promontorie, they arrived before Torone. And when they began to lie against it, after they perceived once that there was a valiant companie there to defend it, they abandoned their enterprise without effect, and sailed to Demetrias. Being approched thither, and seeing the walls full of armed men, they passed by and anchored at Ioscos: intending after they had spoiled the territorie, to set upon Demetrias. Meanwhile, the Consull also because he would not sit still doing nothing in the enemies countrie, sent M. Popilius with five thousand souldiours to give the assault to the citie Melebaea. Seated it is at the foot of the mountain Ossa, on that side which looketh to Thessalie, and very fitly for the purpose commandeth Demetrias. The first arrivall of the enemies put the inhabitants of the place in great affright; but after they had recovered their spirits daunted with so unexpected fear, they ran in arms to the gates, and up to the wals, where they doubted and suspected any place like to give entrance; and incontinently cut off all hope from the enemies, that it could possibly be forced at the first assault. Whereupon they prepared to lay siege unto it, and began  to make fabrickes and engines to batter the walls. Perseus having intelligence, that in one instant both Melibaea was beleaguered by the Consull, and also that the fleet anchored before Iolcos, to the intent that from thence he might go in hand to assaile Demetrias: sent Euphranor one of his captaines, with a chosen regiment of two thousand souldiours to Melibaea; with this charge and direction, That if hee could raise the siege from Melibaea and force the Romans to depart, he should march secretly to Demetrias, and put himselfe within the towne, before the Romanes could remoove from Iolcos and advance before the citie. The assailants of Melibaea discovering him with his forces all at once upon the higher places, quit their fabrickes and engines in fearefull hast, and set them all on fire; and thus they departed from before Melibaea. Euphranor having levied the siege from this one cittie, forthwith led his armie to Demetrias. And then the citizens  assured themselves, that they should be able not only to defend the citie against the siege, but also to save their territorie from wast and spoile: and so they made sallies upon the forragers dispearsed loosely here and there, not without drawing bloud of their enemies. Howbeit the Pretour and the king rode about the walls, and viewed the situation of the towne, if peradventure they could espie any one place which they were like to force, either with batterie of engines or force of armes. The voice went, that by the means of Cydas the Cretensian, and Antiochus governour of Demetrias, there was a treatie of peace and amitie betweene Philip and Eumenes. But howsoever it was, this is certeine, both Eumenes and the Pretour departed from Demetrias. As for Eumenes, he sailed to the Consull, and testified unto him the joy that he conceived for his safe and prosperous entrance into Macedonie; and from thence returned to Pergamus  into his owne realme. But Martius Figulus the Pretour, when hee had sent part of his fleet into the harbor of Sciathus there to winter, with the rest of his ships went to Oreum in Boeotia: supposing it a most commodious citie, from whence victuals and all provisions might be sent to the armies that abode either in Macedonie or Thessalie. As touching Eumenes, sundrie authors

 have written diversly. If a man should goe by Valerius Antias and beleeve him, hee reporteth, that neither the Pretour had any helpe from him by his nauie, notwithstanding that oftentimes he had sent for him by his letters; nor tooke his leave of the Consull in good tearmes with favour, at what time as hee was to depart into Asia, as beeing highly displeased, that hee was not permitted to quarter with him in one and the same campe; in so much as he could not possibly bee entreated by him, to leave behind that Cavallerie of Gaules which he had brought thither with him. As for Attalus his brother, hee remained still with the Consull (as Valerius saieth) and continued syncere, fast, and faithfull unto him without any change and alteration; yea and performed right good service in all that warre.
During these warres in Macedonie, there came embassadours from beyond the Alpes to  Rome, sent from a petie king of the Gaules (Balanos he had to name, but of what linage hee was descended it is not recorded) promising aid to the Macedonian warre. Thanked they were from the Senat, and presents were sent unto them: to wit, a chaine of gold weighing two pound; certain golden cups of foure pound weight, a brave courser barbd and trapped, and an horsemans armour. After these Gaules were gone out of place, the embassadours of Panphylia brought with them into the Senate a golden crowne, valewed at 20000 Philip-peeces of gold: their request was, that they might be permitted to set up the said present and oblation in the chappell of Iup. Opt. Max. and likewise to sacrifice within the Capitol. Their petition was graunted: and when these embassadours were desirous to renew the amitie betweene them and the Romanes, they received a gracious answere, and had of them a reward sent of two thousand Asses. Then the embassadors  of king Prusias, and anone after, others from the Rhodians had audience; who of one and the same argument discoursed diversly; for both tended to one thing, namely a treatie for reconcilement of peace betweene the Romanes and king Perseus.
Prusias seemed to intreat rather than to demand: protesting that he had ever to that day stood with the Romans in that war; and willingly would friend them still to the very end thereof: but since that, there came embassadors unto him from Perseus, and dealt with him to make an end of the warre betweene him and the Romanes; and for that he promised them to be a mediatour and intercessor for him to the Romanes; therefore his request was unto them (if they could so find in their harts) to stint their anger, and so they should use him in any service, as one that would acknowledge himself beholden unto them for a favor; in effecting this attonement and reconciliation. In this maner (I say) spake the king his embassadors.  But the Rhodians contrariwise, in a proud humor of theirs, reckoned up a beadroll of their demerits toward the people of Rome, attributing the greater part (beleeve mee) of the victorie of king Antiochus to themselves: moreover they added and said, that when the Macedonians and Romanes were at peace, they began to enter into league and amitie with king Perseus: which they had interrupted and discontinued against their will; not upon any desert or occasion given of his part, but onely because it pleased the Romanes to drawe them into the association of the war. Three yeeres now alreadie (say they) have we felt the smart of this war and lived by the losse; by reason that the seas are shut up from us, and our Iland is decaied and distressed for need and want, having lost our tollage and customes yssuing from the seas: which we not able to endure any longer, have addressed other embassadours to Perseus into Macedonie to intimate unto him,  that the Rhodians will and pleasure was, that he should grow to a composition and bee at peace with the Romans. Our selves also are sent to Rome to declare the same: and likewise to denounce, That whosoever shall impeach and hinder this course tending to pacification, the Rhodians will consider of them accordingly, and bethinke how they are to proceed against them. I am verily persuaded, that there is no man at this day, who can heare or read this, but his stomacke will rise thereat with indignation; guesse then thereby how the LL. of the Senate of Rome were affected and touched as then, at the hearing thereof. Claudius mine author saith, That there was no answere at all given unto them. Onely an arest or decree of the Senate was read before them, importing thus much, That by order from the people of Rome, the Carians and Lycians were made free: and presently were letters dispatched to both nations to  signifie so much unto them. Which when the principall person of the embassage once heard, even hee, whose big and brave words a little before, the whole Senate-house was hardly able to containe, fell downe flat before them in a swoune and extasie.
Other Historians write, that this answere was returned, That the people of Rome at the verie beginning of this warre, knew assuredly (by intelligence given from persons of right good credite) how the Rhodians had secretly

complotted with Perseus against the state of Rome: and if there had ben some doubt therof  before, yet the words of the embassadors erewhile delivered, made all cleere and put it past peradventure: and no mervaile, since that for the most part it falleth out, that such cautelous practises howsoever at the first they are covertly and cleanly caried, yet one time or other are be wraied and discovered. Let the Rhodians send their messengers over the world and spare not; let them make themselves judges to determine of war and peace at their pleasure: as for the Romans, they will take armes in hand, and lay them downe againe at the will and appointment of the gods in heaven. We are well holpen up now in deed, if wee must have the gods no more to be witnesses of our accords, but the Rhodians forsooth. And must the Romans (I would not else) be ruled by them, and withdraw their forces out of Macedonie? They, will consider and advise themselves how to proceed against us! How shall wee doe then? What the Rhodians will see to, well may  they perhaps themselves know: but the people of Rome (that is certaine) will consider indeed and resolve, after that Perseus is vanquished (which they hope will not be long first) to recompence and require every citie and state according as they have deserved in the service of this war. As sharpe as this answer was, yet they sent a reward to these embassadors, to every one of them 2000 asses; but none would they receive.
After this, were the letters read of Q. Martius the Consull, conteining thus much, namely, How he had passed over the streights of the forest, and was come into Macedonie; where he had provision of victuals which the Pretour had given order for out of other places to serve for winter: and besides, had taken up of the Epirotes twentie thousand Modij of wheat and ten thousand of barley, for which corn they should make mony readie at Rome to centent their embassadors. Also that they must send from Rome souldiours liveries and other apparell: and need hee had besides of two hundred horse or thereabout, especially of Numidia; for that in those parts hee had no plentie of any thing. Hereupon an act was granted out of the Senat, That all these things should be done according to the tenor of the Consull his letters. So C. Sulpitius the Pretor bargained for the transporting over into Macedonie of six hundred side cassocks and thirtie thousand short coats or jackets, togither with horses; for to be disposed and distributed at the discretion of the Consull: and besides paied the embassadours of the Epirotes good money for their graine. He brought also into the Senate, Onesimus the son of Pytho a noble personage of Macedonie. This man was evermore of counsel with the K. persuading him to peace; and admonished him, that like as his father Philip before him, observed an order even to the time of death to read  over twise a day from point to point the instrument of the accord and covenants betweene him and the Romans; so he also would take up that good custome and practise the same, if not so continually, yet at leastwise many a time and often. But when he could by no meanes skare him nor avert his mind from warre, hee began at first to withdraw and absent himselfe, alledging for his excuse one while this occasion and other-whiles that, because hee would not be present at the debating of those matters which he approoved not: and in the end perceiving that he was had in some jealousie, and otherwhiles charged to be a traitor, he changed his allegeance, revolted to the Romans, and served the Consull in right good stead. This Onesimus beeing (as is before said) brought into the Senat-house, related all these premisses-whereupon the Senat ordained, That he should be enrolled formally in the number of allies: also, that he should bee provided of a  lodging, and his ordinarie expences for the time allowed at the citties charge. Moreover, that two hundred acres of land in the territorie of Tarentum, which was confiscate unto the people of Rome, should be set out for him; and a messuage in Tarentum bought for his habitation. To see all this performed, C. Decimius the Pretor had in charge.
The Censors upon theIdibus Decembras. thirteenth of December, tooke a survey of the number of citizens and an estimate of their goods, more straightly than aforetime. Many were unknighted and had their horses taken from them; and P. Rutilius among the rest, who when hee was Tribune of the commons, had been their accuser and called them so violently to reckoning: degraded hee was besides and displaced out of his owne tribe, and made no better than a verie labourer in the citties workes. Whereas the one moitie of the cities revenues and profits for that yeere, was set by  and allowed unto them by the treasurers (according to an ordinance of the Senat) Tib. Sempronius out of the mony assigned unto him, purchased the house of P. Asricanus, on thepane Veteres. back side of the old Curiae neere the image of Fortunus: the shops also wherein they sold wooll and the other adjoining therto, all to the use of the city. He caused likewise the stately pallace or hal to be

 built, which afterwards was called Sempronia Basilica.
Now was the yeere come about and well-neere at an end, when by reason of the great care principally about the Macedonian war, men began to talke, whom they were to create for Consuls against the next yeere, to atchieve and end the said warre? Whereupon there passed a decree of the Senate, That Cn. Servilius with all speed possible, should make hast to Rome for to hold the generall assembly of election. This decree Sulpitius the Pretor within few daies after read to the Consull, to the end that hee should repaire home into the cittie before the day prefixed. Whereupon both the Consull hastened; and the said election also was finished by the day appointed. Consuls these were created, L. Aemylius Paulus the second time (even fourteene yeeres after his former Consulship) with C. Licinius Crassus. The day following were the Pretours also  chosen, to wit, Cn. Boebius Tamphilus, L. Anicius Gallus, Cn. Octavius, P. Fonteius Balbus, Mar. Ebutius Helva, and C. Papyrius Carbo. The carefull regard of the Macedonian warre caused everie thing to be done with greater expedition. And therefore it was thought meet, that these new elect magistrates should cast lots out of hand for their provinces, that it might be knowne to whether Consull Macedonie, and to which Pretour the conduct of the navie should fall; that thereupon they might presently consider and provide for all things requisite to the warre, and require the advise of the Senat as need required. Ordained it was, when the Consuls were entred into their office, to solemnise the Latine festivall holidaies as soone as they might conveniently, without offence of the gods and breach of any religious order: that the Consull whose lot fell to goe into Macedonie, were not deteined behind upon any occasion. After these ordinances,  Italie and Macedonie were nominated for the provinces of the two Consuls; and for the Pretors, the two civill jurisdictions within the citie of Rome, the navie, Spaine, Sicilie, and Sardinia. In fine, Macedonie fell to Aemylius the Gonsull, and Italie to Licinius. Of Pretors, Cn. Boebius was lord chiefe justice of the pleas of cittizens, and L. Anicius of aliens. And if the Senate thought good to send the navie any whither, Cn. Octavius had the charge thereof as L. admirall. P. Fonteius was appointed by lot L. deputie of Spaine, M. Ebutius of Sicilie, and C. Papyrius of Sardinia.
All men soone saw, that L. Aemylius intended not to goe coldly about the managing of that warre; both for that he was not an ordinarie man, but singular above all other, and also because that night and day hee mused and studied upon nothing else, but that which was requisite and  pertinent thereunto. The first thing of all wherewith he went in hand was this; a request to the Senat for to dispatch certaine delegat commissioners into Macedonie, to visit the armies there and the armada; to make true report upon their certaine knowledge, what was needfull to be done for the supply of the forces as well by land as sea; also to lie in espiall and estimate as much as possibly they could, the kings power; moreover, what quarter of the province was taken up by our men, and which the enemies kept; whether the Romanes lay encamped still within the forrests and pases, or if they were passed beyond the streights and come into the plaine and even ground; who continued trustie allies, who were suspected, who hung in doubtfull tearmes, (as whose faith depended upon fortune;) who seemed to be undoubted and professed enemies; how great the provisions were of victuals; from whence they were conveighed by land; from  what places transported by water; and lastly, what exploits had ben performed the sommer past both by land and sea: supposing, that by a light given and certein intelligence delivered of these things, he might be surely directed in the casting and laying of future plots and designments. So the Senat granted out a commission to Cn. Servilius the Cos. for to send as delegats into Macedonie; such as L. Aemylius thought good of. Whereupon within two daies after, Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus and A. Licinius Nerva, took their journey as legats and commissioners. Newes came in the latter end of this yeere, that it rained stones twise, namely, in the territorie of Rome, and likewise about Veij: and therefore a novendiall sacrifice was celebrated. This yeere there died certaine priests, namely, Pub. Quintilius Varus, a flamine of Mars, and M. Claudius Marcellus a Decemvir: in whose roume was substituted Cneus Octavius. And now noted it was, that the magnificence  and port of the people of Rome encreased, for that in the plaies and games called Circenses exhibited by Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica and Publius Lentulus, Aediles Curule, three-score and three wild beasts out of Affricke, with fortie beares, and certain elephants, were baired to make sport unto the people.
When L. Aemylius Paulus and P. Licinius entered their Consulship upon the *fifteenth of



March, which was the beginning of the yeere following, the LL. of the Senate were in great expectancie, and especially what the Consull would propose unto them as touching the Macedonian warre, which was his proper province. But Paulus said that he had nothing to propound and put to counsell, seeing that the Delegates aforesaid were not yet returned. And at Brundusium (quoth he) they now are, having twise in their voiage upon the sea been driven backe by tempest and cast upon Dyrrhachium. But so soone as I am once advertised and have perfect knowledge of those things that first are to bee knowne, I will then consult; and that will bee within very few daies. Now to the end that nothing might stay and hinder his journy, he told them, that the eeven before the Ides of Aprill, was appointed for the solemnitie of the Latine feastival holydaies. And after sacrifice duly performed [upon the Albane hill] the Senate should no sooner ordaine, but he and Cn. Octavius would set forth and putthemselves on their way. As for C. Licinius his Colleague, his charge should bee in his absence to provide and send all things requisite and needfull  for this warre. Meane while (quoth hee) the embassies of forraine nations may have audience given. So when hee had sacrificed as the manner was, before they tooke in hand the great affaires of State, the embassadours of Alexandria, from king Ptolomeus and queene Claeopatra, were called in. Clad they were in poore array, the haire of their head long, their beards side and overgrowne: and carrying in their hands branches of the Olive tree, they entred into the Senate, and fell grovelling and prostrate upon the floore. Their habite and apparrell was not so simple and mournefull, their looke and countenance not so heavie and sorrowful, but their speech was more piteous and lamentable. Antiochus now king of Syria,and who had sometime ben hostage at Rome under a colourable pretence of honestie and equitie to restore Ptolomaeus the elder to his kingdome, made hot war upon his younger brother, who then held Alexandria: and after a victorie obtained in sea-fight neere Pelusium, he made a bridge of hastie work upon the river Nilus, over which he transported his armie,and now laid siege to Alexandria: so as by all likelyhood he would shortly by way of conquest be lord of a most rich and wealthie kingdome.
In which regard, these embassadours made pittifull mone and greevous complaint, beseeching withall the Senate, of their aid and succour to that realme and those kings, who were such friendes to their siegnorie and dominion. For Persuaded they were that the people of Rome had done so much for Antiochus in particular, and were of that account and authoritie with all other kings and nations, that if they would but send their embassadours to intimate thus much, That the Senat was not well pleased with waging warre upon confederate kings, he would presently raise his siege, depart from before the walls of Alexandria, and withdraw his armie cleane away into Syria. But if they protracted  the time long and delaied thus to doe, then should Ptolomaeus and Cleopatra within a while bee driven out of their realme, and forced to come to Rome with some shamefull spot of dishonour to the people of Rome, in that they had not set to their helping hand in that extreame daunger of all their fortunes. The LL. of the Senate moved with compassion at the praiers of these Alexandrines, sent incontinently C. Popilius Lenas, C. Decimius, and A. Hostilius as embassadors to determine and make an end of the warre betweene those two princes. in commission they had first to goe unto king Ptolomaeus, and then to Antiochus, and to let them both understand, that unlesse they surceased and gave over armes, they would take him neither for friend nor feere, whom it was long of that the warre was not given over. So these three together with the Alexandrine  embassadours, tooke their leave within three daies and departed. Then the foresaid Delegates returned from out of Macedonie, the last day of the feastivall games to Minerva called Quinquatrus, and not before they were welcome; for so long looked for they were, that had it not beene eventide when they came, the Consuls would immediately have called the Senat together. But the morrow after, the Senate sat, and those commissioners had audience given. Report they made first, That with more daunger than profite ensuing, the armie entred into Macedonie over those pases and streights, where was no way and passage at all. Item, That the king kept the countrey of Pieria, into which the Roman armie was now advaunced, and were so neere encamped one to the other, that nothing but the river Enipeus between kept them asunder; that neither the king made offer of battell, nor the Romans were of sufficient strength to challenge and force him to fight: moreover, that the winter had overtaken them (a time unseasonable for warlike exploits) that the soldiors were nuzzelled and nourished in idlenesse, notwithstanding they had victuals to serve no longer than sixe daies; also, that by report the Macedonians were thirtie thousand strong. Were it so that Ap. Claudius had a good and sufficient power about Lychnidum, hee might bee able to

 trouble the king, and put him to his trumpes in a battell; but now both Appius and the garrison with him, are themselves in extreame jeopardie, unlesse with speed either a complete armie bee sent thither, or els they drawne from thence where they are, into Macedonie. Over and besides they related, how from the campe they went toward the fleet, where they heard say, that some of the sea-faring men and marriners were dead of sicknesse, others,and namely those of Sicilie above the rest, were gone home againe to their owne houses, insomuch as there were not men ynow to serve the ships; and those that remained, had neither their wages paied and money to put in their purse, nor liveries and apparell to hang on their backes. As for Eumenes and his fleet, they (like ships driven to a coast by force of wind and weather, without any other e^^and or cause els) were come and gone againe: and it seemed that the mind of that king was not well setled and resolved.  But as they reported all of Eumenes suspiciously and in doubtfull tearmes, so they assured them of the singular sidelitie and constancie of Attalus his brother. When these Legates had spoke, then said L. Aemylius, Let us debate now in counsell what is to be done as concerning the said warre. So the Senate ordained, that for eight legions, the Consuls and the people should elect an equall number of martiall Tribunes or Colonels, the one as many as other;and that honourable dignitie: then, out of all those Tribunes thus elected, that L. Aemylius should make choise for those two legions which were to goe into Macedonie, of whom he would himselfe: also, that after the solemnitie of the Latine feasts performed, L. Aemylius the Consull, and C. Octavius the Pretour and admirall of the fleet, should depart into their province. A third was joined  in commission with them, to wit, L. Anicius the Pretor and lord cheefe justice for strangers. And ordained it was, that he should passe into Illyricum about Lichnidum, for to succeed Ap. Claudius. The charge of taking musters was put upon C. Licinius the Consull. Hee had commaundement to enroll seven thousand [foot] citizens of Rome, and two hundred horsemen, and to charge the Latine allies with a levie of seven thousand footmen and foure hundred horse. Also to send letters unto Cn. Servilius, who governed the province of Gaule, to enroll six hundred men of arms. This armie he had commaundement to send with all convenient speed to his colleague into Macedonie, so as in that province there should not be above two legions, and the sameful and complete, conteining six thousand footand three hundred horse a peece. As for the surcease, as well of the Cavallerie as Infanterie, they should be disposed and bestowed in sundrie garrisons. And all  such as were unmeet for service, were to be cassed and sent away. Moreover, the allies were put to set out and find ten thousand foot and eight hundred horse. And those were to serve in garrison under Anicius, over and above the two legions (which hee was commaunded to lead into Macedonie) consisting of five thousand and two hundred foot, and three hundred horsemen either of them. Also for the navie were enrolled five thousand mariners and rowers. Licinius the Consull was appointed to defend and keepe in obedience his province with two legions, and to take besides of allies ten thousand foot and sixe hundred horse.
After these ordinances of the Senate were accomplished,The Ovation of L. A^mylius to the people of Rome. L. A^mylius the Consull went forth of the Senate house into the common place before the assembly of the people where hee made a speech unto them in this wise following: Me thinkes I perceive and see, my good friends and  citizens of Rome, that yee have shewed more apparent tokens of joy and gratulation in my behalfe, for that the province of Macedonie is fallen to my lot; than either at the time that I was declared and saluted Consull, or that day whereupon I first entred into government: and for no other reason in the world, but upon the opinion which you have conceived, that the Macedonian warre, which hath so long continued, may be brought by my meanes to such an end as beseemeth the greatnesse and majestie of the people of Rome. And for mine owne selfe I have good hope, that as the gods in favour have directed this sortilege, so they will bee present and propitious unto mee in performing the service. In these matters, I say, I am but carried partly with conceit and partly with hope. But this one thing I am assured of; yea and I dare affirme and promise on my owne head, that I will endevour my selfe and employ all that is in me, that this your good  opinion of mee may not bee in vaine conceived. As for all things necessarie and requisite to this warre, both the Senat hath ordained; and also, for that they have thought good I should depart immediately (for which my selfe am well pleased and contented, neither in me there shall be any delay) my colleague C. Licinius, a singular man and of great valour, will provide with as great care and diligence, as if himselfe had the full conduct of this warre. For the effecting whereof

see, that whatsoever I shall write either to the Senate or to you, yee beleeve for true: as for running  rumours which have no certaine author, give no eare and beleefe therto; neither feed them with your foolish credulitie. For now adaies verily, (a thing that I have observed to fall out ordinarily in this warre) there is no man setteth so little by the common bruites that are blazed abroad, but his spirit and courage may be thereby quailed and daunted. In all meetings now, yea and at every bourd (I would not else) yee shall have them, that in their table talke will lead your armies into Macedonie: that know where they are to lodge and encampe; what commodious placer are to be seized and kept with garrisons, at what time and through which passe the entry must be made into Macedonie; where the gamers and storehouses forcorne should bee built and set; which way by land and sea both, the provisions of victuals ought to be brought; when the time serveth to encounter and fight with the enemie, and when to sit still and rest. Neither are they  content to set downe and pronounce, what is to be done for the better: but if ought happen to be mannaged otherwise than they have thought and judged expedient, they are so bold as to controll the Consull; yea and readie to commense processe against him judicially. These are shrowd hinderances, I may tell you, to warriours and men of action. For all men have not the gift of resolution and constancie to neglect the speech and talke of men, as sometimes Fabius had, who chose rather to have his authoritie and commaund diminished and impaired by the follie and vanitie of lewd people, than with their favorable applause and good opinion to mannage his affaires but untowardly. Yet take me not so, as if I were a man that would have no captaines to be admonished and advised by others; nay contrariwise, of this judgement I am, That hee who worketh all by his selfe-wit and followeth onely his owne head, is selfe-willed and  proud, and nothing sage and wise. What is then to be done?First in mine opinion, Generals and commanders of armies, are to be instructed by discreet and prudent men; by such as are skilfull by profession in feates of armes and militarie science; by those also that by long practise are throughly experienced: nay more than that, they are to be taught and counsailed by them, that are usually present and conversant in the execution of affaires, who daily see the vantage of places, marke the proceeding of the enemies, and observe the opportunities of times: those (I say) who as passengers in one ship, are partakers of the same daunger. If therebe any man therefore, who is verily persuaded of himselfe, that he is able to direct me and give me any counsell (in the conduct of this warre which I have in charge) for the good of the common weale, let him come forth, and not denie his helping hand to the weale publick, and go along with mee into Macedonie. Furnish him I shall, with ship, with horse, with tent-roume, with conduct money, and all things necessary for his voiage. If any be loth so to do,and had rather sit warm at home, preferring the ease and repose of the cittie before the travaile and paine of warfare, let him not here on the land take upon him to play the pilot and steersman at sea. Matter hee shall find enough within the citie to talke of,and seeke no father; let him hold him there and keep his babble and prattle to himselfe: know he (whosoever he is) that we will content our selves with our own counsell about us in the camp. After this oration ended,and the Latine festivals solemnized the day before the calends of March,The last of Februarie. together with the sacrifice duly celebrated upon the Albane mount; the Consull and the Pretour Cn. Octavius departed incontinently into Macedonie. It is recorded in the Chronicles, that the Consull was honoured with a greater frequencie that accompaied him, than usually had beene knowne: and that men presaged in manner assuredly, the end of the Macedonian warre: how the Consull should have a speediereturne, and obtaine a brave and glorious triumph.
During these occurrents in Italie, Perseus who (because he was to be at the charges of disbursing money) never thought of it, to goe through with that which before he had begun, namely to adjoine unto him Gentius king of the Illyrians: so soone as hee perceived that the Romanes were entred the streights, and the warre come now to this extremitie of hazard; thought good now to make that sure and put it off no longer. Whereas therefore he had covenanted and promised by his embassadour Hippias three hundred talents of silver, with condition also, that for securitie hostages should be put in of both parties interchaungeably; hee sent Pantaucus one of  his most trustie friends, to dispatch and make an end of this affaire. This Pantaucus met the Illyrian king at Medeon in the countrie of Labeatis: where hee both tooke an oth of the king, and also received his hostages. Gentius likewise sent his embassadour named Olympio, to demand the semblable oth of Perseus,and require hostages accordingly: with him were certain persons sent of

 purpose to receive the money, who also by the advise of the said Pantaucus were to goe in embassie with the Macedonians to Rhodes: and the men hereto appointed were Parmenio and Morcus. But they had in charge and commission, after the oth taken, after hostagesand money received, to go to Rhodes, and not before. Good hope they conceived that the Rhodians might be sollicited and induced to take armes against the Romans, by using the name of these two kings at once: and this accompt they made, that if this state which carried the renowne and honour above all others for sea-service, would once combine and band with them, they should leave the Romans no hope at all, either on land or sea. When these Illyrians arrived, Perseus departed with all his cavallerie from before the river Enipeus where hee was encamped, and encountred them neere Dium. There, were all the accomplements performed according to the covenants, in the sight  and mids of the cavallerie, whom the king of purpose would needs have to bee present at this accord of association made betweene him and king Gentius, supposing that it would comfort and encourage them the more. So the hostages were given and taken in the presence of them all. They also who were to receive the money were sent to Pella where the king his treasure lay: and those that should goe to Rhodes with the illyrian embassadours had commaundement to embarke at Thessalonica. Now was Metrodorus there, lately come from Rhodes: who asured them by the meanes of Dion and Polyaratus, two principall personages of that cittie, that the Rhodians were prest and readie to warre. Whereupon the said (Metrodorus was appointed the chiefe in this embassage of Macedonians and Illyrians together. At the same time likewise was addressed and imparted both unto Eumenes and also unto Antiochus, such advise and counsell in  common, as the present condition wherin their affairs stood, might ministerand affourd argument.
Namely, that a free citie and a king were two; by nature, enemies that possibly could not sort together: That the people of Rome went in hand with them severally one after another:and (that which was a greater indignitieand unsupportable) used the force of kings to overthrow the state of kings. For so, by the aid of Attalus they had brought his father Philip to ruin: by the help likewise of Eumenes, and partly also of his father Philip, Antiochus was defaited; and even now against himselfe both Eumenes and Prusias were put in arms. if the kingdome of Macedonie were once subverted, have at Asia next; which the Romanes have in some part seized alreadie for their owne, under a colour of enfranching citties and setting them free: and then they will not leave untill they have Syria too. For now is Prusias preferred in honour before Eumenes: and Antiochus for all his  conquest is chaced and debarred out of Aegypt, which ought to have bene the recompence for the war by him enterprised and atchieved. In these regards Perseus advertised ech of them to consider and provide therefore either to force the Romanes to make peace with him, or else to hold them for the common enemies of all kings, in case they persisted still in so unjust a war. The commission that the embassadors had to Antiochus was apertand open: but unto Eumenes and embassador was sent under a pretence of ransoming certain captives: but practised there were under hand more secret complots; which caused Eumenes even then to bee suspected and odious unto the Romans, yea, and charged afterward with more grievous matters, althoughuntruly. For he was reputed little better than a traitor and a professed enemie to their state, wheras indeed both he and Perseus strove who could compasse, surprise, and overtake one another better in fraud and avarice.  Now there was one Cydas a Cretensian, an inward and most secret friend to Eumenes: this man had communed first at Amphipols with one Chimarus a countrieman of his, who served under Perseus in the wars; and afterwards at Demetrias conferred with another named Menecrates; also with a certaine third person called Antiochus, all captaines to king Perseus, even under the very wals of the foresaid cittie. Over and besides, Eropon who at this time was sent, had beforetime ben emploied in two severall embassies to the same Eumenes. These secret communications and embassages were badly spoken of; but no man knew what was concluded between the two kings. Howbeit thus the case stood; Eumenes as he had no mind nor intention to war upon Perseus, so he was not desirous in his hart that he should have the victory of the Romans; not so much for the old enmitie which had ben between both their fathers, as for the hateful quarels kindled among themselves.  For this concurrence and aemulation there was betweene these two princes, that Eumenes could never abide to see Perseus for to purchase so great welth,and so much honor, as he must needs acquire by the conquest of the Romanes: he saw moreover, that Perseus from the first beginning of this war, sought by all meanes possible for peace, and the neerer he was to daunger and domage, aimed thereat every day more than other; employing his whole studie and care about nothing els.
He perceived also that among the Romanes, because the warre grew to be longer than they hoped  and looked for, as well their captains as the Senat were well enough content and very desirous to see an end once of so troublesome, hurtfull, and difficult a warre. Knowing thus as he did, the mind and will of both parties, he enclined and framed to that which of it selfe as he thought might fall out, where the stronger was wearie and the weaker in feare: and therein desired he to Thew his double diligence, thereby to win a thinke and purchased favour of both parts. For he entred into bargaine with Perseus for a summe of money, one while not to aid the Romanes either by land or sea: another whiles to be a means for peace and to treat with the Romans thereabout, and not to intermeddle at all in the warre, but to sit still: he capitulated (I say) for a thousand and five hundred talents; making semblance and shew, that for the assurance both of the one and the other, readie he was not only to sweare, but also to put in good and sufficient hostages. Perseus was the willingest man in the world to set in hand with this, as being driven thereto by the exigent of feare: and presently without delay dealt with him as touching the hostages which were to be received: and in fine concluded it was, that they should upon their deliverie and receit be sent into Creete. But when they came once to talke of the money aforesaid, hee hafred and stucke at that; and to say a truth, either of these two summes (between princes of so great name and honour) was but a base and dishonest consideration; a thing much unfitting (ywis) the giver, and more the receiver. Perseus verily for his part, in hope to purchase peace with the Romanes, was willing enough to be at the expense of so much money: mary, hee said that he would make paiment thereof when the thing was done and accomplished: and in the meane time lay it up safe for that purpose within the temple of Samothracia. Eumenes againe, considering  that the said Island was an appertenance to the dominion of Perseus, could not see but it was all one for it to lie there and in Pella: and therfore was earnest to have part therof in hand. Thus betwene them there was nothing but lying in the wind for the vantage, who could overreach the other: and what was gained in the end but infamie and discredit? As for Perseus, hee not onely let fall this design and lost his opportunitie, (and that by his niggardise only) when by the means of Eumenes he might have had either his money sure enough, or peace for it, (which indeed he should have bought, if it had cost him the one halfe of his kingdom,) and being once received into grace and favour [of the people of Rome] hee might have defamed and brought into obloquie and daunger his concurrent, by charging him to have received a peece of money for a bribe, and so justly have set the Romans upon his top: but also the association with king Gentius which now was at the point of a contract, was neglected; yea and a mightie army of Gauls spred at that time all over Illyricum and presented unto him, was even then refused and discharged by this pinching and saving of his mony. For there came and offered their service ten thousand horsemen and as many foot, and those so well practised and so good of footmanship, that they were able to hold out and keepe pace with horses, yea and run by their sides: such (I say) as when the riders were unhorsed and fallen, could vault and mount on the emptie horse backes ready to fight in their turnes. These had bargained to have for pay every horseman tenPhilippeus numus, was somwhat lesse than our soveraigne of 20 sh. or 3 ducats. Philip peeces [of gold] paied down aforehand, and a footman five, and their captaine a thousand. Perseus departed from his leaguer lying neere the river Enipeus, and with the one halfe of his own forces met these comming upon the way, and caused proclamation to be made in all townes and villages  neere the high waies, To make ready and bring abroad their provision of victuals, and see that there were plentie of corne, of wine, and cattaile. Himselfe brought with him horses and trappings, and fine souldiors cassocks, to bestow as presents upon the chiefe of them, with some litle sprinkling of gold to deale among a few of them; supposing that all the besides of common souldiors, might be drawne on and reteined with bare hope. Thus he came to the cittie of Alamana, and encamped upon the banke of the river Axius. But the armie of these Galatians were lodged about Desudaba in the countrey of Maedica, and rested there expecting the paiment of the money aforesaid, according to covenant. But Perseus sent unto them Antigonus one of his gallants and countries, to will and command the multitude of the armie to dislodge and remove to Bylazora, a place so called in Paronia, and a good sort of their chief to repaire unto him. Now were they threescore and fifteene miles from the river Axius and the kings campe. And when Antigonus had delivered unto them this mandate as hee had in charge, and added besides, with what care and diligence the king had laid his provisions by the way of all things in great plentie for the armie, and with what gilts of apparrell, silver, and horses, hee purposed to

 receive and entertaine their captains at their first comming unto him: As for that (say they) we shall take knowledge thereof when wee are in presence personally: but now for this time, wee demaund, Whether yee have brought with you in readie coine according to bargaine, that gold which is to be paied to the souldiours, as well horse as foot? And when he could make no answere thereto, but was sent nonplus; then said Clondicus their prince, Goe your waies then (quoth hee) and tell your king and master, that the Gaules unlesses they may receive the gold, and hostages besides for their securitie, will not stirre one foot forward. Relation beeing made hereof unto the king, hee clled his counsell: and when it was soone seene what they all would advise him to doe; himselfe, who could skill better to keepe his money together, than hold the roiall estate of his kingdome, began to enter into a discourse of the disloialtie and savage nature  of these Gaules; making remonstrance, how he had experience by the calamities and losses of many before him, that daungerous it was to receive so great a multitude of them within Macedonie, for feare the Gauls would be found worse neighbors, than the Romans were enemies. Five thousand horsemen are sufficient (qd. he) and so many well we may have good use of in wars, and need not be afraid of them for their number. But every man saw well ynough, that it was the waging of such a number that he feared, and nothing els: but when no man durst give him counsell, albeit he seemed to aske their advise, Antigonus was sent again with a message unto the Gauls, That the king stood in need of five thousand horsmen and no more, as for all the rest, he weighed them not. When these Barbarians heard that, all the rest began to mutter and grumble, yea, and to take great scorne and indignation, that they were levied and departed out of their native  country for nothing: but Clondicus redemanded, Whether he would make present pay to those five thousand, according to covenant, yea or nay? but seeing that he was to seek, and made shifts to avoid a direct answer, he let this deceitfull messenger goe his waies, and did no harme unto his person (a thing that Antigonus himselfe would scarcely have thought could possibly have been:) And so after they had given the wast unto those parts of Thracia which lay neere to their way, they returned backe againe to the river Ister. Which power of men, if it had passed the streights of Perrhaebia into Thessalie against the Romanes (although Perseus had not stirred at all, but sitten still at Enipeus) might not only have spoiled and laid bare the territorie all about,and empeached the Romanes for expecting any victuals there, but also destroied the townes utterly, whiles Perseus held the Romanes play at Enipeus that they could not releeve and succour the cities of  their allies and confederates. Nay the very Romanes should have had ynough to doe to looke unto themselves, considering that there was no tarrying for them, after that Thessalie was lost, which nourished and maintained their army: and passe forward they could not possibly, having the Macedonian campe to affront them. But Perseus by that deed, as he confirmed the hearts of the Romanes, so he quailed not a little the courages of the Macedonians, who depended upon the hope and expectancie of their aid. By the same miserfable pinching of his, hee estranged also the heart of king Gentius from him. For when as at Pella he had paied three hundred talents unto those that were sent of purpose from Gentius to receive the same, wel content he was that they should seale up that mony, Afterwards he sent unto Pantaucus ten talents, and commanded him to deliver the same to the king in person: as for the rest signed up with the seale of the Illyrians,  he commaunded his owne men who had the convoy thereof, in going with it to take small journies, and when they were come to the utmost frontiers of Macedonie, there to rest and attend the messengers from him. Gentius, after he had received as earnest that small portion of the wholsum aforesaid, being called upon continually by Pantaucus and set on to provoke the Romans by some hostilitie or other, made no more adoe, but committed to prison M. Perpenna and L. Petilius, who chanced at that time to come unto him in embassage. Which when Perseus once heard, he had enough and thought verily that Gentius had done that, whereby of necessitie hee must be forced to wage warre with the Romans: and thereupon sent out presently to call those backe who had the carriage of the foresaid talents; as if he had studied and sought for nothing more, than to reserve as great as great a bootie as possibly hee could, for the Romanes to enjoy, after that they had  vanquished and subdued him. Eropon returned likewise from Eumenes, and wist not what had ben contrived secretly betweene them. That their treatie was about certaine captives, they themselves had given forth abroad, and likewise Eumenes advertised the Consul so much, for avoiding of all suspition.
Perseus after the returne of Eropon from Eumenes, was much dismaied and cast downe. Wherupon,

he sent Antenor and Callippus (admirals of his navie) to Tenedos, with fortie pinnaces, unto  which number five Gallions were adjoined; who from that coast dispersing themselves all about the Ilands Cyclades, might waft and guard the lighters and hoies charged with corne, as they sailed to Macedonie. These ships were put to sea at Cassandrea, and first they fell with the havens that lie under the foot of the mountaine Athos, and from thence passed to Tenedos with pleasure in calme sea: where finding certaine Rhodian open ships riding in the harbour, they spake courteously to Eudamus their admirall,and let them alone without any hurt at al done unto them. But afterwards upon knowledge, that fiftie hulkes of theirs on another side were shut up and pent in by the warre-ships of king Eumenes (which rid in the mouth of the haven and were commaunded by Damius) hee turned about in all hast, and dispersed the enemies ships with a suddaine terrour that hee put them in, and sent the said hulkes and vessels of burden into Macedonie, with a  convoy of tenne brigantines to wast them over, with this charge, That after they had conducted them past all daunger into place of safetie, they should returne againe to Tenedos. After nine daies they retired toward the fleet ankering then in the rode of Sigaeum. From thence they crossed over to Subota, an Island lying betweene Elea and Athos. It fortuned, that the morrow after the fleet was arrived at Subota, five and thirtie ships which they call Hippagogae [serving for the transporting of horses] which came from Elea, having abourd certaine horsemen of Gaule and their horses, made head toward Phanae, a cape or promontorie of the Chians, from whence they might cut over into Macedonie. And these were sent from Eumenes to Attalus. Antenor being advertised by a signall given him from a watch-tower, that those ships were discovered under saile in the open sea, losed from Subota; and betweene the cape of Erythraea and Chios, where  the sea is most narrow, hee encountred them. The admirals of king Eumenes thought nothing lesse, than that any fleet of Macedonians were abroad in those seas; but imagined one while they were Romanes, otherwhiles, that it was Attalus or some sent backe from Attalus, who from out of the Romane campe were sailing toward Pergamus. But as they approched neerer, they tooke knowledge by the forme and fashion of their pinnaces who they were, by their hastie rowing also and making head full against them, they were out of all doubt that their enemies were at hand. Then were they mightily afraid, as having no hope to resist and withstand them, considering the ships were unweldie and unhandsome, and the Gaules besides could hardly brooke the very sea without any other trouble. Some of them therefore, who were neerer to the firme land, saved themselves by swimming to Erythraea; others set up their sailes, and being cast upon the Island  Chios, forsooke their horses, and ran as fast as they could for refuge to the cittie. But the barkes discharged their armed souldiours neerer to the citie in a more commodious place for landing, Where the Macedonians overtook the Gaules and slew them; some in the way as they fled, others before the very gate of the cittie, being kept out and excluded from thence: for the Chians not knowing either who fled or who pursued, had shut their gates upon them. Nine hundredNote that Gaules, Galatians, and Gallogreekes be all one, in this book; although Livie terme them only, Gallos. Gallogreekes or very neere lost their lives and were hewen in peeces, and two hundred taken alive. As for the horses, part perished in the sea after the ships were split and broken, and the Macedonians hought and cut the strings of their gambrels of as many of them as they found upon the shore. Twentie of the bestand fairest horses together with the prisoners, Antenor commanded that those ten barkes which he had sent before, should transport to Thessalonica, and return againe with all  speed to the fleet, for that hee would expect their comming at Phanae. The fleet staied about three daies under the citie side, but afterwards went forward to Phanae; and when the tenne pinnaces aforesaid were returned sooner than they looked for, they set up saile in the Aegean sea for Delos.
In this while the Roman embassadors, C. Popilius, C. Decimius, and C. Hostilius, departed from Chalcis, and arrived with three Quinquereme galeaces at Delos, where they found fortie Macedonian pinnaces, and five roiall Quinquereme galeaces of king Eumenes. The holinesse of the temple and island wherein it stood affourded securitie to them all, so as there was no hurt done nor violence offered from one to another. And therefore, as well Romanes as Macedonians, and besides, the sailers and marriners of king Eumenes conversed together, entermingled one  with another in the temple, and the religious devotion of the place yeelded them truce and surcease of hostilitie.
Antenor the admirall of king Perseus, when hee was advertised from the watch and sentinell, that certaine ships of burden were seene a farre off in the sea, set saile and made after them himselfe

 with part of his pinnaces, and part of them hee bestowed in await among the Cyclades, and saving those that directed their course toward Macedonie, he either drowned or spoiled them all. Popiltus did the best he could, and Eumenes with his ships likewise, to save some; but the Macedonians, who sailed by night with two or three pinnaces at the most, deceived them, and were not discovered.
Much about this time Macedonian and Illyrian embassadors came together to Rhodes, who caried the greater authoritieand credit with the Rhodians, by reason not only of the comming of their brigantines, which sailed to and fro raunging over the Aegean sea, and among the Cyclades, but also by the conjunction and association of the two kings, Perseus and Gentius, together with a rumour that ran of the Gaules, who were comming with a great number, as well of  horse as foot. And not both Dion and Polyaratus, who tooke part with Perseus, tooke more courage and heart unto them: by whose meanes there was not onely a gracious answere returned to the kings, but also pronounced openly it was, that by their authoritie they would make an end of the warre: in regard whereof, the kings also for their parts were to bee disposed and well willing to accept of peace.
Now was it the prime of the spring, when as the new generals were arrived into their provinces: Aemylius the Consull into Macedonie; Octavius to the navie at Oreum; and Anicius into Illyricum, whose commission was to levie warre against Gentius was the sonne of Pleuratus king of the Illyrians, and Eurydica was his mother: two brethren he had, to wit, Plator of the whole blood by father and mother both, and Caravantius onely by the mothers side. This  halfe brother he lesse suspected, by reason of his base parentage from the father; but as for Plator he murdered, togither with two especiall friends of his Ettritus and Epicadus (brave men of action) to the end that he might reigne in more safetie and securitie. The voice goeth, that hee carried an envious eye to that brother of his, for that hee had espoused Etuta the daughter of Honunus the prince of the Dardanians: as if by this mariage he meant to make himselfe strong and combine with the Dardanian nation: and the more likelihood this carried with it after hee married the damosell indeed. When he had made away Plator, and rid himselfe of the feare that he might have of his brother, he began to molest and oppresse his owne naturall subjects: and as hee was by nature given to violence, so that indisposition of his hee set on fire with untemperate drinking of wine. But as we said before, being mooved and incited to warre against the Romanes,  hee assembled all his forces togither unto Lissus, to the number of fifteen thousand armed men, and sent his brother from thence with a thousand foot and 50 horse against the Cavians, for to subdue that nation either by force or feare, whiles himselfe led his armie five miles against the citie Bassania from Lissus. Now were the Bassanians confederat allies of the Romans: and therefore when they were first sollicited by messengers to yeeld, they resolved rather to endure a siege than doe so. As for Caravantius hee was peaceably and friendly received at his first comming into Durium, a town of the Cavians: but Caravantis another cittie, made the gates fast against him: and as he gave the wast to the territorie about it, certaine of his soldiours straggling here and there, were by the peasants and villagers killed, who came forth and made head against them.
 And now by this time Appius Claudius having taken with him, over and above his owne armie, the auxiliaries of the Bullians, Appolloniates, and Dyrrhachians, dislodged out of the place where he had wintered,and encamped neer the river Genusous. For hearing of the alliance made betweene Perseus and Gentius, and incensed besides with the outrage committed upon the Romane embassadours, whom Gentius put in prison, he resolved certainely to war upon him. Anicius the Pretour being at that time at Apollonia, and advertised in what tearmes the affairs stood in Illyricum, dispatched letters before hand to Appius, willing him to attend at Genusuus for his comming: and so within three daies after came himselfe to the campe there; and to those aids which he had of his own, he took with him two thousand foorand two hundred horse, drawn out of the youth and flower of the Partiners. Of the Infanterie Epi^ados had the conduct, and Agathus  commaunded the Cavallerie. With this power hee prepared to goe into Illyricum, principally for to levie the siege before Bassania: but this dessigne projected by him, was empeached by a bruit that was blowne of certaine pinnaces which wasted and spoiled the sea-coasts. A fleet they were together of eightie saile, sent from Gentius by the instigacion of Pantaucus, to forray the territories of Apollonia and Dyrrhachium. Then the fleet *****

Which beeing surrendred, they submitted also and yeelded themselves. And so consequently, other citties of that countrie one after another did the semblable: and the inclination and disposition of mens minds that way, was much set forward by the clemencie and justice of the Romane Pretour which he used toward all. Then they marched to Scodra, the capitall place and seat-towne of the warre: not onely for that Gentius had seized upon it for his owne selfe, as the chiefe strength and fortresse of all his realme, but also because it was the strongest peece of all the Labeates nation, and very difficult for accesse. Enclosed it is with two rivers: to wit, Clausala which runneth along the East side of the cittie, and Barbana on the West, arising out of the marish Labeatis. These two rivers joine in one, and are discharged together into the great river Oriundes: which springing from the mountaine Scodrus, and encreased still with the confluence of many other waters and riverets, falleth at length into the Adriaticke sea. This Scodius is the  highest hill by ods of all other in those quarters on the East it hath Dardania under it, on the South Macedonie, and Illyricum on the West. Albeit this towne was strongly situate, by the naturall site of the place, and defended by the whole nation of the Illyrians and the king himselfe in person: yet the Romane Pretour (encouraged with the good successe he had at the first, and supposing the fortune of the totall warre would bee answerable to so happie beginnings, and that a suddaine terrour also would serve him in much stead and prevaile) approached the walles of the towne with his armie readie embattailed, and displaied his banners against it. Now if they had shut their gates, and defended their wals and turrets over the gates, with armed guards bestowed accordingly, surely they had repulsed the Romanes from the walls, and defeated them of their enterprise cleane: but they yssued forth of the gate, and in the plaine and even ground gave battaile  with more animositie and courage, than they maintained it with persistance. For being discomfited and driven backe, and in the chase hudled by heaps together as they fled, after 200 and above were slaine in the very streight entrance of the gate, they put the rest within in such a fright, that Gentius incontinently sent unto the Pretours as oratours, Teuticus and Bellus the principall persons of that nation, to treate and intreate for a surcease of armes, that in the meane while he might debate in counsell and be advised as touching the main estate of his affaites. And when for this purpose he had obtained a graunt for three daies, and the Romanes lay encamped from the citie halfe a mile; Gentius took a barge, and sailing along the river Bartana, passed into the lake or meere of the Labeates, as if he had sought some secret by-place to consult in. But as it appeared afterwards, he was mooved upon a certain vain hope of his brother Caravantius his  comming, who was said to bee neere at hand accompanied with many thousands of fighting men, whom he had levied and brought out of that quarter into which he was sent. But when this rumour was over-blowen and vanished to nothing, down the river he went again with the stream the third day after in the same vessell to Scodra, and sent courriers before him to the Pretor, requiring leave to parley and commune with him; which being granted, he entred into the camp. First he began his speech with accusing and condemning his own follie: in the end his last refuge was to poure out praiers and shed teares: and so humbling himselfe at the Pretour his feet, hee submitted to his devotion. The Pretour at the first bad him take a good heart unto him and bee of good cheere, and invited him to supper: and so he returned to his owne people into the cittie, where he was honourably feasted that day by the Pretour. But afterwards he was delivered to the  guard and keeping of C. Cassius a martiall colonell: and thus received he of K. Perseus onely ten talents (a mean reward and hardly sufficient to content a simple sword-plaier) to engage himselfe into a world of daunger; and being a king as he was, to fall into this extreame calamitie and miserie. Anicius having entred upon Scodra, first before all other things, tooke order that the two embassadours aforesaid, Petilius and Perpenna should be sought out and brought unto him: whom after he had restored to their pristine estate and reputation, he sent Perpenna presently to apprehend the friends and kinsfolke of the king: who tooke his way directly to Medeo a cittie of the Labeates; and brought with him into the campe at Scodra Elleva the kings wife, with her two sonnes Scerdiletus and Pleuratus, together with Carasvantius the king his brother. Thus Anicius having ended the Illyrian war within the compasse of thirtie daies, sent Perpenus to Rome with  tidings of this victorie; and within few daies Gentius himselfe after him, together with his mother, his wife and children, his brother, and other LL. of the Illyrians. This was the onely warre atchieved and brought to an end before they heard at Rome that it was begun.
During the mannagement of these affaires, Perseus also was in great feare and affright, by reason

 of the comming of L. Aemylius a new Consull (who as the voice went, marched against him with great menaces) together with Octavius the Pretour. Neither was he lesse terrified with the Romane navie and the daunger of the sea coasts. Eumenes and Athenagoras had the keeping and commaund of Thessalonica with a small garrison of two thousand targatiers. Thither hee sent captaine Androcles also, with commaundement to encampe close to the very harbour where the ships lay in rode. Vnto Aenia he sent one thousand horsemen under the leading of Antigonus, to guard the sea-coast, to the end that in what part soever they heard the enemies ships were arrived, they might incontinently advaunce to the succour of the paisants and countrie people. Five thousand Macedonians were likewise sent to lie in garrison at Pythoum and Petra, under the conduct of Histiaius, Theagenes and Midon. After these were departed, he went in hand to fortifie the  banke of the river Enipeus: because it was passable over the very chanel on drie foot. And to the end that all the multitude should be emploied hereabout, the very women were compelled out of the townes adjoining, to bring victuals into the campe. The souldiours were commaunded from out of the woods neere by^^^ Finally the waterbearers in leather bits or bottels, were commaunded to follow him to the sea, which was a quarter of a mile off: and thereupon they stood to dig pits, some in one place, and some in another, a pretie distance asunder. The exceeding high hils all about put He speaketh of L. Pau. Armylius. him in good hope (and the rather because they sent out from them no rivers to be seen in open view) that they conteined within them some hidden springs, the veines whereof draining into the sea, were intermingled with the sea water. They had scarcely sunke throgh the uppermost course of sand above,  when they mighe small sources to boile up, at the first troubled, but afterward they began to yeeld sheere and cleere water in great aboundance; by a speciall gift (as it were) of the gods above. And even this occurrent also encreased the name and reputation of the captaine with his souldiours. Then after hee had commaunded his men to make readie their armour, himselfe with the martiall Tribunes and the principall formost rankes, marched to recognise and view the passages; and to see where the armed men might descend with ease, and where they might with least trouble mount up the banke on the fartherside. When hee had taken a sufficient survey hereof, hee forecast and gave direction aforehand, for all things to bee done in the armie in good order without trouble and tumultuous noise, even at the very beck and commandement of their leaders. For when a thing to be effected is pronounced to all at once, it falleth out  that every man is not within the hearing; and so receiving an uncertaine signall and commandement, some put more of their owne head to that which was commanded, and others doe lesse againe for it: and so there arise from all parts dissonant cries, and by this meanes the enemies know sooner whereabout they goe, than many of themselves. Therefore to avoid this contusision, he ordained that every martiall Colonel should give a secret watch-word to the principall Centurion of the legion, and round him in his eare what he would have done: then he and so forth every one should deliver unto ech centurion as he is next in range and place, what was to be executed; whither it were that the commandement was to be caried from the front of the armie to the taile, or from the rereguard behind to the vaward before. He broght up a new order and custome, forbidding the watchmen to carrie with them any targuets to their sentinels: for that the  watchman went not out to fight, wherby he needed any armor, but to keep watch; that when lie desetied the enimies comming, lie might retire himself, and raise others to take armes. Item, he ordeined that the helmettiers or morioners should stand upon their feet, having their shields upright before them: and when they were wearie, to leane and bear upon their javelins, and resting their head upon the edge of their shields, so to take a nap and sleep; to the end that their glittering armour, might bee disbovered afarre off by the enemie, whereas himselfe could not see farre before him. The manner also of warding in the day time and of the corps de guard hee altered cleane. For whereas they were wont to stand all the day long armed, and the horsemen holding their horses bridled; in fell out so, that in summer daies when ordinarily the sunne is extreame and scorching hote, both horse and man became wearie and languished againe with abiding so  many houres in the heat, and oftentimes the enemies being fresh, although they were but fewe in number, set upon them and put them to trouble and hazard enough. Hereupon he commanded that the morning guard should break up at noone, and others succeed in their places for toward in the afternoone. By this meanes the enemie fresh and in heart could never take them weatie and so charge upon them.
When he had pronounced in a publicke assembly gathered together,

that his will was, that these orders should be observed accordingly, he delivered unto them  a speech, much resembling the former Oration which hee used before to the people within the cittie of Rome. Namely, that the Generall of an armie ought onely to foresee and provide for all that is meet to be done, sometime by himselfe, otherwhiles with those whom hee hath joined assistants unto him: as for such as are not called to be of his counsell, they ought neither in publick nor in privat to shoot their bolts and give their advise. Three things in deed the soldior was to care and provide for: namely, to have a body most strong and nimble withall; his armor and weapons decent and fit; and thirdly, a spirit prompt and ready at all assaies to execute any commandement on a sodain. For all things else he ought to know, that the gods immortal and his Generall will take care: for as much as, in that armie wherein the soldiors, the Consull, and chiefe commander, suffer themselves to be caried away with rumors and brutes of the common sort, it is not possible  for any thing to go well forward and come to good effect. For his own part (according to the dutie and devoir of a captain Generall) he would endeavor and provide to give them the occasion and opportunitie of brave exploits: as for them, they were not to enquire after any future thing; but so soon as the signall is given, then every man to performe the service of a doubtie soldior and valiant warrior. After these good precepts and instructions, he dismissed the assembly: and the old souldiors themselves confessed commonly in plaine tearms, that they had taken forth a lesson that day as yong and raw novices, yea and learned in militarie profession that, which they never knew before: neither shewed they only by these and such like words, with what consent and generall liking they heard the Consull his speech, but also testified the same by present deed and visible effect. For immediately, you should not have seene over all the campe, one man idle and  doing nothing: some fell to whet and sharpen their swords; others surbushed their headpeeces, busses, and beavers: some skoured their shields and bucklers; others their cuiraces and corslets; some fitted and buckled their harnesse to their bodies, and tried how they could bestine their limmes and rule their joints under it: some shooke their pikes and couched their javelins; others brandished their swords and lookt that they were sharpe at point: So as a man might easily perceive by them, that upon the first occasion presented of encounter with the enemie, they would enter into conflict, either to atchieve a brave victorie, or to die an honourable death.
Perseus also on the other side, perceiving that upon the arrivall of the Consull and the beginning of the spring togither, the Romane camp refounded and rung again with their stirring and rustling of armour, as if there had beene some new warre toward: that they were dislodged  from Phylla and encamped upon the banke just over against him: and that now their leader and commaunder rode up and downe to view and behold his fortifications and workes, to spie (no doubt) some way or other for passage * * * * * * * * * This Namely, the newes that king Gentius was vanquished, and that he and his kingdom was at the devotion of the Romans. encouraged the Romans hearts, and daunted not a litle the Macedonians and their king. At the first, Perseus endeavoured to suppresse secretly and stop the bruit and same thereof, by sending out certein of purpose to Pantaucus (as he came from thence) to forbid him in anywise to approach the campe. But by this time were certein children seen brought by their owne parents among the Illyrian hostages: and looke how much more carefull order was taken to conceale al, so much the sooner was every thing set abroad and blurted out by the prattle and babble of the kings servitours attending about his person.
About the same time the Rhodian embassadors came into the Romane campe, with the very same charge and commission as touching peace, which at Rome had set the LL. of the Senat in exceeding heat and choller; but farre worse audience had they in the councell of the camp, and with greater discontentment. And therefore when some advised, that they should be thrust out by head and shoulders without any answer at all; the Consul pronounced, That he would shape them an answere after fifteene daies, and not before. Meane while (that it might appeare what a goodly reckoning was made of these Rhodian peace makers who came about a pacification) he began in steed therof to debate in councell as concerning the means and maner of making war. Some were of opinion (and principally the elders and auncients) to give the assault, and force the munitions and defences planted upon the bank of the river Enipeus; for that the Macedonians  were never able to resist, if they came upon them lustily and charged them by thicke troups: for why? no longer ago (say they) than the yeer before, disseized they had ben of so many holds both higher and better fortified, and the same holden with strong garisons. Others were of mind, that Octavius the admirall should with the fleet saile to Thessalonica, and by laying wast the maritime

 coasts, to cut off and weaken the kings forces; to the end, that upon another warre shewed from behind at their backes, the K. might be withdrawen and trained about to defend the heart of his realme, and thereby forced in some sort to open and lay naked the passage over the river Enipeus. And Octavius, himselfe was of this judgement, that the banke as well by the naturall site thereof, as for the sconses made upon it by mans hand, was unsuperable and not to be gained: and besides the engins planted every where thereupon, hee heard say, that the enemies had the slight and skill to discharge all kind of shot farre better and shoot more dead sure: but the intention of the Generall Aemylius was wholly bent another way and after he had dissolved the assembly of his councell, he called unto him two merchants of the Perrhaebians, namely, Schanus and Menophilus (men of approoved fidelitie and wisdome) and of them in great secret enquired,  What kind of passages there wereover into Perrhaebia? when they answered, That the wayes were nothing difficult and daungerous, but' onely that they were kept and beset by the kings guards; he conceived some hope, that if he assailed them by night with a valiant companie, and tooke them sodainly at unawares before they looked for him, hee might chase those garrisons from their holds: for darts, arrowes, and all other shot, served to little or no purpose in the darke, when a man cannot see his marke a farre off before him; but close sword-fight, hand to hand pell mell, was it that must doe the deed: wherein the Romane souldior had no fellow. Minding therefore to use those two as guides, he sent for Octavius the Pretour: and when he had declared unto him the effect of his designment, he commaunded him to saile with his fleet to Heraclea, and to have with him victuals baked and dressed to serve a thousand souldiours ten daies.  Himselfe sent out P. Scipio Nasica and Q. Fabius Maximus his owne sonne, with five thousand select souldiors to Heraclea (as if they were to be embarked) for to wast the maritime coast of Macedonie, lying farre within the countrey, according as it had been before debated in councell; and secretly under-hand they were given to wit, that there were viands and victuals in the fleet prepared for them, to the end that nothing should stay their expedition. Then the guides who were to conduct them in their way had commaundement, so to cast their gifts and journies, that by three of the clocke in the morning the third day, they might assaile Pythoum. Himselfe in his owne person the next morrow, with intent to amuse the king and keepe him from all regard of other enterprises, earely by the breake of day began to skirmish with the enemies guards in the very mids of the channell and place of the current. The light armour and  forlorne hopes as well of the one side as the other, mainteined the fight: for it was not possible for souldiors heavily armed at all peeces, to skirmish in the channell, so uneven as it was. The descent from the bankes on either hand to the foresaid channell, conteined somwhat lesse than three hundred paces, or little better than a quarter of a mile: the middle space of the stream betweene (hollowed and eaten with the current, in some place more, in others lesse) tooke up little above a mile. In this middle plot was the medley mainteined within the view and eye of the king of one side, who looked upon them from the rampier of the campi; and of the Consull of the other, who beheld them standing with his legions. The kings auxiliaries lightly armed, sought better a farre off by the meanes of their darts and other shot. The Romans were more firme and steadie, yea and better desended with their round bucklers or Ligurian shields. About noontide  the Consull commaunded to sound the retreat unto his men; and so for that day the fray was parted, not without much bloudshed on both sides. The next morrow by sun-rising they tell to it againe, and fought more eagerly by reason that their bloud was up and their stomackes sharpened the day before: but the Romans received hurt not only by them with whom they entred into fight, but much more also from a number of those who stood in turrets and petie sconfes erected here and there; who discharged at them all kind of darts and shot, but hurled stones especially. And when they approached ones neere to the banke where the enemies were, their bullets levelled out of engins, commaunded and reached even them that were utmost and farthest off. The Consull having lost that day more men by many than before, caused them to retire somewhat later than the former day. The third day hee forbare to fight, but turned aside toward  the nether quarter of the campe, as if he minded to assay passage by an arme of the river that bended to the sea. Perseus having before his eyes * * * * * * Now was it the season of the yeer past Solstitium. Howsoever Astronomers observe two Solstitia. (i. Sun. St^aci^) in the yeere, the one in sommer, and the other in (...); Grammarian (after the best and most approoved writers) (...) Solstitium for the hotest season of the sommer onely. Thus Plantus in Pseudolo useth Solititialis herba, for an one (...) withering away with heate of the sunne: and in Trinummo, Solstitialis morbus, for Sitiasis, i. cum carbunculatur arbores nimiis ardoribus folis lub Sirio, as Plinie saith, i. the fault of blasting with heat in the dog-dayes. Livie also in the speech of Quintius to the Embassador of K. Antiochus, by Solstitialis dies, meaneth the hotest time of sommer, as by Brumalis dies elsewhere, the mid-winter. Finally, Plutarch expresseth this place thus: (...). fun-stead in summer, and neere unto the houre of noonstead

in the day, so as they journeyed in a way full of dust, when the sun was exceeding hot; and  even now they began to feele thirst and wearinesse alreadie: but it seemed evidently, that when high noon was come indeed, they would be more troubled with the one and the other. Wherupon Aemylius resolved, not to present his men thus tormented and afflicted, unto the enemies all fresh and in heart: howbeit so sharpe set they were on both sides, and so eager upon fight, that the Consull had as much need by some cunning cast or other to deceive and beguile his owne men, as to delude his enemies. Before they were all embattailed and set in array, hee was earnest with the martiall Tribunes, and called upon them to make hast and put them in ordenance: himselfe rode about from ranke to ranke, and by his comfortable words encouraged and incensed the hearts of his souldiors to fight. At the first they were all very lustie and called for the signall of battaile; but afterwards, as the heat of the weather encreased, so their visages seemed lesse vigorous, and their voices more heavie and dull; nay some of them stood leaning  on their targuets, and rested themselves bearing upon their javelins. Then he made open shew of his meaning, and in plaine tearmes commaunded the formost companies in the vaward, to measure out the forefront of a campe, and to lay downe their baggage: which when the souldiors perceived, some of them there were who rejoyced openly, for that he had not forced them to fight, so wearie as they were with travailing, and during that most scortching and burning heat. About the Generall stood his lieutenants with the captains of strangers, and Attalus himselfe among the rest. All of them allowed and thought well of the matter, all the while they thought no other but that the Consul would verily fight: for he had not so much as made them acquainted with this delay and lingering of his. But then seeing the case altered and the purpose  changed, all the rest held their peace: onely Nasioa of them all was so hardie and bold as to tell the Consull his mind and admonish him to take heed, that hee suffered not the enemie by avoiding fight, to slip and escape out of their hands, like as he had mocked and beguiled other Generals before him: for he feared much, least he would dislodge and depart in the night, and so they should be driven to pursue him with exceeding great travaile and daunger into the inland middle parts of Macedonie: so as the armie should bee put to wander up and downe all about through the blind lanes and over the narrow streights of the Macedonian mountains, like as it happened to other captains before him. And therefore he counselled him in good sadnesse, while he had the enemie within the open plain field, to charge upon him and not to loose the opportunitie of a goodly victorie now presented.
The Consull, nothing at all offended with  this franke advertisement of so noble a young gentleman, said no more but thus unto him: The day hath been (Nasica) when I carried that spirit with me which you doe at this present: and the time will come when you will be of that mind, of which I am now. Taught I am by experience of many adventures and casualties in warre, to know, when it is good time to fight, and when it is better to forbeare and sit still. For this present needlesse it is and bootlesse (standing as wee doe now arraunged in order of battell) to tell you what motives they be, that induce me to thinke it better to be quiet and not to stir this day: another time demaund the reasons thereof; and rest contented I advise you, with the authoritie and credite of an old warriour and experienced captain. The young man was blanke and said not a word: persuaded he was doubtlesse, that the Consull saw some impediments to stay the battell, which to himselfe appeared not. Paulus, when hee  perceived that the camp was set and quartered out, and the cariages bestowed accordingly, drew first out of the reregard the Triarij; then afterwards the Principes, whiles the Hastati or pikes kept their standing still in the vaward (if haply the enemies should offer battell;) at the last hee withdrew them also, beginning first at the right point, taking by little and little the souldiours from every ensigne one after another. By this meanes were the footmen had away without any trouble and tumult, and the horsemen together with the light armour opposed against the enemie in the front and head of the maine battell before the enemies: neither was the Cavallerie called backe from these stations wherein they were placed, untill the forefront of the rampier and trench was fully finished. The king likewise, who without any refusall of battell had stood readie that day to fight, contenting himselfe with this, that he knew the stay thereof was occasioned by the enemie, led his companies backe into his campe. After the Romanes were encamped and well fortified, C. Sulpitius Gallus, a martiall Colonell of the second legion, who had beene Pretour the yeare before, by permission of the Consull called the souldiours to a generall audience, and before them all declared and pronounced, that the next night following there would bee seene an

 eclipse of the moone, from the second hower of the night untill the fourth: and this hee did because no man should wonder thereat, as if it were a prodigious token. Also hee made demonstration unto them, that it might bee well fore-knowne and fore-told, because it is a thing comming at certaine times by the ordinarie course of nature. For like as they nothing marvelled at the rising and going downe both of sunne and moone at set houres, nor to see the moone sometime shine bright out at the full, otherwhiles in the waine, giving light onely with the small tips of her horns: even so they ought not to make a wonder and miraculous matter of it, that she should be dark, when as her bodie is hidden by the shaddow of the earth. Thus the moon was eclipsed at the hour before prognosticated, overnight before the 4 Septemb. eeven of the Nones of September: by occasion wherof, the Roman soldiors held Gallus for a deeply learned Sage, and a divine  Philosopher: but contrariwise the Macedonians were troubled with the fight thereof, as an heavie prodigie, portending and presaging the ruine of that realme and the utter destruction of the whole nation. And surely the houling and yelling which they made in their campe all the while, untill the moone recovered her full light againe, was a very prognostication and prediction of no lesse. The morrow after both the armies were so hote set and greedie of fight, that both king and Consull were blamed by some of their owne souldiours, for that they went out of the field the day before, and strucke not a battel. As for the king, he had his excuse and defence readie, not onely because the enemie refused the fight first, in open view of all men, and so retired his forces into his campe, but also in that he had pight and raunged his ensigns in such a place, unto which the Macedonian battell called Phalanx could not advaunce, considering that with the smallest  disad untage of the ground, there is no use at all thereof. The Consull for his part, as the day before he seemed to have pretermitted and lost the opportunitie of a combat, yea, and to have given the enemie advauntage to departin the night season (if he had so list) so now also hee trifled out the time, making semblance of sacrifice, whereas the signall of battell at the point of day was put forth for the souldiours to enter into the field. Well, at the last when the sacrifice was duly performed, about the third houre of the day, he assembled his counsell about him; where, some there were that thought he prolonged the time for the nonce, with his discourses and unseasonable consultations, and spent that opportunitie so, which should bee emploied better in fight and execution of some worthie exploit. Howbeit, after some speeches passed, the Consull made an Oration unto his souldiours in this wise.The Oration of L. Aemylius unto his armie.
Pub. Nasica (quoth he) a right valiant yong gentleman,  of all those that advised to give battell yesterday, was the onely man that uttered his mind, and acquainted me with his counsell; yet afterwards, even hee held his peace and kept silence, in such sort, as he seemed to chaunge his opinion, and to be of my mind in the end. Some others there be that have taken a several course by themselves, and thought it better to carpe at their Generall behind his backe, than to admonish him to his face. As for me, I will not thinke much nor make it daintie, to render a reason both to you, o P. Nasica, and to them also who have thought the same that you did (although they caried it more secretly) why I made such stay and deferred battel. For, so far off am I of repenting for our yesterdaies repose, that I am of this beleefe rather, how by that meanes and policie alone I saved the whole armie. And because none of you may thinke that I have taken such a pitch, and hold that opinion of mine without just cause, let him  consider and discourse together with mee (if hee thinke so good) what advauntages the enemies had, and how many things made against us. First and formost, how farre they surpasse us in number, assured I am that none of you either was ignorant before, or could chuse but observe and marke yesterday, seeing their armie how it was thrust and thronged together. And of that small number which we are, the fourth part of our fighting men was left behind to guard the carriage; and well ye wot, that we set not the most cowards to the keeping of our baggage. But suppose we had been all there together. How then? thinke wee, I pray you, that we have not ynough of it, even out of this very campe wherein we have rested one whole night, to goe either this day or to morrow at the furthest, with the leave and power of the gods into the field, if you shall so thinke good? Skilleth it not indeed, and is it all one, to bid a souldiour take armes, whome neither the  travell of this daies journey, nor toile of labourious worke, hath tainted and wearied, but is at ease and quiet, yea, and fresh within his tent, and so to bring him forth into the field for a battell lustie and strong, full of bodily vigour and courage of heart? or to offer and expose unto the enemie who is heartie and fresh, who hath taken his rest and ease, and hath brought with him to a fight his strength entire and whole, not foiled or spent upon any occasion; to present, I say, unto

such an enemie, a souldiour tired out with long journey upon the way, wearied with carrying his  lode and burden, all molten to sweat and dropping therewith, his throat burnt and scorched for drought and thirst, his face and eies full of dust, and all his bodie rosted against the noone-sunne? Now tell mee, by the faith yee owe to the gods, what is hee that beeing in this so good a plight, (were he the veriest beast and coward otherwise in a countrie) could not foile and beat out of the field the hardiest and most valiant man that is? Moreover, what should I say how materiall and important this also was, that our enemies had marshalled their battailons with great leisure after long time of rest; that they had repaired and refreshed their own strength, and stood raunged every man orderly in his owne tanke; whereas we were at one instant both hastily to embattaile and set our men in array, yea and also to fall to a medley pell mell without all order? But, may some man say, True it is, our battaile in deed wee should have had much out of square and shufled in great confusion: yet our campe was well fortified; we had forecast and provided for good watering, the passage thereto was good and safe by reason of strong guards placed every way; and all coasts were cleered about us by our espials. Nay ywis: but contrariwise, nothing (to lay truly) was ours, but the bare and naked plaine field where we were to fight. Your auncestors in times past, esteemed a campe fortified with rampiars and trenches, as good as a port and harbour of sure refuge, for an armie against all chaunces and misfortunes whatsoever: from thence to yssue forth, and thither to retire for safetie, after they had bin tossed and beaten with the tempest of a battaile. And therefore when it was empaled round about with good defences, they had a care also to reenforce and strengthen it with strong guards; for as much as he that hath lost his camp and is turned out of it, is ever holden for vanquished, notwithstanding he woon the day and had  the better in the field. The hold of a campe serveth for a place of retrait to the conqueror; and of refuge to the conquered. How many armies could I recken, which having sped but badly in the battaile, were driven to take their leaguer; yet afterwards seeing their time and spying their vantage, otherwhiles sallied forth, and in the turning of an hand repulsed and discomfited the enemie, for all his former victorie? This seat and retrait of souldiours in time of warre, resembleth as a man would say, another native countrie of theirs; the rampier serveth in fleed of walls, the tent and pavilion is to every souldior his house and home. And should we have fought in deed like vagabonds without any place of mansion whereunto we might betake our selves after victorie? But against these difficulties and empeachments of giving battaile, this one thing is objected: How and if the enemie (say some) had gone his waies last night between; what a soule deale of  trouble and sorrow should we have endured againe in pursuing him as far as to the heart, nay to the very farthest frontiers of Macedonie? But I for my part verily, hold this for certaine, that if he had ever ment and resolved to have started from hence, he would never have staied thus heere as he hath done, nor brought his forces out into the field. For how much more easie was it for him to depart and be gone when we were farther off, than now when we are readie to tread upon his heeles, and goe over his backe? Surely he could not possibly have given us the slip, but wee should have bene ware of his dislodging, either by day or night But, say he had gone his waies; what could we have wished more at the gods hands, than to set upon the taile and back part of the enemies in the open plaine ground, departing in disarray disbanded one from another, as they abandoning their fort and strong hold, and whose camp situate most sure upon an exceeding high  and steepe banke of a river, fortified also with a rampier, and many a sconce and turret beside, wee gave the venture to assault? Loe, what the causes were, why the battaile was put off from yesterday to this present. For I must tell you, I am as willing my selfe to trie the fortune of a field as any other: and to that end (because the advenues to the enemie over the river Enipeus were stopped up against us) I have found a new way through another pase and streight, by disseazing the guards of the enemies there left; and never will I give over untill I have defaited him quit and brought this war to an end. After this oration all kept silence, parly for that many of them were woon to his opinion; and partly because they feared to find fault to no purpose and so to give offence, when a thing howsoever once past and forslipt, cannot be recalled and amended. But that day neither, was there battaile sought, for any great desire that the Cos. or king had therto. The king wished  it not; because he was now to charge his enemies, not weary of their way as the day before, nor troubled about their embattailing in such sort, and hardly at the last brought into ordinance: The Consull againe had no great stomacke thereto, for that his campe newly pitched, was provided neither of fewell nor forrage brought in and laid up alreadie: and for the purveiance thereof,

 out of the villages and fields neere at hand, many of the souldiors were gone abroad forth of the campe. And thus when neither of the Generals were willing thereto, meere chaunce and fortune (which is more powerfull than all the counsell and pollicie of man) made means and gave occasion of a battaile. There was a river not very great, neere to the enemies campe, whereat both Romanes and Macedonians watered: and on either banke side certain guards kept their stations, for the safetie and securitie as well of the one part as the other. Two cohorts there were for the Romanes of Marrucines and Pelignians, footmen; two troupes or cornets besides of Samnite horsemen; all commaunded by M. Sergius Sylus a lieutenant. Over and besides, another standing corps de guard quartered before the camp, conteining three cohorts, namely of Firmian, Vestine, and Cremonian footmen, together with two troupes of Placentine and Essernian horsemen,  all conducted by lieutenant Cluvius. Now whenall was well and quiet about the river, and no side provoked or challenged other; it fortuned that a sumpter horse [of the Romanes] about the fourth houre of the day brake from the hands of those that had the tending and keeping of such, tooke the river and made toward the banke of the farther side: and when three souldiors followed after crosse the water almost knee-deepe to catch him, the Thracians began to traine the jade from the mids of the river to their banke side: but after one of them was slaine, the Romanes recovered the beast againe and retired to their owne guard. Now there was a strong corps de guard of eight hundred Thracians upon the banke which the enemies kept, from whencesome fewe at first, taking it to the heart that a countriman of theirs should thus be killed before their face, traversed over the river in pursuit of those that had slaine him; afterwards more and more, and in the  end all followed after, and together with that guard * * * * * * leadeth to the battaile. Men were moved with a reverence of the majestie of his place, as he was L. Generall; also with respect of the honour and glorie of the man otherwise; and above all, with the regard of his age: for that being about threescore yeers old he did undergo the offices and parts of young men in the adventures of greatest travell and daunger. That void space which was between the light targuetiers called Cetrati and the thicke battailons named Phalanges, the legion tooke up cleane, and broke within the battaile of the enemies. Behind the Cetrati was this legion, and had affront them the Pavoisers called Aglaspides, with rosplendent or shining shields. L. Attilius who had bene Consull before time was commaunded to lead against the battailon of other Pavoisers called Leucaspides with white shields. And that was the maine battaile of the enemies.  Against the right flanke, from which quarter the skirmish first began about the river, the Elephants were conducted together with a wing of consederate horsemen, and from thence began the Macedonians to flie. For like as many new devises and inventions of men, carrie some shew in apparance of words when they are first spoken of; but come to practise and trie them once, and not to argue and dispute how they should be put in execution, they vanish away without effect and prove just nothing: even so at that time, the Elephants bare a name only in the battaile, without any use and service at all. That violence of the Elephants (such as it was) the Latin allies seconded immediatly, and forced the left flanke to recule. Then the second legion was put forth, and in the mids entred upon the Phalanx and put it to flight; neither was there any cause of victorie more evident than this, namely, that many skirmishes there were in divers places, which at the first  troubled the Phalanx, and afterwards discomfired it. True it is, that to abide the force thereof it is unpossible, so long as it keepeth close united together, and putteth forth their sharp pointed pikes bent thicke couched together breast-high: but if a man by charging the same here and there, force them once to turne about those pikes, which for their length and heavie weight are unweldie and hard to guide, they soone are intangled and catch one within another untowardly: but in case it fall out so, that there be any tumult made either aflanke or behind, then there ensueth a generall trouble and confusion of all, as if they all at once came tumbling downe: like as it hapned then, when as against the Romanes, who assailed them by troupes in sundrie parts, they were driven to break their battaillon into many peeces as it were, and so to make head and affront the enemie. But the Romanes espied where there was a breach made and lane left between, and there they  would insinuate and wind in with their rankes and files: who, if they had run upon the front of the Phalanx close raunged altogither with their whole battaillon, they had enwrapped and entangled themselves within their pikes: (which in the beginning of the conflict happened to the Peligni as they unadvisedly dealt with the targuetriers called Cetrati) and had never been able to sustaine that battaillon united thicke and couched together. But as there was a cruell carnage

committed upon the companies of the infanterie in every place, save only those that flung away  their weapons and fled; so the souldiours of the Cavallerie departed in manner safe and found out of the medley. The K. himselfe was the first man that fled: and now by this time was escaped beyond Pydna, and with his corners of horsemen which they call, Sacred, made hast to Pella. Anon after followed Costacus and the Cavallerie of the Odrysians: consequently, other troupes and companies of Macedonian horsemen departed and kept their arraies unbroken: for that the Phalanx or battaillon of the footmen between, which kept the conquerors occupied in execution, put them quite out of remembrance to pursue the men of arms. A long time continued the massacre of this Phalanx afront, aflanke, and behind. In the end, they who escaped the hands of the enemies, and fled without weapons to the sea; some took the water, and stretching forth their hands to them that were abourd in the ships, most humbly besought them for to save their  lives: and when they saw the small pinnaces and cockbotes making apace on all hands toward them from the ships, they imagining that their comming was to catch them for their prisoners rather than to kill them outright, waded farther into the water, yea and some swimmed forward: but when they saw they were by them of the botes slaine in all hostile manner like enemies, as many as could, swam backe againe to land: where they met with a fouler mischiefe, and were worse plagued than before: for the elephants (driven by their governours to the shore) trode them under foot and crushed their guts out. All men generally agreed in this point, That never at any one field, were so many Macedonians defeated and killed by the Romanes: for twentie thousand men were there slaine, and to the number of six thousand (who fled to Pydna out of the battaile) came alive into the enemies hands: five thousand besides were taken prisoners, as they  fled scattering and disbanded here and there. Of the victors, there died not above an hundred, and the more part by farre of Pelignians; but a greater number somewhat, were hurt and wounded. And if the battaile had begun sooner, that the winners might have had day enough to follow the chase upon their enemies, all their forces had been utterly defeated and devoured by the sword: but now the night comming upon them, as it covered and shadowed the enemies that fled, so it caused the Romanes not to be so hastie and forward in pursuit; considering they were not acquainted with the coasts of the countrey. Perseus fled to the forrest Pieria by the port rode way, with a great number of horsemen and his roiall traine about him. So soone as he was entred the forest where the way divided into sundrie and divers parts, seeing that the night approached, hee turned out of the high beaten way with very few of his most loyall and faithfull  friends. The horsemen being thus abandoned and left destitute of their leader, slipt some one way and some another home into their own cities: certain of them (but very few) recovered Pella before Perseus himselfe, because they rode a direct and readie way. The K. was much troubled and vexed untill midnight almost, what with feare and what with difficultie to find out the way. When he was come to Pella, Eactus the governour thereof, and the kings pages, were ready attendant at the court to wait upon him and doe him service: but contrariwise, of all those friends who escaped safe out of the battaile and chaunced by variable adventures to come into Pella, there would not one come at him, notwithstanding they were oftentimes sent for. Three onely bare him companie in that flight of his, to wit, Evander of Crete, Neon a Boeotian, and Archidamus the Aetolian. Fearing therefore least they who refused to come unto him, would soone  after enterprise some greater matter against him; with those three he fled still forward, about the fourth watch of the night. After him there followed upon five hundred Cretensians. Toward Amphipolis he went; but he departed in the night from Pella, making all the hast hee could to passe over the river Axius before day-light, supposing that the Romanes would give over the chase there, by reason of the difficult and dangerous fourd.
The Consull being returned into the camp with victorie, (because he should not have the fruition of sincere and perfect joy) was greatly disquieted and troubled about his younger sonne, and that was P. Scipio, surnamed also afterwards Africanus, because hee rased the citie of Carthage: the naturall sonne he was of the Consull Paulos, and the adopted nephew or grandchild of Africanus: he was at that time seventeene yeeres of age, and (which augmented the sorrow  of the father) whiles he followed in chase the enemies upon the spurre, was carried by the prease a contrarie way, in such fort, as it was late ere he returned: and then the Consull having recovered him againe safe and found, felt the joy of so great a victorie, and not before.
When the bruit and newes of this battaile was arrived at Amphipolis, and that the dames

 and wives of the citie ran flocking into the temple of Diana, whome they call Tauropolos, to beseech and call for her aid, Diodorus the chiefe governour of the citie, fearing the Thracians (who were two thousand in garrison) least in that tumult and garboile they would spoile and rifle the citie; craftily suborned a fellow for the nones in guise and shew of a letter-carrier, and received from him letters in the mids of the market place: wherein it was written, That the Romane fleet was arrived in Emathia, and that the territories all about were pitifully wasted by them; and therfore the rulers and captains of Emathia requested him to send a garison to succor them against these soraiers. When he had read these counterfeit letters, he exhorted the Thracians to undertake this expedition and to go into Emathia for to guard the coasts therof: giving them to understand, that considering the Romans were loosely straggling and scattered about the fields and  villages, they might make a foule havocke and carnage of them, and besides raise and bring away with them a great bootie: withall, he forgat not to elevate as much as he could, the same of the foresaid unhappie field fought, saying, That if all had ben true, there would have ben messengers comming thick one after another upon their flight, to bring fresh tidings still therof. Vnder this pretence he sent away the Thracians; and so soone as hee saw they were passed over the river Strymon, incontinently he shut the gates. The third day after the battaile fought, came Perseus to Amphipolis, and from thence hee sent Orators to Paulus with an herald of peace. Meane while Hippias, Midon, and Pantaucus, the kings principall friends, went themselves to the Consull, and surrendred unto the Romanes Berrhaea, whither they had retired and fled immediately out of the field. Other cities also strucken with feare one after another, prepared to doe the  like.
The Consull, after he had sent to Rome with tidings and letters of this victorie, Q. Fabius his owne sonne, together with L. Lentulus and Q. Metellus, gave the spoile of the enemies armie thus lying defeated, unto his footmen: but the horsemen hee allowed the bootie of all the territorie round about, with condition, that they should not be absent from the camp more than two nights. Then, he removed nerer unto the sea, and lodged about Pydna. First Berrhaea (as is beforesaid) yeelded, then Thessalonica and Pella; and consequently, all Macedonie well-neere within two daies was surrendered. But the Pydneans who were next unto him, as yet were behind with sending their embassadours: the reason was, for that the confused confluence thither of many nations, and the disordered multitude of those that fled out of the field, and were all met there together,  hindered the counsell and consent of the whole cittie: so as the gates were not only shut, but also mured up. Now were Midon and Pantaucus sent to parle under the wals with Solon, who lay there with a garison: by whose means the whole troup and multitude of armed men was sent away, the citie rendred up, and the pillage given to the souldiours.
Perseus, whose onely hope was in the aid of the Bisaltes whom hee had assaied and sollicited, and for which purpose he had sent his embassadours (although in vaine) held a publicke assembly, and bringing his sonne Philip with him came forth before the people; to the end that hee might by some exhortation confirme and strengthen the hearts, as well of the Amphipolitanes as the companies of foot and horse, who either at all times continually had followed him, or were retired thither by flight for refuge. But ever as he was about to make a speech unto the audience (which he oft began to doe) he could not proceed for tears. Now for that himselfe was not able to speake, he came down from the pulpit, and imparted unto Evander the Cretensian those points, which his will was to be delivered and proposed unto the congregation there assembled. The multitude, as they lamented and wept againe to see the king so piteously shed tears; so they regarded not the speech of Evander: nay some of them were so bold as to crie out aloud from the middest of the assembly, Away, away, and get yee gone from hence, that the small remnant of us here, perish not for your sakes. The stout resolution of these men stopped Evander his mouth, that hee could not say a word and replie againe. The king by this time was gotten to his lodging, and having conveighed into certaine bottomes upon the river Strymon all his money, gold, and silver, went also in person downe to the water side. The Thracians durst not goe abourd  and commit to sea, but slunke every man away to his own home; and so did all the sort of soldiors besides. The Cretensians only (for greedie hope of gain) accompanied the king, who because in sharing and dealing money among them, he should incurre more offence than win thanks, laid out fiftie talents among them upon the river side to skamble for. When they had made quicke riddance and a cleane hand with it, they went abourd in a great hurrey so as one barge overcharged

with a multitude of passengers was cast away and sunk in the mouth of the river. That very day  they arrived at Galipsus, and the morrow after at Samothrace, the very place that they intended; and thither (by report) were conveighed two thousand talents. Paulus after he had sent presidents to govern every citie surrendered, to the end that no injurie should be offered in this new peace to the conquered, and detaining with him still the kings heraulds and Oratours, not knowing any thing of the kings flight and departure, sent P. Nasica to Amphipolis with a mean regiment of foot and horse, to ruinate and destroy at once Sintica, and also to empeach all the dessignements and enterprises of the Romanes.
In this time Melibaea was forced and ransacked by Cn. Octavius: but at Aeginium (to the siege whereof Cn. Anicius the Lieutenant was sent) two hundred men were lost by a sallie made out of the towne, for that the Aeginians heard not the newes of the late defeature.
The Consull departed from Pydna with his whole armie, and the morrow after came before  Pella. Where having encamped within a mile of the citie, he made abode there for certain daies, to view on all sides the situation of the citie, which he perceived and marked full well, to have ben chosen not without good cause, for the imperiall seat of the Macedonian kings. Situate it is upon an hill that lieth to the Southwest, enclosed round with meeres, so deepe as they cannot possibly be waded and passed through: and these marishes are bred and fed both winter and summer by waters overflowing out of certaine lakes. Within the very marish next unto the citie side, there standeth a strong tower by itselfe, bearing up above the rest, as it were an Island railed upon a terrace, made with exceeding labour of mans hand, which terrace both sustaineth a wall, and is not hurt with the moisture of the marish round about it; and a far off seemeth close joined to the  citie wall. Howbeit, devided it is by a river betweene it and the wall, and yet united to the citie by a bridge over it: so as, whosoever assaileth the same without, can have no accesse any way to it, neither, if the king be disposed to shut and enclose any man within, can hee possibly make an escape and get forth but over the said bridge; which a few men may keep and guard with ease. In this place the kings treasure used to lie, but at that time there was no more found but the 300 talents which were sent to king Gentius first, and afterwards staid and deteined. During the time that the Consull remained about Pella in his standing camp, many embassages had audience given them, who repaired thither out of Thessalie, especially to congratulate with him, testifying their owne joy and wishing his. But the Consull after that he had intelligence that Perseus had crossed over to Samothraca, departed from Pella, and at the fourth gift and journey that  he made, came to Amphipolis. The whole multitude went forth of the citie in great numbers to meet him, which gave testimonie to every man, that neither a good nor just king * * * * *




THE XLV. BOOKE OF THE HISTORIES OF T. LIVIVS of Padoa, from the foundation of the  Citie of Rome.

The Breviarie of L. Florus upon the five and fortith Booke.
PErseus was taken prisoner by Aemylius Paulus in Samothracia. When Antiochus king of Syria besieged Ptolomaeus and Cleopatra, king and queene of Aegypt, embassadours were sent from the Senate of Rome, willing Antiochus to give over, and besiege no more an associate king  unto them: but when he made answere to this their message delivered, that hee would consider better what he had to doe, Popilius one of the said embassadors, with his rod that he had in his hand drew a circle about the king, and charged him to give him another answere before he went out of that circle: by which rude, rough, and blunt behavior, be forced Antiochus to lay away armes and surcease war. Divers embassies of States and kings came with congratulation, and were admitted into the Senat. As for that of the Rhodians, because in the late war they stood out and tooke part against the Romanes, it was excluded. The morrow after, when it was debated in counsell, about making war upon the Rhodians, the embassadours pleaded thecause of their countrey in the Senate: So, they neither had a friendly dispatch and farewell, as allied associates, ne yet were sent away as professed enemies. Macedonie was now reduced into the forme of a province. Aemylius Paulus triumphed, notwithstanding the contradiction of his owne souldiours, discontented for that they were pinched and cut short in the pillage, and although Servius Sulpitius Galba interposed himselfe and gaine said it. Hee led  before his chariot Perseus with his three sonnes. And that the ioy of this triumph of his should not bee entire and accomplished, blemished soulely it was with the death of his two sonnes: the one died before, the other after the triumph of the father. The Censors tooke a review of the citie, in which were assessed and enrolled in their subsidie bookes 312805 citizens. Prusias king of Bithynia repaired to Rome, to reioice with the Senat in their behalfe for the victorie and conquest of Macedonie, where he recommended unto the Senate his sonne Nicomedes. This base minded king, made all of flatterie, named himselfe the enfranchised vassale of the people of Rome.

QVintus Fabius, L. Lentulus, and Q. Metellus, the messengers of the late victorie, albeit they made all the hast that possibly they could, and came speedily to Rome, yet found the joy thereof ^o have prevented them:  for the fourth day after the battaile fought with the king, even as the playes and games were exhibited in the shew-place, there was heard suddainly at first, a confused humming noise, which spred over all the companies of the spectators, That a field was fought in Macedonie and Perseus vanquished: afterwards arose a more cleere and evident voice, which grew at length to an open shout and clapping of hands, as if certaine newes had beene brought of the said victorie. The magistrates wondred hereat, and made search after the author of this so sodaine gladnesse, but none would be found: and then verily it passed away as the momentanie joy of some vaine and uncertein occurrence: howbeit a joyfull presage of some good luck setled in mens hearts and remained behind. But after that this was confirmed by the  true report and relation of Fabius, Lentulus, and Metellus, which they made at their comming, all men rejoyced as well at the fore-giving of their minds, as for the victorie itselfe. This joyous conceit of this assembly in the shew-place, is reported otherwise, and carrieth with it no lesse probabilitie and likelihood of truth, in this manner: Vpon the ad dicimum Calendas Obtavius. two and twentieth of September (which was the second day of the solemnitie of Romane games) as the Consull was going

up to the lists for to set out the running of the charriots, a post, by report, (who said hee was  come out of Macedonie) presented letters unto him decked with lawrell. The Consull then, so soone as he had set on foot the race, presently mounted up into his owne chariot: and as he rode through the shew-place toward the common scaffolds, he shewed unto the people the said laureat letters: which being once seene, the people presently (forgetting all their sports and fights) ran out into the mids of the cirque, and thithier the Cos. assembled the Senat; unto whom when he had read the letters, by the advise and allowance of the LL. even before the publicke stages and skaffolds, he published the contents thereof to all the people in this manner, That L. Aemylius his colleague had fought a set field with king Perseus, That the armie of the Macedonians was discomfited and put to flight, That the king himselfe was fled with some few of his traine, and that all the cities of Macedonie were subdued and brought under the subjection of the people of  Rome. These tidings were no sooner heard, but there arose ashout with exceeding great applatise, in so much as many men there, left the sight of these disports, and carried these joyfull newes home to their wives and children. This was the thirteenth day after the battaile given in Macedonie. The morrow after the Senate assembled in Curia (Hostilia) and ordeined it was, that publicke processions should be solemnized; an Act also passed, that the Consull Aemylius should dismisse all those that had taken the militarie oth, excepting onely the sea-souldiours and marriners; and as for the discharging of those souldiours, agreed it was, that it should be moved in the Counsell-chamber, when the lieutenants were arrived and come from L. Aemylius the Consull, for they had dispatched a courrier with letters before them. Now these messengers aforesaid entred the citie the ad. (...). five and twentieth of September about the second home of the  day, and drew after them a mightie train of those who encountring them upon the way wheresoever ever they went, accompanied them to Rome, and so directly went to the market-place and tribunall seat. It fortuned that the Senatours sat then in the ordinarie Curia or Counsel-house, and thither the Consull brought the embassadours. Where they were reteined and held so long onely as they might declare these points, How great the kings forces were, as well in foot as horse; how many thousand were slaine, how many taken prisoners; what small losse of Romane souldiours that great diffeature of enemies cost; how few they were in number that the king fled with; that it was supposed he would passe into Samothracia; that the fleet was in readines to make way after them in chase; and that it was not possible for him to escape either by land or sea. And then anone they were brought foorth before the generall assembly of the people, where they  made relation of the same. And then the joy was renewed upon proclamation made by the Consull, That all the sacred temples and churches should be set open: and that every man should depart out of the assembly to render thankes unto the gods; in such sort, that all the temples of the gods throughout the whole citie were replenished with mightie multitudes and congregations not of men onely, but also of women. Then the Senate met againe in the ordinarie Curia: and ordeined that publicke processions and thankes should bee made for five daies together in all churches and chappels and at every altar, for the happie and fortunate successe of L. Aemylius, and that greater head of beasts should be killed for sacrifice. Also that the ships which rid readie rigged and well appointed in the river Tyberies for to be sent into Macedonie, (in case it had so fallen out, that the king had bene able to have resisted) should bee retired and drawne to  land, and so laid up due in their dockes and arsenals: also that the marriners should bee cassed, after the receit of a whole yeeres pay, and together with all those who had sworne to serve the Consull, should have their conge and pasport to be gone. Item, that all the souldiours in Corcyra, Brundusium, about the Adriaticke sea, or in the territorie of the Larinates (for in all these there was an armie set in readinesse, wherwith C. Licinius if need required should have succoured his colleague) should have their discharge. Also processions were published in the full assembly of the people, to begin ex a.d. quint. I^^^ Octab. from the tenth day of October, and so to hold on five daies after.
Out of Illyrium also two leiutenants or messengers, to wit, L. Licinius Nerva and P. Dicius, brought word that the armie of the Illyrians was defaited; that king Gentius was taken prisoner, and that all Illyricum was reduced under the obeisance of the people of Rome. For which exploits atchieved by the leading and conduct of L. Anicius the Pretour, the Senate decreed a solemne procession to be holden for three daies, like as also the Latine feast and holidaies were proclamed by the Consull, for to be holden the in a.qus^t. t^^^.and prid. Idus Novembr. ninth, tenth, and eleventh daies of November.

 Some have recorded that the Rhodian embassadours had not yet their dispatch nor were sent away, but after the newes of this victorie, were called into the Senate in mockerie and scorne of that sottish insolence and pride of their owne.
And then Agepolis the principall person of them spake in this manner, That the Rhodians had sent them in deed as embassadours to treat about an accord and to make peace betweene the Romanes and king Perseus, for that this warre as it was greevous and prejudiciall to all Greece, so it could not chuse but bee chargeable and hurtfull to the Romanes themselves. But fallen out it is passing well through the goodnesse of fortune, that the warre is ended otherwise: and hath given them so good an occasion and opportunitie, to rejoyce and testifie their joy in the behalfe of the Romanes, for the atchievance of so brave and notable a victorie. Thus much spake the Rhodian. And then the Senat  made aunswere againe, That the Rhodians had sent that embassie not regarding the good and profit of Greece, ne yet for any care they had of the expenses defraied by the Romanes, but onely in love and favour of king Perseus. For if they had bene respective unto them (as they would make semblance and have the world to thinke) they should have addressed their embassadours when as Perseus invaded Thessalie with an armie, and for two yeeres space persecuted and plagued the cities of Greece, besieging some, and frighting others with menaces of warre: yet all that while, not a word with the Rhodians as touching peace. But after that they heard once that the Romanes were mounted over the streights and passed through into Macedonie; that king Perseus was shut up and enclosed sure enough for starting any way, then and not before, they could send an embassage, for no other reason in the world, but to rid and deliver Perseus out of that imminent  daunger which threatned him so neere hand. With which answer the embassadors were sent away.
About the verie same time M. Marcellus being departed out of his government in the province of Spaine, after he had forced and woon Marcolica a renowmed and famous citie in those parts, brought home with him and bestowed in the publicke treasurie ten pound weight of gold, and Ad summons sestersium decies. about a million of Sesterces in silver coine.
Paulus Aemylius the Consull lying encamped (as is aforesaid) neere Syrae in the Odomantidian territorie, when hee saw the letters from king Perseus brought unto him by three embassadours of base condition, wept (by report) himselfe, to consider the frailtie of this world, and  the fickle state of mans life; to see (I say) that hee who erewhile could not rest content with the roialtie of Macedonie, but would needs warre upon the Dardanians and Illyrians, and levie the aid of the Bastarnians, was now after the losse of his armie, as one exiled out of his owne kingdome, driven into a small Iland, where, like a poore suppliant hee remained in suretie, not by meanes of his owne forces, but through the religious protection of a sanctuarie and priviledged place. But when he red the superscription of the letter with this stile. KING PERSEUS TO THE CONSUL PAULUS, GREETING, he could no more pitie him, for thinking of his blockish follie, in that he had no sence and feeling of the calamitie and miserie wherein he stood. And therfore albeit the contents of the letter otherwise were praiers so demisse and object, as little savoured of a princely mind, yet was that embassage dismissed without aunswere and without letters. Perseus soone perceived what title it was that hee must lay downe and forget now that hee was  vanquished: whereupon he addressed other letters in qualitie of a private person without any other addition at all: and by those as he craved so obteined he likewise, that certain agents should be sent unto him, with whom hee might parley and commune as touching the state and condition of his present fortune. So three delegat embassadours were sent unto him, namely P. Lentulus, A. Posthumius Albinus and A. Antonius. But nothing was effected in this agencie or embassage; whiles Perseus stucke hard and laboured all he could to hold still and keepe the roiall name of king, and Paulus endevoured contrariwise, that he should submit himselfe and all that he had to the protection and clemencie of the people of Rome. During these debates and affairs between them, the fleet of Cn. Octavius was arrived at Samothrace, who also presenting before their eies fearefull objects of terrour, went about to force him as well by threates and menaces, as to win  him by hope of faire intreatie and good usage to yeeld and submit; and herein he found some help by means of an occurrent, either hapning by chaunce and meer adventure, or contrived by mans devise of set purpose. L. Attilius a noble young gentleman, perceiving that the people of the Samothracians were met in a generall assembly, requested of the magistrates that he might be permitted to make a short speech unto the people.
Good leave he had, and then hee began in this

wife; My masters and friends of Samothracia, I would gladly know, whether it be a false fable or  a true tale which we have heard, That this is a sacred Iland, and the soile therof holy and altogither inviolable? When they all accorded in one consent, that the Iland was as holy and sacred as it was reported: How is it then (quoth he) that a murderer hath violated and polluted it with the bloud of king Eumenes? And considering that in all preambles and prefaces of sacred and divine service premised, they are commaunded precisely to avaunt from the ministerie thereof, who have not pure and innocent hands; will you suffer in deed your most secret sanctuaries and devout tabernacles to be stained with the bloodie bodie of a thiefe and fellon? Now was it a rise report and common bruit in every citie of Greece, That K. Eumenes had like to have ben murdred at Delphos by Evander.
The Samothracians, besides that they saw their whole Iland and the said temple to be in the power and puissance of the Romans, tooke these reproofs and reproches to  touch them neer, and not without just cause: whereupon they sent Theondas, the soveraign magistrate (whom they call their K.) unto king Perseus, giving him to understand, That Evander the Cretensian was charged with murder: also that by custom and tradition from their auncestors, they had ful power and authoritie to proceed by order of law, against all those that were presented and endited for entring within the liberties and sacred precincts of the temple, with unclean and unpure hands. Now if Evander stand upon his innocencie, and knoweth himselfe cleere and unguiltie of the capitall crime laid to his charge, let him come to his answer and plead his cause for his owne defence, and he shall be heard: but if he dare not hazard the judiciall triall of the issue, retire he and depart, that hee pollute not the temple; let him shift for himselfe and escape away. Perseus called foorth Evander unto him, willing him in no case to trie the processe of justice;  for neither would his cause justifie him, nor any favour beare him out. Hee much seated withall, least being cast and condemned, he would bewray Perseus himselfe and appreach him for the setter and author of that so horrible a fact: and no way then but one, even with patience and resolution to take his death. Evander gainsaied nought in outward appearance, but pretending in words, that hee had rather die by a cup of poison than upon the swords point, sought secret meanes to flie and be gone. The king upon advertisement hereof, fearing least the Samothracians would discharge their anger upon him, as if he had wrought his evasion to avoid due punishment, commaunded Evander to be made away and killed. After which murder committed thus rashly without all advisement, hee be thought himselfe and considered, that he should be touched deeply with the same spot of guilt that Evander was noted with: namely, that as Eumenes was by Evander wounded at Delphos, so Evander by him was murdered in Samothracia; and so the two most holy and religious temples in the world were stained and polluted with mans blood; and who but he the cause and contriver thereof? But the blame of this soule fact of his, was by the corruption of Theondas quite averted another way; and he for a summe of money bare the people in hand, that Evander was his owne hangman. But Perseus by this lewd and detestable act, committed upon the person of the onely friend whome hee had alive, (so well approoved and tried by him in so many adventures, and now betraied for his labour by him, unto whome he refused to be a traitour) estraunged cleane the hearts and affections of all men from him: so as now every man raunged with the Romanes. Thus abandoned as hee was and left to himselfe, they forced him to cast about and devise how to escape and be gone. Whereupon he  called unto him Oroandes the Cretensian, a man that knew well the coasts of Thrace, (because he had negotiated and traded in those parts;) and with him hee dealt to embarke him in some small foist, and so to conduct him unto Cotys. Now there was a certain bay under a promontorie of Thrace, wherein a pinnace stood in readinesse: thither, after sun-setting were all things brought for necessarie use; and money withall, as much as closely could be conveighed. The king himselfe at midnight accompanied with three persons (for no more were privie to this his flight) went out at a posterne or backe dore of the house, into a garden neere his bed-chamber, and so with much a doe having clambred over a mud wall, passed to the water side. Now was Oroandes alreadie loosed from the foresaid creeke; for so soone as the money was once brought thither into the vessell, hee launched into the deepe and set his course for Candie. Perseus, after  that the barke was not to be found in the bay, walked and wandred a good while along the strond: and fearing at last the day-light approaching (yet not so hardie as to adventure backe againe to his lodging) lurked behind in one side of the temple close unto a blind corner and coign thereof. Among the Macedonians, they called those the kings pages who were the princes and

 noble means sonnes, chosen to serve and wait upon the person of the king. That companie yet followed after the K. in his flight, and as hard as the world went, departed not from him until such time as by the commaundement of Cn. Octavius, the publicke cryer pronounced with a loud voice, That the kings pages and all other Macedonians besides in Samothracia, if they would turne to the Romanes, should enjoy with safetie of life their estate entire, their libertie free, and all that ever they either had about them, or was left in Macedonie. At which proclamation once published, they all immediatly revolted to the Romanes, and entred their names with C. Posthumius, a martiall colonell. Likewise Ion of Thessalonica, delivered into the hands of Octavius the young infants of the king, and not one of them all was left with Perseus, but Philip his eldest son: and then he yeelded both himselfe and that sonne into the hands of Octavius, crying out upon  fortune, and blaming the gods in whose temple they were, for that he received no aid and succour from them, notwithstanding he humbly craved and besought the same. Then commaundement was given, that he should be embarked in the admirals ship: and thither also was brought abourd all the money that remained, and then forthwith the fleet retired to Amphipolis: from whence Octavius sent the king to the campe unto the Consull, but first hee had dispatched his letters to give him knowledge, that he was sure enough under his hand, and that hee was at the point to be brought unto him. Paulus, reputing this for a second victorie, (as it was no lesse indeed to be esteemed) presently upon the receit of the message, killed beast for sacrifice: and when he had called his counsell about him, and read the letters of the Pretor before them, he sent Q. Aelius Tubero to meet the K. upon the way, and commaunded the rest in good frequencie to  remaine in his capitall pavillion, and give attendance upon him. Never was there seene before, so great a multitude to runne out for to see any solemne sight or pageant. In their fathers daies king Syphax was taken prisoner and brought into the Romane campe; who besides that there was no comparison betweene him and Perseus, either in regard of his own name or the renowme of his nation, was then also but an accessarie as it were to the Punick war, like as Gentius now to the Macedonian. Perseus was the very head of this war, neither was it the same of his father and grandsire onely (whom he neerely touched in birth and bloud) that made him renowmed, but the resplendent glorie of Philip and Alexander the Great, who brought the soveraigne empire and monarchie of the whole world to the Macedonian nation. Well, Perseus entred the campe arrayed in a blacke cloake, without any one of his owne traine to accompanie him,  who partaking his miserie, might cause more compassion to be had of him. The afluence of the people was so great who went out to see him, that for the verie prease hee could not march forward, untill such time as the Consull sent his sergeants and huishers to void the thronging of the multitude and make way for him to goe to the Consull his pavillion. The Consull arose, and (giving commaundement to the rest for to sit still) advaunced forward a little, and raught out his hand to the king as hee entred into the pavillion; and when hee bowed and debased himselfe to his verie feet, hee tooke him up againe and would not suffer him ones to touch his knees, but led him into the tent and caused him to sit downe right over-against those whome he called thither to councell.
The first question that hee demaunded of him was this; What wrong hee had sustained at the hands of the people of Rome, that hee should be constrained  to enterprise and begin the warre against them with so malicious a mind as hee did, and so to hazard himselfe, his whole state and kingdome, in such extremitie of daunger? And when everie man attended what answere hee would make, hee staied a good while without utterance of one word, casting his eyes wistly upon the ground, and shedding teares withall. Then spake the Consull againe: If you had beene but young (quoth he) when you came to the crowne, I would verily for my part marvaile the lesse, that you should be so ignorant as not to know how important it was, to have the people of Rome either for a friend or an enemie: but now, since you both had your hand in that warre which your father waged against us, and also could not chuse but remember the peace afterwards made with him, and which wee observed most faithfull, What pollicie was it for you to entertaine warre rather than peace, with them, whose force you  had tried in warre and whose fidelitie you had found in peace? When as hee would yet make no answere at all either to question or accusation, the Consull went on and said: Well, howsoever these things are thus fallen out and come to passe, be it through the errour and frailtie of man by adventure of fortune and hard happe, or fatall necessitie of the destinies, bee of good cheare yet, and take a mans heart unto you: the gracious clemencie and mercie of

the people of Rome, well knowne and prooved in the misfortunes of many princes and States, affourd unto you not onely hope, but certaine assurance of safetie. Thus much spake hee to Perseus in the Greeke tongue: then, turning to his owne assistance and companie about him, hee directed his speech to them in Latine as followeth. A notable example and rare mirrour you see (quoth he) of the chaungeable varietie of this world: to you I speake especially, my maisters here that are fresh and youthfull gallants in the heat of your young bloud. And therefore let no man in time of his prosperitie, carrie himselfe proud and violent against another, nor yet confidently to trust upon the present state wherein hee is, for who knoweth what may happen once yet before midnight? But him alone will I hold for a man of valour indeed, whose heart neither the gentle gale of this fawning and flattering world is able to list aloft, ne yet the blustering blasts of frowning fortune cast downe or dash upon the rockes. After the Consull was risen and departed, he committed the charge and custodie of keeping the king to Quintus Atlius. But for that day Perseus was not onely invited courteously to sup with the Consull, but respected also in all kind of honour, as possibly might be done unto him in that state and condition of his.
After this the armie was divided here and there in garrisons for the winter time. The greatest part thereof was received into Amphipolis, and the other cities neere adjoining entertained the rest. This was the end of the warre betweene Perseus and the Romanes, which had endured foure yeeres one after another continually: and here an end with all of the most flouring kingdome of the greatest part of Europe and of all Asia. Perseus was counted the twentieth king after Caranus, who was the first that raigned there. This Perseus began his raigne that yeere wherin  Q. Fulvius and L. Manlius were Consuls. In the time of M. Iumius and A. Manlius Consuls of Rome, the Senate entituled and honoured him with the name of king, and eleven yeeres his raigne continued. The name of these Macedonians was very obscure and base, untill the daies of Philip the sonne of Amynias. From that time and by his meanes it began to grow and wax great: howbeit, contained it was within the compasse and precinct of Europe, comprehending all Greece, and part of Thrace and Illyricum. Afterwards it spread into Asia, and in thirteene yeares space, during the raigne of Alexander, it subdued and brought under subjection, first all those parts whereunto the empire of the Persians extended, which was an infinite dominion in circuit: afterwards it reached to Arabia and India, even to the end of the earth, bounding and confining all about upon the red sea. At that time was the monarchie and name of the Macedonians the greatest  in the whole world, but upon the death of Alexander, distracted it was and divided into many and sundrie kingdomes. And whiles each one endeavoured and stove by force to draw unto him more and more puissance, they dismembred and rent the whole: and so from the highest tip and pitch of prosperitie, brought it downe to a most base and low condition, after it had continued in good estate a hundred and fiftie yeeres.
When the bruit of the Romanes victorie was blased and blowne as farre as to Asia, Antenor who with a fleet of barkes and pinnaces rid in the harbour of Phanae, sailed from thence to Cassandrea. C. Popilius, who was in Delos to guard and wast those ships which were bound for Macedonie, after he heard say that the warre in Macedonie was brought to an end, and the enemies vessels removed out of their rode, dismissed also for his part the Athenian ships, intending to go  forward in his voiage for Aegypt, to accomplish that embassage which he had taken in hand; to the end that he might encounter Antiochus, before he approched the walls of Alexandria. As these embassadours coasted along the river of Asia, and were arrived at Loryma (a port somwhat more than twentie miles distant from Rhodes, and situate just over against the citie) the principal States of Rhodes, met him in the way (for now by this time was the fame of this victorie flown so same and reputation, yea, and was expedient for their good and safetie, that they should be made acquainted with all that either had beene done or was now in hand at Rhodes, and so to make report therof at Rome upon their own knowledge, and not as things were voiced by the common bruit. They refused along time, but in the end they were so importuned, that content they were to saile  a little farther, and spend some small time for to gratifie and benefite a citie associate unto them When they were come to Rhodes, the same principall citizens aforesaid urged them instantly with much praier and entreatie to come into their generall assembly of the people. The arrivall of these embassadours rather augmented than empaired the feare of the citie. For Popilius made

 rehearsall there in open audience, of all which had beene done or spoken (sounding any way to hostilitie) either in particular or in generall by them, during the late warre. And being as he was, a grim sir, rough and fierce by nature, hee aggravated all that he spake, with his soure visage and sharpe language, like an accuser at the barre: insomuch as they might well conjecture and guesse, how the whole bodie of the Senate stood affected unto them, by the bitternesse of one only Senatour, who otherwise for himselfe had no occasion of particular ill will and malice against the citie. But the speech of Decimius was more temperate, who said, that the blame of those imputations for the most part which were objected by Popilius, was not to be laid upon the people, but upon a few persons, who had sollicited and stirred the multitude: for those having their tongue at hire, and using to speak for gaine, had made decrees full of flatterie to please the king, and sent  such embassages, as the Rhodians at all times were no lesse ashamed than repented of: All which practises of theirs no doubt would fall upon their heads who were faultie, in case the people had the government and rule in their owne hands. Audience he had with great assent and applause; not more for elevating the fault and trespasse of the common people, than for laying the weight upon those that were the authours culpable. And therefore when the cheefe men among them made answere to the Romanes, their words, who went about to excuse and salve in some sort as well as they could the articles objected by Popilius, were not so wel taken, as their speech who accorded to Decimius, in delivering the guiltie persons and offenders to bee punished according to their demerites. Whereupon there passed presently a decree, That all those who might bee convicted of any deed done or word spoken in favour of Perseus against the Romanes, should be  condemned and have sentence to loose their heads. Some of these persons were departed out of the citie upon the comming of the Romanes, other laid violent hands upon themselves. These embassadours or delegates having so journied no longer than five daies at Rhodes, departed and made saile for Alexandria. And notwithstanding their absence, the execution of judiciall proceeding was no lesse hotely followed at Rhodes, according to the decree made in their presence. For the moderation and gentle cariage of Decimius was the very cause that they persisted resolute, and gave not over untill they had gone through with it, and dispatched all.
Whiles these affaires were thus managed, Antiochus after he had assaied in vaine to force the walls of Alexandria, was departed from before the citie, and having possessed himselfe of all Aegypt besides, and left the elder Ptolomeus at Memphis, (for whose behoofe he pretended by his own  forces to reconquer the kingdome, to the end that soone after the conquest obtained, he might set upon him likewise) withdrew his armie away into Syria. Ptolomaeus for his part was nothing ignorant of his dessignment and intention, making full account, that whiles he kept his younger brother affrighted with the feare of siege, by the helpe of his sister hee might bee received into Alexandria: considering withall, that his brothers friends were not opposed against him, first hee sent unto his sister, afterwards to his brother and his friends, and never gave over to write and send, before hee had concluded and established a peace with them. The thing that made him to suspect Antiochus was this, for that when he had made over all the rest of For Pelusium is called Clavis Aegypti as Ortelius notetho^i^ of Suidas. Aegypt unto him, hee left yet a strong garison behind at Pelusium: and well he knew, that he held still the frontier towns as the very keies of Aegypt, to the end that he might with an armie enter and invade again, whensoever  he would. And thus he conceived of it, that this would be the issue of the civile and domesticall warre betweene brethen, That the victour wearied with warre, should not bee able to make head against Antiochus. These things wisely forecast and seene by the elder brother, were received with assent of the younger and those that were assistant about him: and the sister betweene stood in very good stead, not by her good advise and counsell onely, but also by her effectuall praiers. And therefore by a generall accord of all, a peace was concluded, and the elder Ptolomaus received into Alexandria, without any gaine saying or resistance at all so much as of the very multitude; notwithstanding that during the warre they were much decaied and weakened (not only by the siege, but also after it was raised and the armie gone from Alexandria) for want of all things, by reason that no provisions were brought thither from out of Aegypt. Now, where as Antiochus should have taken great contentment and rejoiced much for this, in case he had brought his forces into Aegypt for to restore Ptolomeus into his owne estate (which was the goodly pretence and colourable shew that he made to all the States of Asia and Greece, when hee received their embassages, or sent forth his letters into all parts) so it fell out, that he was so highly offended and displeased here at, that hee went in hand and prepared to make war now against them both much

more eagerly and with greater malice than before against one alone. Presently he rigged and sent  out his navie at sea to Cyprus; himselfe in person at the beginning of the spring minding to invade Aegypt, marched forward with his armie as farre as into Coele-Syria. The embassadours of Ptolomeus encountered him in his journey about (...) Rhinocolora, and gave him thankes in behalfe of their K. and maister, for that by his means he had recovered the inheritance of his fathers kingdome: requesting with all to maintein that benefit and good deed of his, to declare rather by word of mouth what he would have done, than deale by sword in hand and force of armes, and not of a friend and allie to become a mortall enemie. His answere was, that he would neither call backe his fleet nor withdraw his army upon any condition, unlesse he quit unto his use as wel the whole Isle of Cyprus, as the citie Belbais. Pelusium, together with the territorie about the mouth of Nilus, called Carabes. Pelusiacuni Ostium. And therewith he set him downe a day, before which he expected to receive his answere as touching the accomplishment of the said conditions. After the day prefixed  for the truce was past, as they sailed in the mouth of Nilus neere Pelusium, the states along the deserts of Arabia yelded. Then, being received of them that inhabite about Memphis, and the rest of the Aegyptians, partly with favor and good wil, and partly for feare and constreint; by small journies hee descended toward Alexandria. When hee was passed over the river at Leusine (a place about 4 miles distant from Alexandria) the Romane embassadors met him upon the way. After greetings and salutations at their first comming, he put forth his right hand to Popilius; but hee delivered unto him a scroll written, and willed him before hee did any thing else to read that script. After he had red the writing through, he answered that he would devise with his friends and consider what was best to be don. But Popilius according to his ordinarie blunt maner of speech  which he had by nature, made a circle about the king with the rod that hee had in his hand, and withall, Make me an answere (quoth he) I advise you, such as I may report to the Senate, before you passe the compasse of this circle. The king astonied at this so rude and violent a commande-iment, after he had staied and paused a while: I will be content (qd.he) to doe whatsoever the Sena shall ordeine. Then and not before, Popilius gave the king his hand as to a friend and allie. Afterwards when Antiochus was departed out of Aegypt by the day prefixed, the said Embassadours or delegats having by their authoritie established concord also between the two brethen (who as yet were not throughly agreed) some of them sailed to Cyprus, and from thence they sent away the fleet of Antiochus, which alreadie had given an overthrow in battaile to the Aegyptian ships. This was a noble embassage and much renowned among those nations, for that thereby  Aegypt was undoubtedly taken from Antiochus, who was as good as possessed thereof alreadie, and the inheritance of the kingdome restored againe to the race of Ptolomeus.
Of the two Consuls that yeere, like as the one was famous in his place by this notable victorie, so the other was little or nothing spoken of, by reason he had not matter of any great exploit to be emploied in. And first of al when he was assigned a certein day for the legions to meet, he entred into the temple without the luckie approbation of the auspices. And when the Augurs were moved and their advise required therin, they declared, that ther was an error committed in the appointment of the said day. In his voiage for France he kept his standing leaguer for the summer time about the mountains Sicimina and Papinus nere the plains called Valle di Mentirone. Macri. And afterwards he wintered about the same places with the allies of the Latine nation. For, the Romane legions  because the day was not rightly appointed for the assembly of the forces at the Rendes-vous, remained behind at Rome. Also the Pretors, save only C. Papyr. Carbo, unto whose lot Sardinia was fallen, went forth into their provinces: and him the LL. of the Senat had ordained to attend upon his civill jurisdiction at Rome between citizens and forreiners (for by lot that charge also hee had.) Popilius likewise, and that embasage which was sent to Antiochus returned to Rome: where he made relation that the controversies betweene the two kings were decided, and the armie of Antiochus retired out of Aegypt into Syria. After this came the embassadors also of the kings themselves. Those of Antiochus made report that the king their maister esteemed more of the peace approved by the Senate, than of any victorie whatsoever; and obeied the orders set downe by the Romane embassadours, no lesse than the very messengers comming with commandements directly from the gods: and finally they testified their owne contentment, and wished them great joy of their victorie obteined, saying that the king himselfe would have bin with all his power at the atchieving thereof, in case he had bene enjoined to performe any service. The embassadors of Ptolomeus in the name jointly of their king and of Cleopatra, rendred thankes unto them, acknowledging

 themselves more bounden and beholden to the Senate and people of Rome, than to their owne parents, yea and more than to the immortall gods; for by their good means they were first delivered from the most lamentable miseries of a siege, and had recovered their fathers kingdome, which they were at the point to have lost forever. The Senate returned this aunswere againe, That whereas Antiochus had bene ruled and ordered by the embassadours, therein hee did well and as it beseemed him, and in so doing he highly contended and pleased the Senat and people of Rome. Againe, if Ptolomeus and Cleopatra the king and queene of Aegypt, had found any goodnesse and commoditie by them, the Senate was very glad therfore and rejoyced thereat, and would endeavour and worke it so, that they mought bee persuaded that the greatest assurance and safeguard of their realme rested at all times most in the faithfull protection of the people  of Rome. This said, the Pretour C. Papyrius had in charge to see that presents and gifts were sent to these embassadours according to the auncient custome. Then were letters brought out of Macedonie to redouble the joy of the victorie, importing that Perseus was sure ynough in the hands of the Consull.
When those embassadours were dismissed and gone, much debate and argument there was betweene the Embassadours of the Pisanes and Lunenses. They of Pisae complained that they were disseized and driven out of their territorie by the Romane coloners: contrariwise those of Luna plainly avetred, that the land in controversie had bene set out and assigned for them by the Triumvirs. The Senate hereupon sent five men as commissioners to make inquisition into the limits of the said territorie and to determine accordingly, and those were Q. Fabius Baleo, P. Cornelius Blasio, T. Sempronius Musea, L. Naevius Balbus, and C. Apultius Saturninus. There came likewise a solemne embassage sent in common from Eumenes, Alsalus, and Athenaesus, all three brethren, to notifie the joy and contentment which they tooke for the Romanes victorie. Moreover L. Menlius the treasure was readie at Puteoli to receive and welcome Masgaba the son of king Masanissa, as hee should disbarke and set a land: for sent hee was of purpose with money to meet him upon the way, to conduct him also and bring him to Rome at the cities charges. He was no sooner come, but immediatly audience was given him in the Senate.
This young prince spake in such sort, as the things which of themselves were acceptable enough indeed, he graced and made more worthie of acceptance by his good words. He rehearsed what forces of foot and horse both, how many elephants, what quantitie of come for that four yeeres space (during the warre) his father  had sent over into Macedonie. But two things there were for which hee was dismaied and could not chuse but blush: the one, that the Senat by their embassadors had made request unto him, and not commanded rather to furnish them with necessaries for the war: the other, that they had sent them money to pay for their corne. For Masanissa was not forgetfull, but bare well in mind, that he held his kingdome as first conquered for him, afterwards augmented and amplified many waies unto him by the people of Rome: and for his owne part, he could content himselfe with the use and occupation thereof, as a tenant in fee-serme; acknowledging the proprietie and possession thereof to bee in them who as lords of the see feossed him therein. Good reason therefore and meet it was that they also should bee bold with their owne, to take and not to aske, to have and not to crave, much lesse then to buy the commodities and fruites yssuing out  of the lands by them demised given and graunted. As for Masanissa, sufficed hee was, and evermore would rest contented with that overplus which the people of Rome might leave and spare for him. Thus much (quoth he) I had in charge and commission from my fathers owne mouth, when I departed and took my leave of him: but afterwards certein horsemen riding post overtooke me, to let me understand that Macedonie was subdued; and to charge me, that after I had signified our joy in your behalfe, I should shew unto the Senate, that my father tooke such contentment therein, that he would gladly come to Rome, to offer sacrifice and render thankes to Iup. opt. Max. in the capitoll: which to doe hee requested leave of the Senate, so it might stand with their good liking, and be no trouble unto them. The prince received this answere from the Senat, That his father Masanissa did as beseemed a good man and thankefull person so to doe, in  giving such a grace and honor over and above, to benefit of dutie required. Moreover, that the people of Rome acknowledged how they had received great helpe at his hands in the Punick warre by his valiant and loiall service, as well as he obteined his kingdome through the favour of the people of Rome, yea and afterwards according to equitie and justice, had borne himselfe right woorthily in all sort of devoirs and duties during the warres of three kings one after another.

Neither was it any marvell at all, that he rejoyced at the victorie of the people of Rome, beeing  a king who had engaged, hazarded, and entangled all his owne fortunes and the whole estate of his kingdome with the Romane affaires. As for rendring thankes to the gods for the victorie of the people of Rome, let him doe that himselfe in his owne house at home; for it should sulfice, that his sonne for him performed that dutie at Rome. That hee and his father both had sufficiently for their parts testified their joy. As for Masanissa, in proper person to leave his realine and depart out of Africke, over and besides that it was in no wise profitable to himselfe, the Senat deemed it not expedient for the weale-publicke of the people of Rome. Masgaba furthermore requested, that Hanno the sonne of Amilcar should be sent hostage in place of another Carthaginian (whose name is not knowne;) but the Senate answered, That they thought it not meet to demand hostages at the pleasure of Masanissa. The treasurer was commaunded by order  from the Senat, to buy certaine presents for to bestow upon this young prince, namely, as much place as might arise out of an hundred pound weight of silver: also to accompanie him as farre as Puteoli; to defry all his charges during his abode within Italie; and to hire two ships for to transport and conduct him and his princely traine into Africk. To all his retinue as well bondas free, there was allowance made of apparell.
Not long after, were letters brought as concerning Misagenes the second sonne of Masanissa; who after that Paulu had vanquished Perseus, was sent home by the said Paulus into Africk with his Cavallerie: but as he sailed, was driven (sicke as he was) upon Brundusium with three ships onely, for that the rest of the fleet was dispearsed in the Adriaticke sea. Stertinius the treasurer was sent to him at Brundusium, with the like gilts as were bestowed upon his brother at Rome, and a charge to see to his lodging. * * * * * * * * *
By vertue of an act granted out of the Senate, the Libertines [t. the sonnes of freed men] were enrolled into the foure tribes of the citie, all save those who had a sonne above five yeeres old; with expresse commaundement, That when they were to be enrolled at the review next ensuing, their goods also should be valued, and they accordingly entred into the subsidie bookes; namely, That as many of them as possessed any manour or manours in the countrey, esteemed better worth than thirtie thousand Sesterces, should be enrolled and assessed. This ordenance beeing thus observed, Claudius denied flatly, that the Censor had authoritie to (...). to take from any particular person, and much lesse from a whole state and degree of men, the right and libertie of suffrages, without the warrant and ordinance of the people: for say, that he have power to casse a man  out of his tribe, (which is nothing else but to commaund him to change his tribe) it followeth not then, that he may dispossesse and displace him out of all the five and thirtie tribes, which is as much as to strike him out of the number of citizens, and deprive him quite of his freedom and bargeoisie: and is not (I say) to limit and set down in what raunge he shall be enrolled, but to exclude him full and wholly out of all enrolment. This dispute and debate passed between them; untill at last they grew to this point, that of the foure citie tribes, they should cast lots openly in the hall of cloister of Libertas for one tribe, in which all they should be registred and comprised, who had been villaines sometimes and were enfranchised. Now this lot fell to the tribe Exquilunea. Then Tib. Gracchus pronounced, That ordained it was to enroll in it all the Libertins. Great honour and reputation with the Senate gained the Censors by this act: Sen.pronius likewise wan much thankes therefore, because hee had persisted constantly in that good enterprise so well commensed: and Claudius went not without his due thank, for that he was no hinderance to this proceeding. In this review and survey taken by the Censors, more Senators were remooved and put out of the councell, yea and more gentlemen commaunded to sell their horses of service, than by other Censors in former time. And all those by both of them joyntly were not only displaced out of their tribes, and made no better than Aerarij (i. to loose their voice) but also to pay all taxes whatsoever to the utmost. And looke who was noted and disgraced by the one, had no reliefe nor hope to recover his credit and place by the other, Now when these Censors demaunded, That according toa custome and order, they might be allowed a yeers space and two moneths, to looke into the repartions of the publick edifices, that they were maintained wind-right  and water-tight; as also to see whether they who had undertaken to finish certaine workes at a price, had performed their bargaine accordingly: Cn. Tremelius a Tribune interposed himselfe and denied this demaund, for anger that he was not chosen and taken into the Senat. The same yeere C. Cicertius dedicated a chappell in the Albane mount, which he had vowed five yeers

 before. Also that yeere was L. Posthumius Albinus enstalled a Flamine of Mars. The Consuls Q.Aetus and M. Iunius propounded in the Senat, as touching the government of their provinces: and the LL. ordained, That Spaine should be divided againe into two provinces, which had been united in one during the Macedonian warre: also that the same L.Paulus and L.Anictus should defend and keep in obedience as before, Macedonie and Illyricum, untill such time as they by the advise of certaine deputed commissioners, had both composed all matters and affaires disordered and troubled by the warres; and also reformed the estate of that realme, by inducing it into a new forme. The provinces assigned unto the Consuls were Pisae and Gaule, and they had the commaund of two legions of footmen, and four hundred horsemen apeece. The Pretours had their lots for government as followeth: The civill jurisdiction over citizens  fell to Q. Casius, and over strangers to M. Invencius Talva: Tib. Claudius Nero was L. deputie of Sicilie, Cn. Fulvius of the hither Spaine, and C. Licinius Nerva of the father: last of all, A. Manlius Torquatus was appointed to the government of Sardinia; but into his province he could not goe, by occasion that hee was deteined at home by vertue of an act of the Senate, to make inquisition into certaine fellonious and capitall crimes. After this, consultation there was in the Senat as touching the prodigies which were reported. The chappell of the Penates (protectors of the citie) in Velia was smitten with thunder and lightning. Also in the towne Minervium, two gates and a good part of the wall felt the like harme. At Anagnia it had rained earth, and in Lanuvium there appeared in the skie a burning flame. Moreover, M. Valerius a citizen of Rome gave knowledge, that in Calatia within the publicke territorie of that citie, for the space  of three dayes and two nights togither, bloud gushed out in his chimney hearth where he kept fire: and for this straunge sight above all the rest, the Decemvirs were commaunded to have recourse unto the bookes of Sibylla: who proclaimed a publicke supplication of the people for one day, and sacrificed fiftie goats in the common market place of the citie. Also in regard of the other prodigies, a supplication was holden another day, and men did their devotions at everie altar of the gods; greater beasts were killed for sacrifices, and the citie was solemnly cleansed and purged. This done, as touching the honor of the immortall gods, the Senat ordained, that for asmuch as the two kings Perseus and Gentius their enemies were overcome, and now at the devotion of the people of Rome, together with Macedonie and Illyricum, Q. Cassius and M. Inventius the Pretours should give order for as great oblations to be offered unto the gods at every shrine and  altar, as had been heretofore (when App. Claudius and M. Sempronius were Consuls) for the defeature of king Antiochus. Then they ordained certaine delegates, by whose advise L. Paulus and L. Anticius the two Generals, might set all affaires in order, namely, ten into Macedonie, and five into Illyricum. For Macedonie were nominated A. Posthumius Luseus and C. Claudius, (who both had been Censours) C. Licenius Crasius, late companion to Paulus in the Consulship, and who at that present had the governement of Gaule continued unto him. To these delegates abovenamed, men of Consular dignitie all by their calling, were adjoined in commission Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus, Ser. Cornelius Sylla, L. lunius, C. Antislius Labeo, T. Numisius Tarquiniensis, and Aulus Terentius Varro. For Illyricum were these named, P. Aelius Ligus, one that had been Consull, C. Cicereius and Cn. Baebius Tamphilus (this Baebius had beene Pretour but the former yeere, and Cicereius many yeeres past) P. Terentius Tuscivicanus, and P. Manilius. Then the Consuls being advertised by the LL. of the Senat, that (for as much as one of them must succeed C. Lisinius in Gaule, who was nominated one of the delegates) they should part their provinces between them either by accord and agreement, or by lot make choice of the fortune of lotterie. So Pisae fell to M. Iunius (but before he went into his province, he had in charge to bring into the Senat, those embassies which from all parts were come to Rome for to declare their joy in the behalfe of the people of Rome) and Gaule to Q. Aelius.
Albeit such personages were sent, as by whose sage counsell good hope there was, that the cheese commaunders of the Romane armies would passe no decree unbeseeming either the clemencie or majestie of the people of Rome, yet debated it was in the Senat about the summe and  principall points of all their counsels and dessignes; to the end that the said Legates might carie unto the Generals all things plotted alreadie and begun to their hands at home in the cittie. In the first place ordained it was, That the Macedonians and Illyrians remaine free and enjoy their liberties, that all nations of the earth might see, that the drift of the Romane armies and forces was not to bring free states into servitude, but contrariwise to reduce those that were in bondage to

to libertie, to the end that those nations which now enjoined freedome, might bee secured under  their safegard and protection both of suretie and of perpetuitie, and such as lived in subjection under the kings, ^ight both mor the present time find their government more and mild and righteous, for that expect which the kings have of the people of Rome; and also, if it fortuned hereafter that there should be warre betweene the people of Rome and their kings, they might be assured that the issue of those warres would bring victorie to the Romanes, and procure libertie to themselves. Also agreed it was that there should be no more ferming out of the mettall mines in Macedonie albeit they yeelded a great revenue; nor yet of publick lands and possessions in the countrey: for possible it was not that these matters should bee practised and followed without publicanes; and where those intermeddle and have ought to doe, then it must needs follow, that either the publicke right and prerogative of the State be annulled, or the libertie of allies come to nothing. Neither were the Macedonians themselves able to exercise the same: for looke where the mini^ters and managers of any thing see a bootie presented before their eies, there, occasions of sedition and contention will never be wanting. Moreover, concluded it was, that there should be no common and generall counsell of the whole nation, for feare least at anytime the leawd vulgar people having by the Senate libertie graunted unto them tending unto a good and holsome moderation and equalitie of the State, should abuse the same and draw it to a mischievous and pestilent licentiousnesse. But they thought it good policie to devide Macedonie into four quarters and countries, that each one might have their severall counsel: likewise it was supposed to stand with good reason and equitie, that they should pay the one moitie of that tribute which they were wont to yeeld unto their KK. Semblable commission and like directions they had for  Illyricum. As for all other matters, referred they were to the discretion of the Generals and the Delegate commissioners, who might bee better able to devise more certeinely of particulars, according to the occurents presented unto them in the managing of their affaires.
Among many and sundrie embassadours of kings, nations, and states, Attalus the brother of K. Eumenes most of all others amused mens minds, and drew their eyes upon him: for by them who had born arms togither with him in that war, welcommed he was much more heartily, and received with greater courtesie than if Eumenes the K. himselfe had come. Two occasions there were outwardly pretended, and those carrying a good shew of honestie and credit, which brought him to Rome: the one, a gratulation or testimonie of joy (as meet it was) for that victory, wherin himselfe lent his helping hand; the other, a complaint of French tumultuous warres and the  blondie hostilitie of Adverta their king, by which meanes his brothers kingdome was in great jeopardie. But there lay another thing hidden underneath, namely, an inward and secret hope that he conceived of honours and rewards from the Senat, which hardly he could seeme to aime and reach unto, without some unkindnesse and violence offered to brotherly duty and affection. For some there were even of the Romanes also, who did him no good but gave him bad counsell, drew on his appetite with faire hopes, and set him a longing, feeding him with these and such like conceits, That in Rome this was the opinion entertained of Attalus and Eumenes, as if the one of them were a friend fast and sure to the Romanes; the other an allie, sound and faithfull neither to the Romans nor yet to Perseus: and therefore hard it were to set downe and say, Whether of the twaine would be more easily obtained at the Senates hands, namely, a suit  made in his own name for his preferment, or a demand of some hard course against his brother: so bent were all men in general to grant any thing to Attalus, and to denie every thing to Eumenes. Attalus(as the sequell and proofeshewed) was sib to those persons whose desires reach at all that hope promiseth, had not the sage admonition of one friend come between to bridle his affections, ravished and transported so as they were with the amiable aspect and fawning flatterie of his own good fortune. He had about him at that time one Stratius a physician, sent by Eumenes (who rested not secure of his brothers loialtie) to Rome, of purpose for to lie in espial and observe al that Attalus did and to advise him faithfully, if he saw him tread awrie and practise ought against his dutie and allegeance. When hee came unto him, hee found his cares alreadie possessed, and his spirite tempted and sollicited before hand: howbeit taking his times and waiting opportunities, he went roundly to worke and stucke to it close, untill hee had set all up againe which was at the point to run on end, and fal to the ground.
He alledged and laid these remonstrances before his eies, saying, That kingdomes have growne mightie, some by one meanes, some by others: but as for theirs, being but newly erected, and grounded upon no strength of auncient foundations, it

 stood upright only by the mutuall concord of him and his brethen, in that one of them beareth the name and title of king, wearing the diedeme and crowne alone upon his head, but in effect all three brethen be KK. As for you Attalus (qd. he) who are the eldest brother save one, who is it that reputeth you for lesse than a king, not only for that he seeth you so mightie at this present, but also the next heir apparant, and without al doubt like shortly to reign indeed? considering the feeble bodie and crasie age of Eumenes, who hath besides, no issue of children to succeed him in the roiall throne? (for as yet hee tooke no knowledge of him that reigned afterwards). What need then is there to use violence, and to force that which of the one accord will shortly be devolved upon you and fal into your hands? Moreover a new tempest and storm is risen of French wars, threating peril unto the realm, which it wil be hard for you princes to withstand, agree as wel as you can in all  brotherly love unitie and concord. But if to forraine war abroad, there should arise a domest^call and civile dissention betweene you at home, what remedie then, but utter ruine and destruction? Neither shall you (Attalus) purchase any good but this, first to prevent that your brother be not king; and then to disable and disappoint your selfe of that neer and assured hope you have to be K. But say, that to preserve a kingdome for a brother, and to wrest a kingdome from a brother, were honorable and glorious deeds both the one and the other; yet surely, of the twain, to have saved a kingdome deserveth greater commendation and praise, in that if forteth so well with pietie and kindnesse. And certes, seeing the other is a cursed and detestable part, even next neighbor to parricide; what scruple and doubt remaineth now which needeth any farther deliberation? For tell me, I beseech you, is it one parcell of the kingdome that you reach at, or shoot you at the whole?  If you aime at a part onely, then upon the dismembring and distraction of your puissance, you shall bee both twaine much weakened and exposed to the daunger of all injuries: if you would have all, what shall become of your brother? Would you wish him being your elder, to live a private person? or so far stept in yeers as he is, a banished man; and namely with those infirmities of bodie which hee carrieth about him? or would you commaund to take his life away and rid him out this world at once? Now truly to say nothing of the unhappie and miserable issue of such gracelesse and wicked brethren, delivered unto us in fained fables, you see what a goodly fair end Perseus is come unto, who being in the temple of Samothracia, was constrained lying prostrate upon the ground; to base at the feet of the enemie his conqueror, the crowne and diademe which hee came unjustly by, even with the unnaturall murder of his owne brother: as if the gods  in heaven had been there present, to require due punishment for his horrible fact. To conclude, they also themselves, who is no friendly love and affection to you, but in rancour and hatred to your brother Eumenes, have put these dessignes into your head, and pricke you on to execute the same; even they, I say, will praise your kindnesse, your pietie and constancie, in case you persever true and trustie to your brother, to the very end. These and such like important persuasions prevailed with Attalus and settled deepely in his mind. Therefore being admitted into the Senate, after hee had wished joy unto them, and protested his own for the late victorie, he laid abroad and declared his owne demerites and good service in that war, the favors also (such as they were) done by his brother, and last of all, the revolt of the Gaules, lately broken out with great troubles and  commotions. His petition to the Senate was, for to send their embassadors unto them, by whose countenance and authoritie they might be reclaimed, and so lay armes aside. Having declared this message which concerned the profit in generall of the realme; hee made a speciall suite for himselfe, and demaunded to have Aenus and Maronea given unto him. And thus, when hee had put them besides their hope, who thought verily, that after he had accused his brother, he would have required the kingdome to be divided peecemeale and dismembred, he departed out of the Counsell house. Seldome had been known at anytime before any man whatsoever, king or subsubject, to have had the like audience with so great favour and applause of all men, as he: received and entertained he was right honourably with gifts and presents of all sorts whiles he was at Rome, and with the like they accompanied him at his departure.
Among many embassies of Asia and Greece, the Rhodian embassadours were most marked  and looked upon throughout all the citie: for whereas at first they were all trim and goodly to bee seen in their white and bright apparell, as decent it was for them that would seeme to congratulate for the victorie (for if they had worne black or been poorly arraied, it might have ben construed, that they mourned for the misfortune and calamitie of Perseus) after that M. Iunius the Consull brake with the LL. of the Senate (and all that while the said embassadours stood without in the

common place Comitium) to consider and advise, whither they would allow lodging, presents, and give audience in the Senat unto them: they resolved and were of opinion to observe no rights nor customes of hospitalitie with them. Then went the Consull out of the Senate: unto whom when the Rhodians said that they were come to rejoice in their behalfe for the late victorie, and withall, to aunswere in the name of their cittie to certeine crimes wherewith they were charged, requesting that they might speake before the Senate and be heard with indifference: the Consull pronounced aloud unto them, That the custome indeed of the Romanes was, to entreat their allies and friends graciously, and among other matters of courtresie and hospitalitie which they affoorded unto them, to graunt them also a day of hearing in the Senate; but the Rhodians had not demeaned themselves during the war, in such sort, as to be reckoned in the number of lovers and associates. At the hearing of these words they
cast themselves all prostrate on the ground, beseeching  the Consull and all those that were present, not to suffer that false imputations of late furmised should against all reason prejudice the Rhodians more, than their good deserts of old(whereof themselves were sufficient witnesses) stand them in stead. And presently after they had put on simple apparell and mourning weeds, they went about from house to house visiting the principall persons of the cittie, humbly beseeching them with teares, to heare their cause before they were condemned. M. Inventius Talva the Pretour or L. chiefe justice for the pleas between citizens and straungers, was the onely agent that provoked and incited the people against the Rhodians: nay he had promulged and published a bill to this effect, That warre might bee denounced against the Rhodians; also, that out of the magistrates for that yeere they would make choise of some one to bee sent as Admirall with a fleet ^or the mannaging of that warre: hoping
that  himselfe should be the man. But this action and proceeding of his was crossed by M. Antonius and M. Pomponius, two Tribunes of the commons. Over and besides, the Pretour, to say a truth, had broached this matter after a new and strange fashion, and to the evill example of future times, in that he preferred a bill unto the people of his owne head alone, without asking the advise of the Senate, or making the Consuls acquainted therewith: and that in this manner and forme, Pleaseth it you, and is it your will, that warre be proclaimed against the Rhodians? whereas alwaies before-time, in question of warre, the Senats advise was first taken, and then the thing was proposed unto the people. Likewise the Tribunes of the commons for their part, did more than they might, and a thing not warrantable by any precedent. For it was a custome and tradition observed ever of old, that no person should interpose his negative to crosse any bill, before that  private men in
particular had their course and time graunted, both to persuade ordissuade the same: by which meanes many a time it fell out, that even they who never professed nor meant to oppose themselves, being mooved and induced by the reasons of those that stood up to dissuade, and perceiving also by them the inconveniences of such a bill, would step betweene and dashall: yea and contrariwise such as came of purpose to crosse and nip the same, being convinced by the authoritie and borne downe by the important arguments alleadged by those that enforced the said bill, would desist and surcease. Thus the Pretours and Tribunes strove avie who should doe everything more unseasonably than others. The Tribunes impeached and staied the hastines of the Pretour, interposing their negative before the time, and deferring the matter untill the comming of the L. Generall. * * * * * * * * * *
Whither we have transgressed and offended yea or no, that yet remaineth doubtfull: but sure we are of this,The beginning of this Oration of the Rhodians is the LL. of the Senate i^ (...). that we suffer all punishments and shamefull ignominies alreadie that can be devised.
Heretofore, when the Carthaginians were vanquished, when Philip, when Antiochus was overthrowne, wee came to Rome: from our publicke lodging provided for us at the charges of the citie, wee presented our selves (my LL.) into your Counsel-house, to testifie our great contentment for your conquests: from the Counsel-house we went directly to the capitoll, carrying with us presents and oblations to the honour of your gods. But now we the same Rhodians are come unto your Senat clothed in this poor habit and array, as you see, from out of a base hostelrie and common inne, where hardly we could have lodging for our money; being commanded in manner of enemies to make our abode without the citie walls: we Rhodians (I say) whom but lately ye  feoffed with the graunt of two provinces, Lycia and Cyria, and whom ye graced with all kind of honours, and enriched with all manner of gifts and rewards. You ordaine as wee heare say, that the Macedonians and Illyrians should live free, notwithstanding they were in servitude before they levied warre against you. Neither speake wee this in envie and repine for any mans welfare and

 good estate; nay wee acknowledge therein the rare elemencie of the people of Rome:) and will yee then make the Rhodians of friends, enemies, who during this warre did no more but sit and meddle with neither part? Now surely yee Romanes are the men that pretend and give out ordinarily, that your warres have good successe and speed well, because they be just and righteous: neither do you glorie so much in the event and yssue thereof, whereby ye are revengers and conquerours, as for the beginning and first enterprises, in that yee undertake them not without good cause. The besieging of Messana in Sicilie by the Carthaginians, was the cause that the people of Rome reputed them enemies. The assailing of Athens by Philip, his intent and purpose to bring Greece into servitude, his relieving of Anniball with men and money, caused him likewise to be holden for their enemie. Thus Antiochus brought upon his owne head the Roman  warre, for that he being sollicited by theAetolians your enemies came willingly out of Asia, and with a fleete sailed over to Greece: and when hee had seized upon Demetrias, Chalcis, and the streights of Thermopylae, went about to dispossesse you of the empire. And last of all, Perseus by levying armes against your allies, by killing some of their petie kings and princes, by murdering other chiefe personages of sundrie nations and citties, gave you just occasions to make warre upon him. But what colourable cause can there be pretended of our calamitie, if needs we must miscarrie and perish? All this while I make no difference between our citties case and that of Polyaratus and Dion our cittizens, even those persons whom we have brought to deliver into your hand. For suppose that the cause were all one, and that wee Rhodians were all faultie and culpable alike, what might that crime be for which we are touched in this warre? We favoured Perseus and that side (you will say) and like as in the warre of
Antiochus and Philip, wee stood with you against those kings, so now we tooke part with the K. against you. Was that all? well, In what sort we are wont to aid our associates, and how lustily to enterprise warres, do but aske of C. Livius and L. Aemylius Regillus, the Admirals of your fleets in Asia. Your ships never fought at sea without us; yet we with our own Armada alone fought a battaile once before Samos, and a second time in Pamphylia against General Anniball: which victorie the thieved was unto us by so much more honourable and glorious, for that after we had in an unfortunate fight nere Samos lost many of our ships and the very choise and floure of our youth, we nothing terrified and dismaied with so great an overthrow, durst turne againe to make head, yea and were so hardie as to encounter the kings roiall navie comming out of Syria. And all this have I related not by way  of boast and to glorifie ourselves (for we are not now in case to s
tand upon those rearmes) but to give you a r^t by the way and put you in mind, in what maner the Rhodians have used evermore to succour their confederats. And for the better proofe therof, after the deffeature, of Philip and Antiochus we received at your hands right great rewards and recompence for our service. In case the fortune of Perseus had bene so happie as yours is at this present (praised be the gods for their grace and goodnes, and thanked be your owne valour with all) and we had come into Macedonie to the king upon his victorie to require and demaund rewards, what could we alleadge therfore? Might we say that he had bin mainteined by our mony, or relieved with our corne? with land forces, or strength at sea? Was there any place by us kept and held with a garison for his use? were we able to tell where we fought, either under the conduct of his captaines or upon our own leading  and direction? If haply he should demand in what quarters our souldiors kept? i
n what coast our ships lay in guard for his defence, what could we answer? Per adventure we might plead our cause and excuse our selves in the presence of him, supposed conquerour, like as we now do before you here in place. For by sending our embassadors to and fro unto you was well as to him about a treatie of peace, this is all the good we have gotten, that in stead of winning the love and favour of both parts, we incurre the heavie displeasure of the one; being thus charged with crimes and wrapped in dangers. And yet my good LL. and honourable Senatours of Rome, Perseus might truly object that to us, which you in no wise can, namely, that wee in the beginning of the warre sent embassadours to you making promise in our name of whatsoever was needfull thereunto; also that we would be readie at all assaies to furnish you with ships strongly rigged, and with our youth wel  appointed, like as in the wars aforetime. That we performed not these promises of ours, you only were the let and hinderance, who (whatsoever the cause was) refused our offered service, and rejected all our succours. Well then, neither have we attempted ought as enemies, not failed in the dutie of good friends and allies: but impeached have we bin by you for effecting that which we intended, How now? may some man say; Hath there been nothing done or said in your cittie (o yee Rhodians)

that you wish unsaid or undone, and whereat the people of Rome may justly take exceptions  and be offended with you for it? Vndertake to justifie and make good whatsoever hath ben done, I will not, neither have I so little wit I trow; but sever I will the publick cause of the whole state, from the privat offences committed by particular persons: for no citie is there under the sunne, but may otherwhiles have lewd and naughtie citizens some or other, and evermore a rude and fortith multitude. I have heard say, that even amongst you here at Rome, some have sought to advaunce and set themselves aloft by currying favor and flattering the common people and that the time was, when the commons rose and departed from among you, so as the rule of the common-weale and people of Rome was out of your hands, as in a verie Anarchie. If such a thing as this might chaunce in this your citie (so well qualified and ordered as it is) how can any man make a wonder, that among us there have been some, who(affecting and seeking  for the amitie and friendship of the king) might haply corrupt and seduce our commons with their naughtie counsell? And yet when all is said, they prevailed no more than thus, that we sate still and failed in doing our devoir to you: for I will not over-passe in this place the greatest and most grievous crime of all other wherewith our citie is charged during this war, and that is this, At one and the same time wee sent embassadors both to you and Perseus about a peace. This designment so untoward and unluckie as it was, a furious and brainsicke oratour and stagent of ours (as afterwards wee understood) handled as foolishly: who (as it is for certein knowne) framed his language in that manner, as if he had ben C. Popilius the Romane embassadour, whom yee sent to the two KK. Antiochus and Ptolomaeus, to warne them both to lay downe armes and for cease war. But that behavior of his, (call it what you will, either pride of follie) was no worse  before you than it was to K. Perseus. Every citie hath their conditions and qualities by themselves, like as particular and severall persons: and semblably it is in whole nations; some are restie and chollericke, bold and audacious; others againe be fearfull and timerous: some are given to wine and drunkenesse, others to women and wantonesse. The people of Athens (by report) are too hastie, hote, and forward to enterprise anything even beyond their power. The Lacedaemonians againe, be as slow and backward, casting many doubts and difficulties to enter upon the very things which they are assured of. I cannot denie, but that all the country of Asia in generall breedeth many a mad braine and vaine spirit: and I will not say, but that our people are jolly fellowes of their tongue and can speake bigge, for that wee seeme (among other cities and states bordering upon us) to excell and surpasse; and that not so much in the confidence wee  have of our owne forces, as for the honourableregard ye have had of us, and the great testimonies and judgements yee have given out, of us. But that foolish embassage of ours even then at the very time had punishment sufficient, being sent away (as it was) with so heavie and answere of yours: and if we were not then disgraced and shamed enough, now surely this present embassage so humble and pitifull, were able to make full satisfaction for a more insolent embassie than it was. All pride (and arrogancie of words especially) chollericke persons indeed hate, wise men deride, and namely from an inferior to his better; but no man ever judged it a mortall sinne and worthie of death: many here was all the daunger, least haply the Rhodians might seeme therby to despise the Romans. How then? be there not some also that cannot rule their tounge, but will be railing and uttering blasphemous words against the gods; yet we never heard of any that have  ^^en therefore smitten dead with a thunderbolt. What remaineth then for us wherein we should ^urge andcleere our selves, if we neither can be charged in fact with hostilitie; and if our embassadour hath used some proud and presumptuous words more than become him, which deserve not the totall ruine of our citie, but some sharpe checkes and hard rebukes on both sides of our eares? But I heare (my good LL.) that in your ordinarie talke among your selves when yee are togither, we are censured for our inward affection only, and secret thoughts, and condemned no lesse than for some deed, namely, That in heart we favoured the king, and wished him rather than you to obtaine the victorie; and therefore they deeme us worthy to be persecuted with fire and sword. Some there be againe of you, who thinke verily that thus indeed we stood affected, howbeit they would not have us for it to be warred upon as enemies; for that is standeth not with  the custome or law of any citie in the world, That if a man wish a mischiefe to his enemie, hee should be straightwaies condemned therefore to die, so long as he hath no
t entred into any action tending thereto. And verily these men wee have to thanke, who free and quits us yet from punishment, although they cleere us not of guilt: howbeit this sentence we passed against our ownselves,

 That if it can be prooved, that were all of us so minded and disposed in affection as we are burdened, (for content we are that all goe under one, heart and hand, will and deed, without distinction) then let us all be punished for it and feele the smart. But if of the great men and chiefe among us, some affected you, and others the king; wee require not, that for the love of us who sided with you, the kings supposts should fare the better and escape cleere; but we request and beseech rather, that for their sakes we perish not and be quite undone. And certes, your own selves are not worse affected and more set against them, than our very citie is: which they knowing wel enough, most of them either fled away, or els killed themselves: others of them (such as we have condemned and passed judgement against) shall bee at your pleasure (my LL.) to doe with them what you will. All the rest of us Rhodians, as thankes wee have merited none in this  warre, so we have deserved as little punishem
ent. Lay the over-deale and surplusage of our former good deeds and demerits to this want to dutie now, and let the heape of the one make up the scant measure of the other. With three kings of late yeeres yee have mainteined warre; let not our slacknesse and sitting still in this one, endammage and hurt us more, than our devoir and emploiment in the other twaine may seeme to satisfie and countervaile. Set Philip, Antiochus, and Perseus, for three verdicts and sentences as it were passed upon us: two of them acquit us cleere; the third is doubtfull whither it will goe against us or no. In deed if they themselves were to sit upon us, we should not doubt be cast and condemned: but you (my good LL.) that are our competent judges, determine now at once, Whether there shall be a citie of Rhodes remaining upon the face of the earth, or be rased utterly and destroyed from the very foundation for ever:  for you are not to debate in councell about making warre upon us: which well you may
begin and goe in hand with at your pleasure; but follow and manage you never shall, because there is not a Rhodian that will take armes and come into the field against you. Will you not be pacified but persist still in your choller and anger? then will wee crave at your hands some respit of time, whiles we may go home and report there how we have sped in this lamentable embassage of ours. And then, all of us in Rhodes franke-borne and of free condition, every one, I say, man and woman, with all our havoir and substance will embarke ourselves: forsake wee will our privat houses and publicke edifices; and to Rome straight will we all come: and when we have laid on heaps here in your common hall, and at the porch and entrie of your councell-house, whatsoever gold and silver we have either in privat purse or common chist: commit we will to your devotion and  mercie our owne persons, togither with the bodies of our wives and children: and never will we goe further, but even here in this place will
we suffer and abide that, which wee have to undergoe and endure. Let our citie then be sacked, rifled and burned, so it be farre enough out of our eye that wee see it not. The Romans may (if it please them) judge the Rhodians enemies; yet you will give us leave to passe in some sort a doome of our owne, That we in our consciences never condemned our selves for such, nor ever will enter in any hostile action against you, come what will, even the utmost extremetie that can be suffered. After their oration in this manner uttered, they fell downe againe all prostrate, and as humble suppliants estsoones put foorth and shook their branches of the olive, untill at length they were raised up on their feet, and so departed out of the Senat. Then began the LL. within, to give their opinion; and passe their sentences  of them. The heaviest enemies and most maliciously bent against the Rhodians, were those, who had conducted the warre of Macedonie, as Consuls, Pretours, or lieutenants: but M. Persius Cato was their only patron that stood to them and supported their cause right earnestly; a man otherwise by nature sower and severe, but as then hee shewed himselfe a mild and gracious Senatour. I will not insert here the lively portraiture and resemblance of that copious and eloquent person, by relating the flowing speech which hee then delivered: his very oration is extant in writing, and contained in the fifth in booke of his Origenes. In fine, the Rhodians received such an answere, as they neither were concluded enemies, not yet remained in the nature and qualitie of friends. The principall persons of this their embassage, were Philocrates and Astymedes. Ordered it was and agreed betweene them, That Philocrates (with some of his fellowes)  should report this answere at Rhodes; and that Astymides (with the rest) should stay behind at Rome, to know what was practised and done there, and give intelligence thereof. accordingly to t
heir cittizens at home. For that present, the LL. of the Senate gave them in charge, to remoove their captaines and governours by a certaine day out of Lycia and Caria. These news related at Rhodes, importing matter (in itselfe considered) of greese and heavinesse,

turned into joy, in regard that they were eased from the fear of a greater mischeef, for they doubted  sore that they should have had hote warre. And therefore presently they ordained for the Romanes a crowne amounting to the value of twentie thousand peeces of gold, and with this present they sent Theodotus the Admirall of their navie in embassage. A will and desire they had to make suit unto the Romans for association: but so, as no act and ordinance of the people should be entred thereof, nor any instrument engrossed as touching it. And this they did, to avoid the greater shame and ignominie of repulse, if haply they missed of their purpose, and could not obtaine. The Admirall alone had this priviledge, and was permitted to treat of that matter, without any bil at all either published or enacted by the people. For in so many yeers before they had continued in amitie with the Romanes in such fort, as they never linked and tied themselves unto them by any formall deed and covenantupon record, and that for no other reason in the world, but because they would neither cut the kings off from all hope of their aid, if haply any of  them might stand in such need, nor disable themselves of the possibilitie they had to reape some fruit, and receive good of their bountie and prosperitie. But surely at this time (mee thinkes) they ought to have sought sadly and in good earnest for their societie, not so much for safetie and securitie against others (for none they feared at all but only the Romans) as to be rid of the suspition and jelousie which the Romanes had of them. About the same time the Caunians also revolted from them, and they of Mylassa tooke certaine townes of the Euromestians. Now were the hearts of these Rhodians within the citie not so much broken or abated, but they saw welynough that if the Romanes tooke from them Lycia and Caria, all the rest would either by way of revolt put themselves in libertie and shake off the yoke of their subjection, or els bee surprisedand  seized by the neighbour nations bordering upon them: and that then they should bee pent up and shut within the compasse of a small Isle and the stronds of a barren soile, not able to nourish and maintaine the inhabitants of so great and populous a citie. Therefore with all speed they dispatched and sent forth their youth, and not onely forced the Caunians (notwithstanding they had joined unto them the aid of the Cybirates) to their obeisance, but also in battell neere Orthosia overcome, the Mylasseans and Alabandians, who having disseized the Euronensians of their province, advaunced jointly with their united armies against them.
Whiles these affaires thus passed there, whiles some occurrents fell out in Macedonie, and others likewise at Rome, L. Anicius having subdued king Gentius (as is beforesaid) and brought him under his owne hand, placed a garrison in Scodra, the king roiall seat, and appointed G^binius the captaine thereof: but in Rhizon and Olcinia, two commodious citties of good importance, he ordained C. Licinius the governour. Having thus made over the rule of Illyricum unto these twaine, himselfe with the rest of the armie went into Epirus. Where the towne Phanora was the first that yeelded unto him, and the whole multitude of the people came forth to meet him with their infules in token of submission. After he had put a garrison in this peece also, he passed over into the countrey of Molossis, where he received the surrender of all the townes thereof, excepting Passaron, Tegmon, Phylacum, and Horreum. And then hee led his armie first against Passacon. The principall men and rulers of that citie were Antinous and Theodotus, men of marke and name, as well for the favour they bare to Perseus, as the hatred they caried to the Romanes: the onely persons who had counselled and persuaded the whole nation to revolt from the Romanes. These two having guiltie consciences within them for their private trespasse, and being past all hope of finding any grace and pardon, shut the gates of the cittie, to the end that they might perish with the overthrow of all, and bee overwhelmed with the totall ruine of their owne countrey: and therewith they exhorted the multitude to preferre present death before servitude and slaverie. No man durst once open his mouth to contradict these so great and mightie persons. At length a certaine noble young gentleman, named also Theodotus, with whom the greater dread from the Romans abroad prevailed more, and overcome the lesse feare of the rulers at home. What aile yee may maisters (quoth he) and fellow citizens, what rage and madnesse haunteth you, to enwrap and interessed that whole citie in the fault and follie of these two persons? Certes, I have often heard of men that for their countrey have willingly lost their lives, but to thinke  it meet, that their countrey should perish for them, these are the first that ever were known. Why rather open wee not our gates and submit ourselves to that empire, into which the whole world besides is subject. As he spake these words, the multitude followed him toward the gates: which when Antinous and Theodotus saw, they made no more adoe, but brake upon the first corps de

guard of the enemies which they came unto, and exposing their bodies to the swords point, were soone killed, and the towne was yeelded into the hands of the Romanes. Tegmon also, upon the like wilfull obstinacie of prince Cephalo, had shut their gates, but after that he was slain, the town was taken by surrender. And neither Phylace nor Horreum would abide the assault. Having thus quieted Epirus, and bestowed his forces by garrisons in diverse commodious townes for the winter time, he returned into Illyricum: where hee held a generall assembly at Scodra, to which hee had summoned the principall States of the whole nation, and whether also there were arrived five delegates from Rome. And there in this frequent and solemne session, he pronounced from the Tribunall seat, by the advise of the counsell assistant unto him, That the Senat and people of Rome ordained the Illyrians to live free and enjoy libertie, and that himselfe would withdraw the  garrisons out of their towns, fortresses, and castles. As for the Isseans, Taulantians, Tirustians in the Dassaretians countrey, Rhizonites and Olcianates (for that whiles Gentius his fortune stood upright, they had raunged with the Romanes) hee declared them not onely free, but also exempt and priviledged from all tributes. The Doarsians also, for leaving Caravantius, and passing with their armies to side with the Romans, he endowed with the like immunitie. They of Scodra, Dassara, and Selepita, with the rest of the Illyrians, were to pay the one moietie of the tribute which they had yeelded to the king. After this he divided Illyricum into three cantons: the one of them he made of those before named: the second, all the Labeates: and the third, of the Agravonites, Rhezonites, Olciniates, and those that bound and border upon them. Having set downe this order in Illyricum, hee returned to Passaro a cittie in Epirus, there to lie for the winter  time.
Whiles these things happened in Illyricum, Paulus before the comming of the ten Legates, sentQ. Maximus his sonne (who was now lately returned from Rome) to the laccage of Aeginium and Agassae. The quarrell against Agassae, was, for that they having delivered the towne once to Martius the Consull, and therewith of their owne accord craved the alliance of the people of Rome, revolted notwithstanding afterwards to Perseus. As for the Aeginians, they had committed a late and fresh trespasse: for, giving no credite to the same that was voiced of the Romans victorie, they cruelly handled certaine Romane souldiours, who were entred into their citie. Moreover, hee sent L. Posthuminius likewise to ransacke in hostile manner the cittie of the Aenians, for that they had persisted in armes more stiffely than the other neighbour cities. Now was it about  that season of the yeere which men call Autumne: in the beginning whereof, so soone as he had determined to
ride a circuite and visite all Greece round, and to see those places whereof there went so great a name, and which were more renowned by hearesay than known by fight of eie; he left C. Sulpitius Gallus for the commaund and guard of the campe, and set forward in his progresse, accompanied with no great traine. And being guarded of the one hand with his owne son Scipio, and on the other, with Athenaeus the brother of king Eumenes, he passed through Thessalie, toward the famous Oracle at Delphos. Wher, after he had sacrificed to Apollo, he destined and appointed those Columnes and pillars (which were begun in the porch of that temple, and whereupon the statues of king Perseus should have ben erected) for to sustain and bear the statues of himselfe with the title Victorious. Hee visited also the temple of Iupiter Trophon in Lebadio:  where, after hee had seene the mouth of that peakish cave into which they use to descend that would have
the benefit of the Oracle, and know the wil of the gods; after sacrifice also done to Iupiter and Hercinna, whose temple there is to be seen, he went down to Chalcis, to behold the first of Euripus, and that Island which in times past was united and joined to the firme continent by a bridge. From Chalcis hee crossed over the Aulis three miles distant from thence, a port enobled for the rode sometime there of Agamemnous fleet, consisting of a thousand saile. Being there, he went to the temple of Diana, where that king of kings (Agamemnon) offered his owne Iphigenia. daughter in sacrifice upon her altar, to have a prosperous voiage for his fleet entending to saile to Troy. After this he came to Oropus, a towne in Attica, where as Amphilochus the Prophet is worshipped as a god. There, was to be seen an auncient temple, most pleasant to behold for the goodly  fountaines and rivers round about it. Then went hee
forward to Athens, a cittie likewise for antiquitie of same much spoken of, and highly renowmed time out of mind: wherin were many monuments also worth the seeing: namely the citadell, the havens, the wals that reach from the citie to Pyraeum, the arsenals made by great captaines and commaunders, the images of the gods, and of men likewise, so rare and excellent, as well for the artificiall workemanship, as the matter

wherof they were made. When he had sacrificed within the citie to Minerva the goddesse and patronesse  of the said citadell, he kept on his journey, and the next day following arived at Corinth. A faire and beautifull cittie this was in those daies, before it was destroied, the fortresse there and the Isthmus were things of especiall marke and worth the sight for the said fortress notwithstanding it be mounted up to an exceeding height above all, yet is it full of fountaines; and the Isthmus by a narrow ridge of land divideth two seas neere together, the one lying East and the other West. From thence he went to Sicyon and Argos, two noble citties, and so forward to Epidaurus, nothing in wealth comparable to the rest, yet of great name for the famous temple of Aeseulipius, which standeth five miles from the cittie, where at this day are to bee seene the markes and tokens of the emptie places from whence the oblations have bene plucked away: but then a rich place it was andfull of those offrings and gifts, which diseased persons had consecrated to that god in recompence and reward for those soveraigne salves and wholesom remedies which they  there found. From thence he came to Lacedaemon, a citie memorable not for any magnificence of stately workes and buildings, but for good discipline and orders there observed. From whence passing through Megalopolis, hee ascended up to Olympia: where among other things there to be seene, he beheld Iupiter as it were represented even before his eies, whereat hee was much moved to spirit. And therefore as if he had bene to sacrifice in the capitol, he commaunded a sacrifice to be prepared with more state and magnificence than ordinarie. Thus having visued all Greece over without any search and enquirie made, how men either in generall or particular stood affected in the warre against Perseus, (because he would not trouble and disquiet the minds of the allies with any fearfull occurrent) as he returned toward Demetrias, he was encountred by  the way with a number of Aetolians all clad in dolefull and mourning array. And when he woondered and asked what the matter might be, he was given to understand that five hundred and fiftie of their principall men of name, were by Lyciscus and Tisippus massacred, who with the helpe of certaine Romane souldiours sent from Babius the governour, had be set their Senate: that the rest were driven into exile; and the goods as well of those who were murdered, as also of the banished persons were not possessed by their accusers. He commanded them to attend upon him at Amphipolis, and when himselfe had communed and conffered at Demetrias with Cn. Octavius, after he once heard that the ten legates had passed the seas, he laid aside all other affaires, and went directly to Apollonia there to meet with them. To which place when Perseus came to meet him, for he having over-large libertie of prison, was come from Amphipolis, and that was a daies  journey off; unto the K. he shewed good countenance and gave him good and gracious words, but after he was returned to the camp at Amphipolis, he sharply checked and rebuked, as men say, C. Sulpitius, first for suffering Perseus to range so loosely and so far off from him, all over the province: secondly, for giving his souldiours so much libertie as to plucke the tiles from off the wals [and houses] of the citie, to cover the places of their winter harbour: and therewith he commanded that the tiles should be carried thither againe where they had them, and the houses to be repaired as sufficiently as before. As for Perseus and his elder sonne Philip, he delivered unto A. Posthumius to be kept in safe custodie: but his daughter and younger sonne, he sent for to Amphipolis from Samothrace, and used them with all courtesie and kind interteinment as possibly hee could. When the day was come, on which hee appointed that ten principall burgeoised out of  every cittie should repaire to Amphipolis, and that all the kings letters and writings in what place soever to be found, should be sought up and represented there together with all his money; hee sat him down upon the tribunal seat, together with the ten legars from Rome, and the whole multitude of the Macedonians were gathered round about him. Albeit they had bene used to subjection under the king, yet this new Tribunall carried with it a forme and shew of a terrible government, namely when they saw the tipstaves and huishers to keepe the doores and places of entrie, the publicke crier and the sergeant: straunge matters all unto their cies and eares, and whereto they had not bene accustomed, able to strike a terror to allies, much more then, to conquered enemies. After silence made by the crier, Paulus pronounced in the Latine tongue, what the Senates pleasures was to be done, and what himselfe with the advise of his Councell assistant  about him had thought upon and set downe: all which points Cn. Octavius the Pretour (for hee also was in place) interpreted and related againe in the Greeke language. Imprimis, they ordeined the Lacedaemonians to be free, to have and enjoy the same citties and territories, to use and exercise their owne lawes, to create yeerely magistrats, and to pay halfe of that tribute to the

 people of Rome, which they used to pay unto their kings. Item, to divide Macedonie into 4 quarters; The one, and that the principall, for to conteine all the countrie between the two rivers Suymon and Nessus; to which part there should be laid the tract on the farther side of the river Nessus Eastward (where Perseus held townes, castles and cities) excepting Aenus, Maronea, and Abdera: also beyond Strymon Westward, all the Bisaltique territory, together with Heraclea, which they call Syntice. For the second, all those parts which on the East side the river Strymon encloseth, except Syntice, Hereclea, and the Bisaltes: also on the West, whatsoever is bounded with the river Axius, together with the Paeonians lying to it, who inahabite upon the river Axius Eastward. The third quarter was that, which Axius from the cast and Peneus the river from the west do compasse; and to the North side is limited with the mountaine Bora, and to this portion was adjoined the  tract of Paeonia, which coasteth along the river Axius toward the West: Edessa also and Berrhaea were annexed therto. The fourth was beyond the mountain Bora, confining on the one side upon Illyricum, and on the other upon Epirus. The head cities of every quarter where they should hold their sessions and counsailes he appointed these: For the first, Amphypolis; Thessalonica for the second; In the third Pella; and Pelagonia in the fourth. To these places hee ordeined that by summons they should repair, and hold the assemblies of ech quarter; thither the mony to be brought; and there the magistrats to be created. Item, he declared and pronounced that it should not be lawful for any person to contract mariage, neither to have commerce and traffick togither in buying or selling of lands or tenements without the limits of their owne division. Item, that in their mines they should no more dig for silver and gold: but for Iron and brasse they had permission.  And those that had the profit therof, wer to pay the one half of the old rent, which they wer wont to yeeld and grant unto the king. Item, he forbad them to use any more forrein salt brought from out of other parts. When the Dardanians put in their claime for Paeonia, for that it had sometime bin their appertenance, and also confined upon their countrie; he pronounced freedome to all those who had bene subjects to king Perseus. But afterwards, when they could not obtein Paeonia, he graunted unto them the commoditie of the trafficke for salt; and he charged the inhabitants of the said countrie to carie it to Stobi in Paeonia, and he set them down a certein price. Item, he debarred them from selling any ship-timbre themselves, and from suffering any others. Vnto those countries which bordered upon the Barbarians (and except the third quarter all the rest confined upon them) he graunted that they might keepe armed garrisons upon their frontiers  and marches. These Acts and ordinances thus published the first day of the session, wrought diversly in the minds of men. Freedome graunted beyond their expectation, and the easement in the yerely tribute, comforted their spirits and made them looke up. But by the interruption of the commerce and traffick one region with another, they seemed like creatures dismembred and plucked asunder joint-meale, so as having need one of another, yet they had no mutuall and reciprocal use and intercourse. In so much as the Macedonians themselves knew ful litle how big and large Macedonie was, and how commodiously it was divided, so as ech part was sufficient in it self without the help of others. The first region conteineth the Bisaltae who inhabit beyond the river Nessus and about Strymon, the most valiant men of all the rest: besides, it hath many proper commodities by it self as well fruits of the earth as mines of mettals, together with the opportunitie and commodious  situation of Amphipolis, which as a frontier-bar stoppeth all avenues on the East side into Macedonie. The second quarter hath in it two most-famous and frequented cities, Thessalonica and Cassandria: also Pallene, a fertile and fruitfull land. Besides, the maritime commodities which the havens at Torone and the head of Athos (and it they call the port or rode of Aeneas do yeeld; to say nothing of other bayes lying handsomely, some toward the Iland Eurboae, others toward Hellespont. The third countrey containeth the famous cities Edessa, Berrhaea, and Pella; the warlike nation of the Veteij, and many Gaules and Illyrians besides who there inhabite, notable men all of action and execution. The fourth region is peopled with the Eordians, Lincestians, and Pelagonians: unto whome, the provinces Atintania, Stymphalis, and Elimiotis are adjoyned. All this quarter is cold rough and hard to dwell in. The nature of the inhabitants is likewise sutable  to the soile: and the fiercer they are by reson of the barbarous nations their neighbors, who one while find them occupied with war, and otherwhiles mingle their rites and fashions with theirs in time of peace. When Macedonie was thus divided and each part distinguished by their severall uses and commodities, hee appointed a generall review to be made and enrolment of all the Macedonians; having declared unto them before, that he purposed to give lawsunto them.

This done, the Aetolians were cited and called next, and in the whole course of the commission  as touching them and their affaires, more inquisition there was, who favoured the Romans, and who affected the king, than of any that either had done or suffered wrong. The murderers wer found unguiltie and absolved, and the banishment of the exiled was as much avowed, as their death justified who were massacred: Au. Babius onely was convicted and condemned, for that he had sent Romane souldiors to execute the said butcherie. This issue of the Aetolians cause, puffed up the spirits of all those who had sided with the Romans, throughout all the nations and cities of Greece, in such sort as they grew to a pride intollerable: but contrariwise put down and abased under their feet, as many as were suspected any waies to have cast a favour and born good will to the king. The principall states-men of their cities were of three sorts; two of them were skilfull in the art of soothing, and either by submitting and subjecting under the Romane empire, or winding within the favour and friendship of the KK. grew infinitely rich and mightie themselves in privat, with the publicke oppression and undoing of their countrey: the third betweene, sung a meane, and was crosse to the one and the other; men that stood for the defence of their liberties and maintenance of laws, who as they were more dearly beloved of their neighbours at home, so they were lesse gracious and of credit with strangers abroad. The favorits and supposts onely of the Romanes, were advaunced by their prosperetie; they alone sate in place of government, they were employed in all embassages, and none but they. These beeing there present in great number comming out of Peloponnesus, Baeotia, and from other frequent assemblies of Greece, filled the heads of the ten delegates and high commissioners; buzzing into their eares, that not they alone who openly were seene in their braverie and vanitie of spirit, vanting  themselves for the hostes and friends of K. Perseus, but many more besides under-hand took part with him and favoured his proceedings: as for the rest (under a colour of maintaining libertie) practised in all their counsels and complotted against the Romans what they could: and never would the Greeke nations abide long in their allegeaunce, unlesse the hearts of that side were taken down and broken; and their authoritie onely cherished, confirmed, and strengthned, who regarded nothing else but the empire and soveraigntie of the Romanes. When these had enformed and presented divers by name sent for they were by the letters missive of the General, out of Aetolia, Acamania, Epirus, and Baeotia, to give their attendance and follow him to Rome, there to answere the cause. But into Achaea two of the high commissioners were sent, namely, C. Claudius and Cn. Domitius, who personally should summon them by vertue of their edict. And  this was done for two considerations; the one, because they thought verily that the Achaeans were more confident and couragious, and therefore would not obey the summons by letters, and peradventure also, Callicrates and other the informers and accusers who made presentment of their names, should be in some daunger of their lives: the other cause why they would be present to give them summons was this, that amongst the kings records and rols they had found the letters of the principall Statesmen of other nations; but of the Achaeans there appeared no writing at all under their hands, and therefore the imputations charged upon them, were nothing evident.
After the Aetolians were dismissed, the nation of the Acarnanians was cited and called into place: as for them, there was no chaunge nor alteration; onely Leucas was exempt from doing  service to the high court and generall assembly of the Acarnanians. As they followed the inquisition still farther and farther, making enquirie who either in publicke or privat had taken part with the king, they extended their commission as farre as into Asia; and sent Labeo to demolish and race Antissa a citie in the Isle Lesbos, and to translate the inhabitants thereof to Methymna: the pretence was, for that they had given harbour in their haven to the provisions of Antenor the kings admirall, at what time as he hovered and raunged about Lesbos with his pinnaces. Two there were that lost their heads, men of qualitie and great worth, to wit, Andronicus the Aetolian, sonne of Andronicus, for that he followed his father and bare armes against the people of Rome; and Neon a Thebane, by whose advise and persuasion they had contracted a societie with Perseus.
After this enquest of forrein causes interposed and comming betweene, the assembly of the Macedonians was called againe; wherein as touching the state of Macedonie, pronounced and published it was, That there should be certaine Senators chosen, whome they call Syned^^, by whose counsel the common-weale should be managed and governed. After this, were the names

 read of the principall Macedonians, whome hee appointed (togither with their children as many as were above fifteene yeeres of age) to goe before into Italie. This at first was thought to be an hard and cruell course, but anon it appeared to the multitude of the Macedonians, that it was all done for their libertie. For nominated there were, the kings friends and gallants of his court, the commanders of armies, the admirals of the fleets, and the captains of the garisons, who were woont to serve the king basely, but to overrule others proudly and imperiously: some exceeding rich and wealthie, others spending above the proportion of their revenues and living: all saring at their table, and arraied in apparell like KK. not one carying with him the civill mind of a good citizen, not one that could abide to heare of lawes, or of equall libertie. All these therefore, who had been employed in any ministerie or service about the king, even they also  who had been used in the least embassages that were, had commaundement to depart out of Macedonie and to goe into Italie: and looke who obeyed not this eddict, where threatned with death. Vnto Macedonie hee gave lawes, with such diligent care and good regard, as if hee had reckoned them not for enemies vanquished, but for allies of good desert: such lawes (I say) as the verie practice and triall of long time (the onely corrector of all statutes) was not able upon that experience, to checke and controll.
After these serious affaires were finished, he exhibited with great furniture and preparation, a solemnitie of game and disport at Amphipolis, which long before he had intended, and for the intimation whereof he had both sent out his messengers to the States of Asia and to the KK. and also himselfe in his circuit and visitation of the Grecian citties, had given warning to the  great men and principall citizens. And thither repaired out of all parts of the world, a number of cunning, fear, and artificiall actours, that made profession of such plaies and pastimes; besides a fort of wrestlers, champions, and brave horses of the best kind and breed. Also divers embassages with their beasts for sacrifices, and whatsoever els was usually done of custome, at the great and solemne gamings in Greece. Thus it came to passe, that men admired not onely his magnificence, but his wisdome also in exhibiting these shewes and sights, wherein the Romanes at that time were altogether rude and ignorant. Moreover he feasted and banketted the embassadours, in the same sumpteous manner and respective consideration. And this (by report) was an apophthegme and common saying of his, That none could make feasts and set forth plaies better than he who had the skill to win a field. Having represented these solemnities of all sorts, and bestowed  all the brasen shields a shipbourd; all other armour and weapons of sundrie kinds, he piled upon a mightie heape, and after his praiers made to Mars, Minerva, dame Lua, and other gods and goddesses, unto whom of right and dutie appertained to consecrate and dedicate the spoiles of enemies; himselfe the Generall with his owne hands put under a burning torch, and kindled the fire, and after him all the marshall-colonels standing round about, cast every man his firebrand, and set all a burning. This was a thing noted in that great assembly of Europe and Asia, where there was such a confluence of people from all parts, as well to testifie their joy in his behalfe, as to see the shewes and disports: in that meeting, I Say, of so great armies of sea-servitours and land-souldiours, there was that plentie of all things and cheapenesse of victuals, that Aemylius the Generall, of that exceeding store and abundance, gave much away freely to private persons,  to cities and nations, not onely for their present use, but also to carie home with them into their countries. And this multitude there assembled, took not more pleasure either in beholding the stage-plaies acted, or seeing men practice seates of bodily strength and activitie, or the running of horses in the race, as in viewing the Macedonian bootie and pillage laid all abroad to be seen; namely of Statues, and painted tables, of rich cloth of tyssue, of vessels in gold, in silver, in copper, and yvorie, most curiously wrought in that roiall seat and citie of Pella, not onely to serve for a present shew and no more (like those that the kings pallace of 18 cities there be of that name. Alexandria was replenished with) but also for continuall and everlasting use. These were all embarked, and committed to the charge of Cn. Octavius to be transported to Rome. Paulus after he had given the embassadours a gracious and courteous farwell, passed over the river Strymon, and lodged within a mile  of Amphipolis. From thence he dislodged and journeyed until he came on the fift day as far as Pella. And passing by the citie, he abode two daies at a place which they call Spelaeum, and then he sent P. Nasica, and Q. Maximus his owne sonne with part of the forces in an expedition, to give the wast unto those Illyrians, who had succoured Perseus in his warres, but he commaunded them to meet him at Oticum. Himselfe marching toward Epirus, at the fifteenth remove arrived

at Passaron. Not farre from thence lay Anicius encamped: unto whome hee dispatched his  letters, to the end that he should not be troubled at those dessignes which were to be put in execution signifying therein, that the Senate graunted to the armie the pillage of all the cities of Epirus which had revolted unto Perseus: which done, hee suborned certaine Centurions, and sent them into all the townes with instructions, to give out that his comming was to withdraw all the garisons from thence, with an intent that the Epirotes should enjoy their freedome as well as the Macedonians; and so he summoned out of every citie ten of the cheese to repair unto him. And when hee had charged and commaunded them to bring abroad into the market place all the gold and silver which they had, he sent out certaine cohorts and companies of souldiours to every of the said cities: they who were assigned for the places farther remote went before them which were appointed to the neere; and this was ordered so, that upon the same day they should  enter into them all at once. Now the Colonels and Centurions had their errand delivered them what to doe. In the morning betaines all the gold and silver was brought forth together accordingly, and at the fourth hower of the day a signall was given to the souldiors to fall to ransacke and rifle the cities. Wherein they found so great store of pillage, that every horseman had for his part (...) foure hundred Denarij, and the footmen two hundred apeece, and a hundred and fiftie thousand pols were led away into captivitie. Then the wals were rased of the said cities thus spoiled, and those were to the number of seventie. All the bootie and prizes were sold, and out of that masse of money were the souldiours paied. From thence Paulus went downe to the sea side, unto Oricum. But the soldiors minds were nothing so well satisfied, as he supposed they had ben, for discontented mightily they were and angrie, that they had no share at al in the kings pillage and  treasure, as if they had made no warre in Macedonie. At Oricum he found those forces which he had sent under the conduct of Scipio Nasica and Maximus his sonne; there he shipped his whole armie, and failed over into Italie. In like manner a few daies after, Anicius, when the session and generall meeting of the other Epirotes and Acarnanians was ended, having given commaundement, that their principall persons should follow him into Italie (the knowledge and deciding of whose causes hee reserved and referred thither) himselfe attended the ships which the armie had used in Macedonie, and passed over likewise into Italie.
At what time as these affaires were thus managed in Macedonie and Epitus, the embassadours who had been sent with Attalus to end the warre betweene the Gaules and king Eumenes, arrived in Asia. A surcease of armes for the winter time, was agreed upon betweene both parties, during  which cessation the Gaules departed home, and Eumenes was retired to Pergamus there to winter, where also he lay grievously sick. The spring was no sooner come, but the Gauls began to stir and looke abroad: but by that time they were come as farre as to Synnada, Eumenes had assembled his forces from all parts to Sardeis. There at Synnada, the Romans parled with Soloveltius the Generall of the Gaules; Attalus also went with them: but thought good it was not, that hee should enter within the Gaules campe, for feare of stirring coales in heat of argument, and raising choler of the one side or other. So P. Licinius communed with the duke of the Gauls aforesaid: and when he had done, he brought word backe, that the more hee was entreated and spoken faire, the worse hee was and lesse tractable; insomuch as it might seeme a wonder, that the words of the Romance embassadours were so powerfull and effectuall with Antiochus and Piolomaeus (two mightie and puissant kings) as to make peace so presently between them, since they prevailed so little or nothing at all among the Gaules.
To returne againe to Rome. First, the two captive kings, Perseus and Gentius were sent thither, and committed there to ward they and their children: after them, the multitude besides of prisoners, then consequently those Macedonians, as also the other cheefe peeres of Greece, who were warned to repaire unto Rome. For not they only were summoned to make apparence there, who had been seene present in place; but also all those were sent for by letters missive peremptorily, who were but reported to have beene with the kings. The Paulus himselfe a few daies after, embarked in a ship of the kings, a galeace of a mightie bignesse, making way with sixteene bankes and rewes of oares to a side, and the same set out and adorned with the Macedonian  spoiles, not onely of brave gorgeous armour, but also of rich hanging, tyssue, and cloth of gold out of the kings wardrobe, came up the Tyber against the stream: where great number of people went forth to meet him, and filled the banks on both sides of the river. Some few daies after Anicius and Octavius arrived also with their fleet. And to al there, by an act of the Senat was triumph

 graunted. Q. Cassius the Pretour had commaundement to deale with the Tribunes of the Commons by warrant from the Senate, that they should preferre a bill unto the common people, that those three should be in full commission of commaund and government, that day when they were to ride triumphant into the citie. See, how meane things escape the touch of envie, but the highest commonly are met with. No doubt was made at all of the triumph of Anicius, no yet of Octavius. But Paulus, with whom even they themselves would have been abashed to compare, could not avoid the backbiting of slaunderous and malicious tongues. His souldiours according to the auncient discipline of warre, he had held hard to their service. And to them had he given a donative indeed out of the bootie, but more niggardly and with a lighter hand than they hoped for, from out of so great wealth and riches of the kings: and yet in good faith to say a truth, full  well he knew that if he had satisfied their greedie desire, and dealt still amongst them til they had cried Ho, he should have left himselfe just nothing to have brought into the common treasurie. So that all this Macedonian armie gave a shew by this time, as if they had but cold devotion to their Generall, either to appeare, or to give their voices for the setting forward of the bill aforesaid, as touching his triump and plenarie power of commaund, when the day of assembly should come. Over and besides, Ser. Sulpitus Galba, who had been a martial Colonell in the second legion, in Macedonie, and in private enmitie with the Generall, both himselfe in persons was in hand with them, and by the souldiors also of his owne legion sollicited and spurred on the rest to appeare in sufficient number, there for to give their suffrages against him, and checked the bill: saying.
That as he was an imperious and lordly commaunder, so hee was as miserable a pinchpennie  withall, and a good deed it were to denie his grace and to crosse the law proposed for his triumph, and so to be revenged of him throughly: for no doubt the commons of the citie would goe that way that they should see the soldiours to lead before. He could not for sooth (say they) give money among his souldiors liberally: well, he shall surely know, that his souldiors yet can give him honour; but never let him looke for the fruit of favor and grace, where he hath deserved none. These words set them agog; and when Tib. Sempronius a Tribune of the Commons read out and published the foresaid bill in the Capitoll, and that by permission of law any privat person might have spoken there to, and no man came forth, as being a matter whereof no doubt and question was to be made: then Servius Galba sodainly slept foorth, and required of the Tribune, That (for as much as it was so far forth dayes, as being the eight houre thereof, so that  he had not time enough to declare and shew at large, what allegations he had why they should not graunt L. Aemylius a triumph) they would adjourne the assembly to the next day, and betimes in the morning set the matter on foot againe; for that he had need of a whole day and no lesse, to plead that cause to the full as he should doe. But when the Tribune willed him againe to speake his mind that day, if he had ought to say; he made a speech, and with his long oration held the court untill it was within night: putting them in mind and alleadging, How precisely and rigorously he had exacted at their hands all militarie duties; how he had imposed upon the souldiors more painfull and dangerous labour than need was: but contrariwise in dealing rewards and bestowing honourable recompences for good service, hee was over-straight laced and too short in every point: and verily souldiere and warfare, if it continued still under such captaines,  will be more hard, travelsome, and rough to soldiors and warriours: but when all is done and victorie obteined, rewarded it shall be with bare povertie and neglect of honour. Ceretes the Macedonians are in better case yet than the Romane soldiors. But if they would be present in great frequencies the next morrow for to denie and revoke this bill, then these rich and mightie men shall know full wel, That all lieth not in the hands of the captaine and commaunder, but that the souldiours also can doe somewhat. The souldiours animated and induced with these perrillous words, resorted the day following in so great multitudes, and pestered the whole Capitoll so full, as none but they could come in to give their voice. The first tribes that were called in, clearely cassed the grace: which when the principall and cheefe men of the citie saw, they ran all into the Capitoll, with open mouth crying out upon this indignitie offered, That L. Paulus a conquerour  in so great and daungerous a war, should be deprived of his due triumph; and the grand Commaunders and Generals of the field were now subjected and enthralled to the loose licentiousnesse and greedie avarice of their soldiours. In this one thing (say they) have we too too much faulted, such hath been our favour and partialitie, and so loth have we been to displease any: but what will become of us in the end, if soldiours once may come to be lords and maisters, and thus to crow

over their Generals? And every man railed and cried out upon Galba. In the end after this garboile  was appeased, M. Servilius who sometime had bene Consull and great maister of the horse under the Dictatour, requested the tribunes that they would begin all again, annulling that which was past, and give him leave withall to make a speech before the people. The Tribunes went aside to consult of this matter; and in fine, over-ruled with the authoritie and countenance of the nobles and peeres of the citie, began to treat afresh and goe in hand with all matters a new, making it known openly that they would recall back those first tribes, in case M. Servilius and other private men who were willing to utter their mind to the cause had once spoken.The (...) of M.(...) the (...) of (...).
Then said Servilius as followeth, Maisters and friends, citizens here of Rome, if and by nothing else it might bee judged, how singular and how excellent a commaunder Lucius Aemylius was in the field, this onely (if there were no more) may suffice, that having in his campe such seditious and light  headed persons for his souldiours, and an adversarie of his owne among them, so noble of birth, so rash of action, and withal98l so arrogant and selfe-conceited, readie to incite and stirre up a multitude to commotion, yet troubled he never was with any mutinie at all in his whole armie. The same severtie it was in government and conduct, that held them in aw and good order, which now at this present they hate and detest. And so long as they were mannaged by auncient discipline, they durst nor quetch nor give offence. As for Sergius Galba, if (like a new barrister who is to shew the first proofe, and to give the assay and hansell of his eloquence) he would have made choice of Lacius Paulus to begin withall and accuse him at the barre, he should not yet have hindered his triump, which (if there were nothing else to dissuade and draw him backe) the Senate had judged to be just and due: but the morrow after his triump (when he had seene him a private  man againe) he might have given presentment of his name, and by order of law ministred interrogatories unto him and so entred processe: or rather he might have staid a little longer, namely untill himselfe had bene a magistratin place, and then have gone roundly to worke, arested him upon an action to answere at aday, and so accused him judicially before the people. Thus should L. Aemylius have had his triump for reward and recompence of his well doing, in that so nobly and valiantly he had conducted this warre: thus likewise should hee have suffered condigne punishment, if he had committed ought unworthie either of his auncient glorie or this new honour. But will you have the truth? when he could find no matter of crime to reproach him with, he sought by waies and indirect meanes to detract his well deserved praises. Hee demaunded yesterday, one full day to accuse L. Paulus: and ^. foure houres, even all the day time that was left he spent in making an invective against him. What prisoner was there ever brought to the bar so culpable and sinful, but all the faults of his whole life might be ripped up, deciphered, and peinted forth in so many houres space? But what objected he all that while, that L. Paulus if hee were to frame his defence, would wish to denie? O that some man would procure me here for the while, two assemblies and courts, the one of Romane souldiors emploied lately in Macedonie; the other more pure and uncorrupt of the twain, namely of citizens founder in judgement, void of al favor and cleere from hatred. And the people of Rome I would have to be the judge. First let Paulus be accused in the graund assembly and court of these citizens. Tell mee, o Sergius Galba, what would you say against him before those Quirites of Rome. For there you should have bene cut off and lost al this discourse and special part of your oration, carying these terms, You looked too streightly  and precisely to the Corps de gards in their stations; you held the souldiors too hard to their watch and ward; the sentinels were neerely and narrowly looked unto; and you were over curious about going the rounds and relieving the watch in the night season; about the works and fabrickes you put the souldiours to more toiling and moiling than heeretofore; whiles you, my lord Generall, their surveiour, overseer, and taske-maister, rode all about to exact the utmost with al extremitie; in one and the same day when you had the armie on foot, presently from a journie you led them foorth to battaile; when the victorie was gotten, you would not suffer the souldiour to breath and take repose, but caused him to march immediately and to follow the enemie in chase; also, whereas the bootie to be parted and shared out, might have enriched your selfe, yet will you carrie the kings treasure in shew of triumph, and then lay it up in the chamber of the citie. As these  be shrewd matters, like sharpe goods to pricke those souldiours and set them on, who thinke they have not scope enough to serve their dissolute loosenes, or too small allowance to content their covetous appecites: so with the people of Rome they would have nothing at all prevailed: who if they should not call to mind examples and stories of old, which they have heard their fathers

 talke of; namely, what overthrowes have bene received through the indulgence and popularitie of Generals; and contrariwise what victories have beene atchieved by their severe discipline and government: yet at leastwise they cannot chuse but remember what ods and difference there was in the late Punicke warre, betweene M. Minutius Generall of the horse, and Q. Fabius Max. his Dictatour. And therefore since the accuser might know all this, the defence of Paulus in this behalfe was altogether needlesse and unnecessarie. Let us go now to the other audience and assembly of the Macedonie-soldiors. But not me thinks I must not call you Quirites any more, but souldiors: if haply there be so much grace in you, as that this name yet may cause you to blush, and be abashed for very shame of the world, to offer abuse unto your General. And verily for mine owne part, I find a great chaunge in my selfe, and am otherwise affected in my mind, now that I seeme  to speake unto an armie of souldiours, than ere-whiles I was, when my Oration was accommodate and framed to the commons of a citie. Now souldiours, what say you to the matter? Is there any one at Rome (but Perseus againe) that would not have a triumph over the Macedonians? and are you not readie to pull such a one in peeces with those very hands, wherewith you vanquished the Macedonians? He, whosoever he is, that impeacheth you for entering into the citie in truimph, trust me truly, would have debarted you of victorie, if it had bin in his power. Lo, how souly are yee deceived (souldiours) and farre out of the way, if yee thinke that the triumph is the honour only of the Generall, and not of the souldiours likewise, and consequently of the whole people of Rome. This is not Paulus his case alone. Many others likewise there have beene, who when they could not obteine triumph at the hands of the Senat, triumphed neverthelesse upon  the Albane mountaine. As impossible it is for any man to bereave L. Paulus of the honour due for the finishing of the Macedonian war, as it was to disappoint C. Luctatius of his glorie for ending the first Punick war; P. Cornelius for the second; or others besides who after them triumped. It is not a triumph that can make Lucius Paulus better or worse, either the greater captaine or the lesse. Herein consisteth the credit, renowme, and reputation of the souldiors and of all the people of Rome more than his: for feare least they be reputed and noted either for envious and malicious, or else unthankfull for their best members and noblest citizens; and therein seem to imitate the people of Athens, who evermore persecute and plague with envie their best men that live amongst them. Your auncestours and forefathers when time was, faulted this waies  ynough (ywis) in the person of Camillus, whom they offered abuse unto, before the citie by his meanes was recovered out of the Gaules hands. Much you were to blame your selves here, and over-much too (I may tell you) in P. Africanus, That in Liternum, his mansion house and place of habitation (who was the conqueror of Africke) should bee shewed: that in Liternum (I say) the sepulchre of P. Africanus should be seene. Let us blush for very shame, that L. Paulus, as hee is equall to them in glory and honour, should likewise go with them and have his part of your hard and wrongfull dealing. The first thing that yee doe then, let bee this: Out with this spot and staine of infamie which yee have caught; so reprochfull in regard of other nations, so hurtfull to your selves. For, who will ever hereafter wish to be like Africanus? who will endeavour to resemble L. Paulus, in a citie so unthankfull, nay so spitefull and malicious to all good men? Say there were no question at all of infamie and obloquie, but of honour only and reputation,  tell me (I beseech you) is there any triumph that compriseth not the glory also of the Romane name? So many triumphes over the Gaules, so many againe over the Spaniards, and so many over the Carthagians, are they reputed and called the triumphs of the captaine alone, and not likewise of the people of Rome? And like was we say, that we triumphed not over Pyrrhus only, nor over Anniball, but over the Epirots likewise and the Carthaginians: even so neither Mar. Curius alone, nor P. Cornelius, but the Romans also have triumphed. True it is, and I must needs say, that the souldiors have a proper interest and part by themselves, in that they alone (dight with branches and chaplets of laurell, and every one bravely to be seen and adorned with the gifts that have been given them) refound 10 Triumphe, 10 Triumphe, and as they passe along the city sing and chaunt the praises of themselves and of their captaine-Generals. And if it fortune at  any time that the soldiors be not brought home out of the province to the triumph, they grumble and are discontented: and yet notwithstanding, absent though they be, they thinke it is their due: and so long as their Generall and leader triumpheth, they triumph also, because the victory was atchieved by the strength of their armes. Good souldiours, if a man should aske your, for what intent you were reconducted into Italie? and wherefore so soone as the service was performed

and the warre brought to an end, yee had not presently your congie of discharge? moreover, to  what purpose yee came by companies and squadrons under your ensigns and colours? for what cause yee stay and remaine here, and goe not every man his waies to his owne home? what answere would ye make els, but, That yee would be seence in triumph? And to say a truth, since yee have woon the victorie and are conquerours, I cannot blame you; nay, yee ought to define for to be seene and seene againe. It is not long since we triumphed over Philip (this mans father) and over Antiochus likewise: and reigned both they did as KK. when the triumph was: and shal there be no solemnitie of triumph over Perseus, taken prisoner and brought captive with his children into the citie? If L. Paulus, standing beneath as a privat person (one amongst the meine of gowned citizens) seeing L. Anicius and Cn. Octavius arraied sumptuously in cloth of gold, and in their rich purple robes and mantels of estate, mounting up the Capitoll in their truimphant charriots, should aske them the question and say in this manner: Tell me, o Lucius Anticius and you Cn. Octavius, judge yee in your owne conceit that you are more worthy of a triumph than? They would no doubt come downe each one out of his chariots and yeeld him their place, yea and for very shame deliver up all their ensigns and ornaments unto him. And you Quirites, had you rather see Genius than Perseus led in triumph? would you with indeed to triumph for an accidentall appendant only of the war, rather than for the maine substance of the war? Shall the legions comming out of Selavonia, and the marriners at sea, enter the citie crowned with laurell garlands; and the legions out of Macedonie, beeing denied their owne triumph, stand still and behold others to triumph? Moreover, what shall become of that rich bootie? what shall be done with the spoiles of that great and wealthie victorie? where shall be bestowed and laid up to  many thousand conslets and armours plucked from the bodies of enemies slaine? Shall they be sent backe againe into Macedonie? Those costly images of gold, of marble, of yvorie; those goodly faire pictures; those pretious clothes and hangings of purple, searlet, and tyssue; that mightie quantitie of gold and silver wrought into vessels chased and engraven; that huge masse of the kings money and coine, what shall we do with it? What? shall it be carried all by night as stollen goods into the publicke treasurie and citie chamber? The goodliest sight of all the rest, what say you to it? A most noble and puissant king is taken prisoner; where shall hee be shewed to the people of Rome his conquerour? What running, what concourse there was of people to see K. Syphax captive (and yet he was but an accessarie to the Punick war) most of us do well remember. Shall K. Perseus then, a prisoner and captive; shall Philip and Alexander his sonnes, (persons of so great name) be hidden and kept from the sight and eyes of the citie? And there were no more but L. Aemylius himselfe, twise Consull, the conqueror and subduer of Greece, all men would desire to see him enter the citie in his triumphant chariot. We created him Cos.for this intent, that he should finish and determine this war, which to your dishonor and great shame had hung for the space of foure yeers. To him then, who (at what time as the lot of that province tell unto him, and when he departed on his voiage from Rome) had all our hearts to presage victorie and triumph, shal we now deny triumph when he hath the victorie? And verily in so doing, we shall not only defraud men, but rob the gods also of their honor; for due it is to the very gods also, and not to men alone. Have not your ancestors ever used to enterprise all great affairs in the name of the gods first, and therin also to end last? The Cos. or Pretor, when he is to take his journie  into his province, or to levie war, with his Lictours before him clad in their cotes of armes, is ever wont to make his solemn vows in the Capitoll: after he hath acquit himselfe of his charge and obtained victorie, when as the triumpheth, he transferreth in pompe the rich presents of the people of Rome so well deserved, and offreth them to the same gods in the said Capitoll, unto whom there first he pronounced his vowes. And the beasts for sacrifice going before the purpose of triumph, are not the least part of this solemnitie that it may appear, how the General in his returne is mindfull of the gods, and rendereth thanks unto them for the happie managing of the affairs of Commonweale. As for all those beasts for sacrifice which he hath appointed and reserved to be shewed in the pompe of triumph, slay them; neither makes it matter whose hand doth it: some kill one and some another, but those sacred viands of the Senat, which are not to be eaten in any privat  house, not in publick place prophane and unhallowed, but only in the Capitol; and there not for the pleasure of men, but of gods and men together, will yee trouble and impeach at the suggestion of Servius Galba? Shall the gates be shut against the triumph of L. Paulus? shall Perseus king of the Macedonians, with his children and the multitude besides of captives, with the spoils

 of the Macedonians, bee left behind at the river side? shall L. Paulus goe directly from the citie gate home to his house as a private person, like one that hath beene abroad in the countrey to see his ferme, and is newly returned? But thous Centurion and thou souldiour, give eare, I advise thee, to the ordinance which the Senate hath decreed as touching the Generall Paulus, rather than to the bibble babble of Serve. Galba: hearken to this, that I say the word, rather than hee. As for him, he hath learned nought els but to prate and talke, and that to the depraving of others full maliciously. I tell thee, sought have I with mine enemies even upon defiance given twentie times and three; done I have my devour, and from them all that were in combat with me, I never failed but carried away their spoiles; I bear the marks and about me of many a wound, and the honorarable therof are to be seen, al of them in the breast and forepart of my bodie. At which word,  they say, hee bared his naked skin, and related with all in what bartell he had received this or that wound. Now as he shewed these skars, and chaunced to discover some parts that better ywis and more honestly had bene unseene, and therewith, a bunch or swelling of a rupture that hee had in his groine, wherat some of them that stood next unto him took up a laughter, then (qd. he) even this that you have espied here and make such game at, I caught with a strain, riding continually as I did, and never from my horseback day nor night: and no more ashamed I am and displeased with my selfe for that infirmitie, than for these skarres which you here see; since that it never was any impediment unto me in performing my service to the Commonweale, either in civile affairs of citie, or in warfare abroad. Well, I an old servitor, have been content here to shew unto young men and raw souldiours, may bodie, many a time and often hacked, perced and slashed with the  sword. Let Galba now lay bare that whole skin of his owne so slicke and smooth. Now my maisters, you that are Tribunes, call the tribes againe to the scrutinie, and take their voices. As for me downe I will, and goe after the souldiours hard at heeles. Know I will which be those lewd and unthankfull companions that had rather be soothed up and flattered in the warres by mutinous persons,All within these markes [ ] is supplied out of Plutarch. Somewhat wante^h besides immediately after this Oration, name^^part of the description of Paulus his triumph. than serve under the martiall discipline of their Generall.] * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Valerius Antias reporteth, That the summe of all the gold and silver taken in pillage and carried in the pompe of this triumph, amounted to the worth of 120 millions of Selterces. Which masse, no doubt, ariseth much greater by the proportion of the number of waines, and the poises both of gold and silver by the same authour set downe in generall sums. And
as some  have recorded, he either spent in the warre next before, or els scattered and lost in his flight when he made hast to Samothrace, as much againe as that came to. And the more wonder it was, that so mightie a masse of money had beene gathered and heaped up within thirtie yeeres after the warre betweene Philip and the Romanes, raised part out of the issue and adventures of his mettall mines, and part out of other prosites and tributes. Thus Philip very bare of money, and Perseus contrariwise exceeding rich, began to make warre with the Romanes. Last of all, Paulus himselfe rode in his charriot, carrying a great port and majestie with him, both for his comely and personable bodie, and also for his reverent old age. After his chariot, among other honourable personages rode his two sonnes. Q. Maximus and P. Scipio. Then followed the horsemen by troupes, and the footmen by their cohorts and companies, every one keeping their rankes full
 decently. The footmen had given them a hundred Sesterces apeece, the Centurions double, and the horsemen triple so much. And it is thought, that hee meant to have given the footmen as much as the most, and to the rest in proportion, in case they either had nor denied his honour by their voices, or if in token of thankefulnesse and joy, they had but willingly and cheerefully shouted, when this summe which they received was pronounced and related unto them. And not Perseus alone (led as hee was through the enemies citie in chaines before the triumphant chariot of the conqueror) but also Paulas himselfe the victorie, glittering so gloriously in his cloth of gold and costly purple, was a mirrour to the world in those few daies, of the transitorie and mutable state of mans life. For of those two sonnes, whome (after hee had given the other two by way of adoption from himselfe) hee kept alone at home as heires to beare his name, to mainetaine  the sacred rites and sacrif
ices of his familie, and to uphold the house it selfe, the younger, a stripling under twelve yeares of age, five daies before his triumph died; and the elder full fourteene yeares old and more, departed within three daies after the triumph. Which two youths indeed ought to have beene arraied in their embrodered robes of purple, and

so to have ridden in the chariot with their father, predestining and aiming to themselves the like  triumphs another day.
Some few daies after, M. Antonius a Tribune of the Commons assembled a solemne audience of the people for his sake, wherein when after the maner and custome of other Generals he should discourse of his owne exploits and worthie acts,The Oration of (...) the people of (...). he made unto them a memorable Oration and well beseeming a noble Romane prince, to this effect.
Albeit suppose (quoth he) my neighbors and friends, the citizens of this noble citie, you be not ignorant, both how happily I have administred the weale publick, and also how unfortunatly within these few daies, two thunderbolts have shaken my private house, as having one while beheld the goodly shew and pomp of my triumph testifying the one, and seene anotherwhile the wofull funerals and obsequies of my two sonnes declaring the other; yet I beseech you suffer mee with that singlenesse of heart and affection, as I  ought, to make a breese comparison between mine own particular private fortune, and the publicke felicitie of the citie. At my departure from Italie, I loosed from Brundusium, and set up faile at the sunne rising: by the ninth hour of the same day I arrived safe with all my ships at Corphu. The fist day after I came to Delphi, where I sacrificed unto Apollo, for my selfe, for your armies and your navie. From Delphi I departed, and within five daies was in the leaguer. Where, after I had received the charge of the armie, and altered some things which might greatly have hindered the victorie, I marched forward, for that the enemies campe was inexpugnable, and the king could not be forced by any meanes to fight: and piercing through his guards that kept the passage, I went as farre as Petra: so as by this meanes having perforce drawne the king to fight, I vanquished him in plaine field and raunged battell. Macedonie I subdued, and brought it in subjection  to the people of Rome. Finally, that warre which for foure yeeres together other Consuls before me so managed, as each one left it ever to his successour worse than hee found it, I archeeved and brought to a finall end in fifteene daies. I followed then in this traine other prosperous affaires, as the fruits ensuing of that victorie. For all the cities of Macedonie yeelded unto me. The kings treasure I seized upon: the king in person (as if the very gods themselves had delivered and put him into my hands) I tooke prisoner, with his sonnes in the temple of the Samothracians. But then my heart misgave me, and even then I suspected the surpassing and excessive favour of my good fortune: then cast I doubts, and began to feare the daungers at sea, having so mightie a masse of the kings treasure to transport, and my victorious armie to reconduct backe into Italie. But seeing all things fall out to hearts desire, a prosperous voiage, a safe arrivall, and whatsoever I could pray for at the gods hands; this I wished in my heart, (as knowing full well the wonted manner of fortune, when she is at the highest pitch, to turne backe againe and come as fast downe) that mine owne house, rather than the Commonweale, might feele that chaunge and alteration whensoever it came. And therefore I hope that this so notable a calamitie of mine owne, shall excuse the cittie for having any other misfortune, since that my triumph (as it were to checke and mocke the chaunges of this world) hath fallen so just betweene the funerals of my two sons. See how I and Perseus are represented above all others for two notable examples of the fraile and unstable condition of man. Lo how he, who being a prisoner himself, saw his sonnes likewise led captives before his face, hath them yet living found and safe: and I, who have triumphed over him, came from the buriall of one of my sonnes to ride in my chariot  up to the Capitoll, and from thence descended againe to find the other lying at point of death: neither is there of al that fair issue that I had, one left to bear the name of L. Paulus Aemylius. For two of them the house of the Cornelij and the Fabij have, unto whom I gave them in adoption, as out of a great race and breed of children: so as now, in the familie of Paulus there is not one left but himselfe. Howbeit for this calamitie and ruine of my house, your felicitie and the happie estate of the citie is a great comfort and consolation againe. These words delivered with such a magnanimitie, troubled the spirits of the auditours, and astonied them more, than if hee had lamentably moned himselfe unto them with pitteous teares, for his childlesse estate and desolate condition.
C. Octavius solemnised his navall triumph over king Perseus the first day of December: in  which solemnitie, he neither had prisoners led in shew, nor spoiles carried in pompe. He gave to his marriners and sailers seventie and five Denarij apeece; to every pilot double, and to the shipmaisters four times as much. After this the Senat assembled, and the LL. ordained, That Q. Cassius

 should lead king Perseus with his sonne Alexander, together with his traine that accompanied him, as also bring all his money and goods, silver, or what moveables and furniture soever he had to Alba, there to be kept in sure custodie. Bitis the kings son of Thrace, with the hostages was sent to Carseoli, there to lie in safe ward. As for the rest of the captives who had ben led in triumph, thought good it was they should be clapt up fast in prison.
Some few daies after these things, there arrived embassadours, from Cotys king of the Thracians, bringing with them money for the raunsome of his sonne and the other hostages. Into the Senat they were brought, where, by way of preamble they laid this for the ground of their speech, That Cotys had not sided to king Perseus in the warre, upon his owne motive and accord, but was compelled to give hostages: then they befought the LL. of the Senate to suffer them to bee redeemed at what price soever they would set downe, were it never so high.
Vnto whome this answere  was returned by authoritie of the Senate, That the people of Rome bare well in mind the amitie which they had with Cotys, with his progenitors, and the whole nation of the Thracians. As for the giving of the hostages, it was rather an evidence to proove, than an argument to excuse their trespasse and fault: considering that when Perseus was quiet, the Thracian nation stood in no feare and aw of him, much lesse then, when as he was troubled and occupied in war with the Romanes. Howbeit although Cotys preferred the favour of Perseus before the friendship of the people of Rome, yet they would consider of the matter, and respect more his qualitie and what was meet, for his estate, than his desert and what he was worttie to have; and therefore they would release his sonne and the hostages, and send them home againe. As for the people of Rome, their  manner is to bestow their favours and benefits freely without regard of recompence: the woorth and estimation whereof they had rather leave to the consideration and minds of the receivers, than require and demand the same presently. So there were embassadors nominated to reconduct the hostages into Thrace, to wit, T. Quintius Flaminius, C. Licinius Nerva, and M. Caninius Rebilus. And to those Thracian embassadours were given by way of presents 2000 asses apeece. So Bitis with the rest of the hostages was sent for from Corseoli, and with the forenamed embassadours returned againe to his father.
The kings ships taken from the Macedonians, of an extraordinarie and monstrous bignes before time, were landed upon Mars field and there laid up drie. Whiles the late remembrance of the Macedonian triumph remained still not in the minds onely, but as it were in the very eies  of men, L. Anicius triumphed over king Gentius and the Illyrians upon the very day of the feast It was called the fooles holyday, and kept upon the 18 of Februarie. Quirinalia. It was generally thought that al things therin rather resembled some likenes in shew, than otherwise countervailed in substance the former triumph. The General himselfe Anicius was inferiour to Aemylius both in nobilitie and also in qualitie of person: and setting together their places of commaund, the one being but Pretour, and the other Consull; neither was Gentius equall to Perseus, nor the Illyrians to the Macedonians. Spoile for spoile, money for money, gifts, for gifts, there was no proportion nor comparison betweene them. And therefore as that fresh late triumph was more resplendent and glorious than this, so considered in it selfe without other respect, it was not to be found fault withal and despised. Anicius within few daies had vanquished and throughly tamed the nation of the Illyrians; both by sea and land prowd and mightie, bearing  themselves stout and bold for their strong and fenced forts. The king hee tooke prisoner, and those of the kings race and roiall bloud. He shewed in triumph many field ensigns, besides other spoiles and moveable goods of the king. Likewise of gold seven and twentie pound weight, and of silver nineteene; besides 3000 Denarij, and a hundred and twentie thousand peeces of Illynan silver in coine. Before his chariot were led king Gentius with his wife and children; Ca^ventius also the kings brother, and certaine noblemen of Illyricum. Out of the pillage hee gave unto his footmen five and fortie Denarij a peece, to every Centurion a double proportion, and unto the horsemen a triple. To the allies of the Latine nation he allowed as much as to citizens; the sailers and marriners he made equall with the footmen. Herein he surmounted the triumph of Acmylius, for that his souldiours followed after his triumphant chariot more jocound and merry, and  the Generall was praised and extolled in many a dittie and ballad. Antias writeth, That of his bootie there was raised as much money as came to twentie millions of Sestertij, over and above the gold and silver that went into the common treasurie. But because I could not see how possibly such a summe should be made, I have set downe mine author for the thing, now, chuse you whether

you will beleeve him. King Gentius with his wife, children, and brother, was by order from  the Senate led to Spolerium, there to be kept in ward: all the captives besides were at Rome cast into prison, and there lay. But when the Spoletines refused to take the charge and custodie of him and the rest, these princes were translated from thence to Igiturvium. There remained besides of the Illyrian prizes two hundred and twentie barkes, which being taken from king Gentius, Q. Cassius by the ordinance of the Senate gave and distributed among the citizens of Corphu, Apollonia, and Dyrrhachium.
The Consuls that yeere after they had onely wasted the territories of the Ligurians, because they could never traine the enemies foorth to fight, having done no memorable service returned to Rome for the choise of new magistrates in the roume of the old. And so the first comitiall or court day that came, they created Consuls M. Claudius Marcellus and C. Sulpitius Gallus. The morrow after were elected for Pretors L. Linius, L. Apulcius Saturninus, A. Licinius Nerva, P. Ruulius  Calvus, P. Quintilius Varus, and Marcus Fonteius. These Pretours had their governement in this manner: two for the jurisdiction within the cittie, two for Spaine, the other for Sicilie and Sardinia. This yere leapt, and the leap day was the morrow after the feast Terminalia. That yeere died C. Claudius the Augur, and in his place the colledge of the Augurs chose T. Quintius Flamininus. Also M. Fabius Pretor the Flamin of Quirinus the same yere departed this life. This yeere also came king Prusius to Rome with his sonne Nicomedes. He entred into the citie with a great traine attending upon him: from the gate he went directly to the common place and the tribunall of Q. Cassius the Pretour. And when there was a great concourse of people about him from all parts; he said that his comming was to worship the gods which are the presidents of the  cittie of Rome, as also to salute the people of Rome, and withall to shew his own joy and to wish theirs for their happie victorie over the two kings Perseus and Gentius, and for that by subduing the Macedonians and Illyrians, they had enlarged their seignorie and dominion. And when the Pretour made an offer to call a Senate for him even that present day, it he would so himselfe; he desired two daies respite, to see the temples of the gods to view the cittie, and to visite his good friends and acquaintance. L. Cornelius Scipio the treasurer was appointed to goe about with him and shew him all: who also had bene sent as farre as to Capua for to meet him upon the way: also for him and his traine about him, there was a sufficient house taken up, where he was kindly and liberally interteined. The third day after he came into the Senate, where after he had congratulated in their behalfe for their late victorie, he recounted his owne demerites and good deserts  during the warre: and then requested, that he might have leave to pay his vowes and namely to sacrifice at Rome in the capitoll, ten head of greater beasts, and one at Preneste to Fortune. For that he said those vowes were made for the victorie of the people of Rome. Also, that the league and alliance with him might bee renued. Item, that the land woon by conquest from king Antiothus, which beeing not by the people of Rome given unto any, the Gaules notwithstanding held in possession, might be conveied unto him by a deed of gift. Last of all, hee recommended his sonne Nicomedes to the Senate. He found much favour among all them who had beene Generals of armies in Macedonie.
And therefore he obteined directly all other suits that he made: onely as touching the said lands, this aunswere he had, That they would send certein commissioners to see and view the thing. And if it appeared and fell out, that the foresaid land appertained  to the people of Rome, and was not passed away by gift to any alreadie, they would repute king Prusias the worthiest man of all other, to receive that donation at their hands. But if it never belonged to king Antiochus, and so was plaine and evident that the people of Rome had no right unto it, or if the Gaules had a graunt thereof alreadie, Prusias then must bee content and pardon them, if they were unwilling to gratify him with any gifts prejudicial and injurious to another. Neither could a thing being never so freely given, be an acceptable gift, which he knew the doner may take away from the done at his pleasure. As for Nicomedes his son, they would willingly recieve him into their protection at his hands so recommended. And how carefull and tender the people of Rome was over kings children committed unto them to keep, may appear by Prolomaeus the K. of Aegypt. With this answer was Prusias dismissed. Order was given that he should  be presented with a certaine summe of festerces, and with silver plate to the quantitie of 50 pound weight. Also they ordained that his sonne Nicomedes should have gifts proportionable to that summe which was given Masgaba the sonne of Masanissa; also that beasts and all other things apperteining

 to sacrifices, should be allowed unto the king out of the cittie-chamber, like as to the magistrates of Rome, chuse wither he would slay and offer them at Rome or Preneste. Also that out of that fleet which rid in the harbour of Brundusium, there should be twentie gallies assigned him to use, until such time as the king were arrived at the fleet which was given him. Finally that L. Cornelius Scipio should accompanie him and never depart from him, but bear the charges both of him and his retinue about him untill they were embarked and ashipbourd. It is said that the king joied wonderously at this courtesie and kindnes offered him by the people of Rome, and that he would needs pay for those presents which were given him: onely hee commaunded his son to take a gift at the hands of the people of Rome. Thus much have our historians written as touching K. Prusias. But Polybius reporteth, that this K. was unwoorthie the majesty of so honorable  a name, for that he was wont to meet the embassadours of Rome with his head shaven and a cap upon it; also to acknowledge and cal himselfe the freed villaine and vassaile of the people of Rome, and to testifie so much he ware the badge and token of that degree and condition. At Rome likewise when he entred the Counsel-house, hee stouped downe and kissed the very doore sill, calling the Senatours gods, his saviours, yea and to have used other speeches not so honourable to the hearers, as base and unsitting his own person. When hee had sejourned in and about the cittie not above thirtie daies, hee tooke his leave and departed into his owne Realme.



To the Reader.
FRom the five and fortith booke forward, all the rest of Livie (to the great maine and blemish of the Latin tongue, and no small griefe of learned men) is lost, even 100 bookes wanting five, like as those ten betweene the tenth and one and twentith books, commonly called the second Decade. For as it appeareth by L. Florus the Epitomist, there were in all 140: and the arguments of so many remaine at this day, by him collected. But if it be true that Frauncis Petrarch saith, Livie wrote in all 142: and as Charles Sigonius probably coniectureth, the 36 and 37 Breviaries of L. Florus be wanting of this latter number. How all these complete bookes of T. Livius should miscarrie, it is not certenly knowne. Some hope there is, that they are but mis-cast and laid out of the way. For like as within these hundred yeeres some fragments of the storie were discovered in Magunce: and the last five bookes now extant, found by Simon Grinaeus in the Librarie of a monasterie over-against the citie of Wormbs, and dedicated by Erasmus of Roterdam unto Charles, the son of William Lord Montjoy, in the reigne of Henrie the eight of famous memorie K. of England, etc. so wee are not to despaire of the rest. In the meane time, we must make much of these briefe summaries left unto us. Even as therefore. I have inserted those ten Breviaries in stead of the bookes: so I thought it not amisse (in hope that one day the verie bookes themselves will come to light) to proceed in the rest following: and the rather, for that neither bee that translated Livie into the Tuscane language, nor they who have done him into French (as farre as I could ever see) have taken that paines.



THE BREVIARIES OF L. FLORVS VPON THE REST OF T. LIVIVS HIS BOOKES, WHICH ARE NOT EXTANT.

Of the six and fortith Booke.
EVmenes came towards Rome. Now because in the Macedonian warre he had carried himselfe indifferent betweene Perseus and the Romanes, there passed a law in generall tearmes, That no King might repaire to Rome; to the end, that if he were excluded, he should not be reputed an enemie: nor if he were admitted, acquit and cleered of all fault. Cl. Marcellus the Consull subdued the Gaules inhabiting the Alpes, and C. Sulpitius Gallus the Ligurians. The Embassadours of K. Prusias complained of Eumenes, for that hee invaded and wasted their borders; and they enformed besides, that hee had conspired with Antiochus against the people of Rome. At the earnest suit and entreasie of the Rhodians, a league was contracted with them. The Censors tooke a review and survey of the city, wherein were enrolled and sessed 327022 citizens of Rome. M. Aemylius Lepidus was elected president of the Senat. Ptolomaeus the king of the Aegyptians, was by his younger brother expelled out of his realme, but by the meanes of Embassadours (sent from Rome) he was restored to his kingdome. Vpon the death of Ariarathes king of Capp^docia, his sonne Ariarathes came to the crowne, and by entercourse and mediation of Embassadours, renewed amittie with the people of Rome. This booke containeth besides, the warres against the Ligurians, Corsians, and Lusitanians, fought with variable fortune: the troubles also in Syria after the death of Antiochus, who left behind him Antiochus his sonne, a very child. This young prince (togither with his guardian Lysias) Demetrius the sonne of Selencus (who had been sent in hostage to Rome) murdered privily, because he was not set at large and dismissed by the Romanes: and so himselfe entred upon the kingdome. L. Aemylius Paulus who had conquered Perseus, departed this life; whose incorruptions and abstinence from the publicke treasure was such, that notwithstanding he had brought both out of Spaine and Macedonie so great store of wealth and riches, yet when his goods were prized and sold, there would be hardly raised thereof sufficient to repay his wife her dowrie. The Pomptine marishes were drawen drie by Cor. Cethegus the Consull (unto whom that charge was by lot fallen) and the same turned into firme ground.


Of the XLVII. booke.
CNeus Tremellius a Tribune of the Commons had a fine set on his head, for that he had contended in a wrongfull cause with M. Aemylius Lepidus the soveraigne Pontifie. The power and authoritie of the cleargie magistrates, was greater and mightier than before. A law was enacted as touching inordinate suit for offices. In the survey of the citie, there were taxed in the subsidie booke 328314 Romane citizens. L. Aemylius Lepidus was chosen againe president of the Senat. Betweene the two breethren Ptolomees, who were at variance, there passed this accord and agreement, That the one should reigne in Aegypt and the other in Cyrenae. Ariarathus king of Cappadocia, by the politick plot and forcible power of Demetrius king of Syria dispossessed of his kingdome, was by the Senat set into it againe. Certein embassadors were sent as delegates from the Senat to determinie of the litigigius ground betweene Masanissa and the Carthaginians. C. Martius the Consull fought against the Dalmatians, at the first unfortunatly, but afterwards atchieved the victorie. The occasion of the wa^ with them was this; for that they had made wast upon the Illyrians, who were allies of the people of Rome. The same nation Cornelius Nasica the Consull brought in subiection. Q. Opimius the Consull subdued the Ligurians beyond the Alpes, who had spoiled Antipolis and Nicaes, two townes belonging

to the seignerie of the Massilians. Moreover here are conteined the adventures of many captaines in Spaine, with no good successe. In the 598 yeere from the foundation of the cittie, the Consuls so soone as the assembly for election was past, and other Consuls chosen for the yere following, began their office. The cause of this alteration was, because the Spaniards were entred into rebellion. The embassadors aforesaid who had bene sent to take up and decide the controversie between Masanissa and the Carthaginians, mande report, That they had sound great store of ship-timber and other matter for a navie at Carthage. Certeine Pretours accused by the provinces for avarice, were condemned.


Of the XLVIII. booke.
THe Censours tooke a review and taxe of the cittie, wherein were reckoned three hundred soure and twentie thousand polls of cittizens. The causes of a third Punike war bee heere recorded. Vpon a report that there was a right poissant armie of Numidians upon the borders of the Carthaginians, conducted by Archobarzanes the nephew of Syphax, Marcus Porcius Cato persuaded in an oration to proclaime warre against the Carthaginians, for that they interteined such a power within their frontiers under a colour against Masanissa, but in truth raised against the Romanes: howbeit Publius Cornelius Nasica gaine said him and dissunded the matter. Whereupon ordeined it was, that Embassadours should bee sent to Carthage in espiall, to observe what they did, and where-about they went. Who after they had given the Carthaginian Senate a checke and rebuke, for that against the covenants of the league, they maintained forces, and were provided of timber and other stuffe for a navie, they were willing to conclude a peace betweene Massanissa and them; so as Masanissa should forgue and part with the land in question. But Gisgo the sonne of Amilcar, a busie and seditious man, who then was soveraigne magistrate (notwithstanding their Senate promised to be ruled by the award of the said embassadours) incited them so by his persuasive remonstrances to warre upon the Romanes, that the embassadours made shift to flee and save themselves, or else they had come to a mischiefe. When they related these newes at Rome, the Senate alreadie set and bent against the Carthaginians, were now by his words provoked much more. M. Percius Cato performed the funerals of his sonne, deceased in his Pretourship, with exceeding small charges, according to his abilitie, for he was put poore. One Andriscus, who stoutly made the world beleeve, that he was the sonne of Perseus the king of Macedonie, was sent to Rome. M. Aemylius Lepidus, now sixe times chosen President of the Senate by the Censours, gave his sonnes in streight charge before he died, to carrie him fourth to buriall in a couch without linnen clothes and the purple pall, and not to bestow in other obsequies above one denier, saying that the funerals of the greatest and best personages are wont to be ennobled and hounoured with the shewes of images and titles, and not with sumpteous expenses. An inquisition there was about the practise of poisoning and sorcerie. Publilia and Licinia; who were endited for making away their husbands, put in sureties before the Pretour, to be bound in goods, lands, and bodie for them, and after iudiciall processe passed, and their cause heard, by a decree of their kinsfolke suffered death. Gulussa the sonne of Masanissa gave intelligence, that at Carthage there was mustering and levying of souldiours, rigging and providing of a fleet, all preparations no doubt for warre: and Publius Cornelius Nasica replied againe, that nothing was to bee done inconsiderately, without advise. Thought good it was to send ten embassadours, for to see the trueth of all, and upon their knowledge to certifie. L. Licinius Lucullus and Aulus Posthumius Albinus the Consuls, when they tooke musters with severitie and rigour, and would not for faveur spare any one, but prest all, were committed by the Tribunes of the commons, who for their friends could obteine at their hands to release and immunitie of souldierie. By occasion of the warres in Spaine, which many times had bene untowardly and unfortunately mannaged, when the cittie of Rome was so dismaied and daunted, that there could not be found any one who would so much as accept of a martiall Tribuneship, or was willing to goe in quality of lieutenant; Publius Cornelius Aemylianus stepped forth, made offer and professed, that hee would undertake any kind of militarie service whatsoever should bee laid upon him: and by his owne example stirred up all the rest to the love of warrefare. L. Lucullus the Consull, when Claudius Marcellus (after whom hee succeeded) was thought to have quieted all the states and nations of Celtiberia, subdued the Vacceans, Cantabrians, and other regions and nations as yet

unknowne in Spaine. P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus Aemylianus, the son of L. Paulus, and the nephew of Africanus by adoption, being there a martiall Colonell, shew a Barbarian challenger that defied him. But in the winning of the cittie Intercatia, hee adventured a more daungerous enterprise: For hee was the first of all other that skaled and mounted over the wall. Servius Sulpitius Galba the Pretour sped but badly in a battalle against the Portugales. When as the embassadours were returned out of Africke, together with the Carthaginian Oratours, and Galussa the sonne of Masanissa, bringing word, That they found at Carthage both an armie and also an armada; thought good it was, to put to question and debate the matter in the Senate: where Cato and other principall Senatours were of opinion and gave advise, to transport an armie presently into Africke* but because Cornelius Nasica opined and said, That hee saw as yet no iust and sufficient cause of warre, agreed it was to forbeare all hostilitie and force of armes, in case the Carthaginians would burne their navie and discharge their armie: if not, then agreed it was, that the Consuls next following in place of governement, should propose as touching the Punickewarre. When the Theatre was built, which by the Censours had beene put forth to workemen to frame and set up at a price, through the meanes of Pub. Cornelius Nasica, who inferred, that it was a peece of worke unprofitable, yea, and hurtfull to the manners generally of the cittizens; by vertue of an act of Senate demolished it was and pulled downe; so as the people for a long time stood on their feet to behold the publicke plaies. The Carthaginians at that time tooke armes contrary to the league, and warred upon Masanissa. But vanquished they were in field by him (who notwithstanding he now was fourescore yeere old and twelve, yet hee used to tast his meat simply without any deintie sauce, yea, and to chew his bare bread still:) and over and besides they deserved to draw upon their head the Romane warre.


Of the XLIX. booke.
THe beginning of the third Punick war, in the six hundreth and one yere from the cities foundation, which within 5 yeers after it began, came to a full and finall end. Much diversitie there was in opinion between M. Portius Cato whom they reputed for the wisest, and Scipio Nasica, who by the Senat was iudged the best and honestest man in the city. Cato was altogether for the wars, and advised to destroy Carthage quite: Nasica contrariwise dissuaded what he could. Neverthelesse, in the end ordained it was, Th^t because against covenant and accord they kept a navie at sea, and had led foorth an armie out of their borders: also, for that they entred into armes and levied war upon Masanissa, a friend and confederat to the people of Rome, and received not into their town, Gulussa his sonne, who was in the companie of the Romane embassadours; warre should be proclaimed against them. But before that any forces were embarked and had taken the sea, the embassadours of Vtica repaired to Rome, yeelding themselves and all that they bad. That embassage, as a speciall presage to the issue and event of the war, was acceptable and pleasing to the lords of the Senate, but heavie and greevous to the Carthaginians. In Terentum [a place it was in Campus Martius, whereupon the pastimes Terentini tooke their name] were plates exhibited to Father Dis the infernall god, according to the direction of the bookes of Sibylla. These had been set out one hundred yeeres before in the first Punicke war and in the five hundreth yeere and one, after the citie was* founded. Thirtie embassadors came to Rome, by whome the Carthaginians presented their submission. But the sentence of Cato imported and prevailed, to hold still their former determination, and that the Consuls with all speed should set forward in their iourney to the warre. Who having passed the seas and arrived in Affricke, received of them three hundred hostages, whome they had required and demaunded; and also tooke into their hands all their armors and weapons, and what furniture of warre soever they found at Carthage. They proceeded moreover after all this, to commaund them by warrant and authoritie form the LL. of the Senate to build them a new towne for to inhabite in some other place, so that it were tenne miles at least remote from the sea: by which indignititie offered, they provoked the Carthaginians to rise and take armes againe. L. Martius and M. Manilius the Consuls, began to besiege and assault Carthage: during which siege and assault, it fortuned that two Colonels unadvisedly adventured to breake into the citie with their cohorts, at one part therof where the wals were neglected, and when by the townsmen they were sore beaten and killed, by the meanes of Scipio Affricanus they were rescued: by whome also a certeine scone and fort of the Romanes, which the enemies by night assailed, with the helpe of a few horsemen was delivered. Moreover hee saved the campe, against which the Carthaginians sallied forth of

their citie to give the assault at once upon it with all their forces; by which service hee above the rest woon great honor. Over and besides, when as the Consull (for the other was gone to Rome to hold the election of Magistrates) seeing the siege and assault of Carthage tooke no better effect, minded to lead the armie against Asdruball, who with another power of men kept: the narrow streights of a certaine passage, he counselled the said Cos. first, not to give battell in a place of such disadvantage; but afterwards overweighed and borne downe by the opinions of the greater number (who envied as well his wisedome as vertue) hee also entered into the same streights. And when the Roman armie, according as he foretold, was discomfited and put to flight, and two cohorts beset round and invested by the enemies, hee with certeine small cornets of horse returned into those streight, reskued them, and brought them away in safetie. Which valour of his, even Cato, (a man otherwise more readie of his tongue to find faults; so recommended in the Senate, that in these terms he gave out and said,Hee (...) of H. mor. (...) That all there rest whowere emploied in the warres of Affricke, served as shaddowes and dead men, but Cato had true vigour and spirit indeed. The people of Rome besides cast such a savour and good liking to him, that at the next election, most of the tribes pricked him for to bee Consull, notwithstanding he was by law under age. When L. Scribonius a Tribune of the Commons had promulged a law, That all the Portugals (who according to covenant and composition, yeelded to the people of Rome, and yet by Sergius Galba were sold in Fraunce) should be restored to their freedome; M. Cato most earnestly pleaded in the behalfe of that law, and maintained it. His Oration is extant to be seene, included within his Annales. Q. Fulvius Nobilior, albeit he was by him shaken up and well checked in the Senate, answered in the behalfe of Galba. Yea, and Galba also, seeing himselfe at the point to bee condemned, tooke in his armes and embraced his owne two sonnes; being (...) of age. Praetextati, and a sonne of Caius Sulpitius whose Guardian hee was, and made such pitteous and rusull mone, all the while hee spake in his owne cause, that the foresaid law was revoked and cancelled. Three Orations of his there are to bee seene; two against Libo a Tribune of the Commons and his proposed lawes, as touching the Portugales; and one against Lucius Cornelius Cethegus, in which hee confesseth and avoweth the killing of the Portugales, encamped neere unto him: for that hee knew certeinly that they after their manner had sacrificed an horse and a man, and under a colour of peace, entended to set upon and charge his armie. Andriscus one of base birth and the most abiect lowest condition, who made the world beleeve that hee was king Perseus his son, and thereupon chaunged his name and was called Philip, having made an escape and fled secretly from Rome (whither Demetrius king of Syria had sent him in regard of this his notorious lie) had many men come flocking unto him, embracing a forged and counterfeit fable of his, as if it had bene a true same and report: by which means hee gathered an armie together, and either with the good will of the inhabitants, or by force of armes, seized all Macedonie and held it in his hands. Now had he devised and framed the pageant in this wise, That Perseus the king had begotten him (forsooth) of a concubine: that he was committed to Or. Creta (...) into (...). one Cyrthesa to bee fostered and brought up: to the end that if ought should fall out but well unto the K. in that war which he waged with the Romanes, there might be yet some seed as it were and yssue remaining of the kings bloud and royall race. When Perseus was deceased, he had his education at Adramittium until he was 12 yeres old, supposing him to be his naturall father who fostered and kept him, and wist not at all from what stocke he was descended. Now it sell out (saith he) that the said foster father of mine lay very sicke; and beeing at the point of death, bewraied at length my birth and parentage. Moreover, that there was a litle book given to my supposed mother, sealed with the signe manuell of king Perseus, which shee was to deliver unto me when I came once to ripe age, and to be 14 yeres old: charging her most streightly of all loves, to conceale the whole matter until that time were come: and when I was grown to that age aforesaid, then the book was given mee, wherin mention was made of two chists of treasure left for mee by my father. Then the woman, who knew full well that I was no child of hers, but onely so reputed, bewraied my birth unto me, who was aforetime ignorant of mine own descent: also the woman laid great wait upon me to depart out of those quarters before that Eumenes, a professed enemie to Perseus, came to the knowledge thereof, for feare to bee murdered. In which respect I being affrighted, and hoping withall to find some aid at the hands of Demetrius, went into Syria; and there first I tooke heart unto mee, and dared openly to professe who I was and never before. [Thus much of Andriscus this counterfet kings, sonne.]



Of the L. booke.
THessalie at what time as the foresaid counterset Philip would have invaded and kept it by force of arms, was by the means of the Roman embassadors, together with the aid of the Achaeans defended. Prusias king of Bithynia, a favourer of the basest persons and lewdest vices, was by his owne sonne Nicomedes murdered, with the helpe of Attalus King of Pergamus. Another son he had, who in stead of the upper row and course of distinct teeth, is reported to have had one entier bone for all, growing out at his gumbs. When the Romans had sent their embassadours to conclude a peace betweene Nicomedes and Prusias; of which embassadours, the one had his head full of many skarres, the other was troubled with the gout in the feet, and the third reputed but blockish of spirit by nature, and none of the wisest; Cato said, That there was an embassage head-lesse, footlesse, and hart-lesse. In Syria, which at that time had for their king, one indeed of the line and race of Perseus K. of Macedonie, but another Prusias up and downe, for cowardise, idlenes, and base mind; it so fell out, that whiles he haunted taverns, stewes, and brothelhouses, and lay there altogether, Ammonius swaid the scepter and raigned as King: by whose practise the kings friends, also Loodice the Queene, and Antigonus the sonne of Demetrius came to their end and were killed. Masanissa king of Numidia, a man above foureskore and ten yeeres old, a famous prince and every way excellent, yeelded to nature and died. Among other youthfull parts which hee performed to his dying day, this one, That in this old age of his he was so lustie, that after the foureskore and sixth yeere of his life he got a boy. Among his three sonnes, Mycipsa (the eldest) Gulussa, and Manastabal, who also had good knowledge in the Greeke tongue, Publius Scipio Aemylianus divided the administration of the kingdome: for their father had left it in common for them all, and had given order to part it at the discretion of the same Scipio. Likewise he persuaded Phamias the commaunder under Himilco of the Carthaginian Cavallerie, (a valiant warrior and whom the Carthaginians emploied most of all others in service) to revolt with his men of armes and to turne Romane. Of those three embassadors abovesaid, who were sent to Masanissa, Claudius Marcellus was cast away in a tempest upon the sea, and swallowed up of the waves in a ghust. The Carthaginians murdered in their Counsel-Chamber Asdruball nephew of Masanissa, and their Pretour for the time being, upon suspition of treason. This iealousie of theirs arose hereupon, for that hee was neere in kindred and bloud to Gulussa, who friended and succoured the Romanes. Publius Scipio Aemylianus when hee sued to be Aedile, was by the people propounded and nominated for Consull: and when as by law he might not for his young yeres be created Consull; hard hold there was about him: whiles the commons laboured with might and maine for him, and the nobles and lords of the Senate gainesaid it a good while: but in fine, he was dispensed with, notwithstanding the The law Annalis made by Lucius Villius Annalis, wherby no man was capable of a Consulship, under 43 yeeres of age, and this Scipio was new but 37. law in that behalfe, and created Consul. Marcus Manilius (Pro-consull) forced certaine citties situate about Carthage.Pseudo-philippus. Counterfet Philip, after he had slaine M. Inventius the Pretor and Q. Caelius, and together with them defeated the armie, was in Macedonie vanquished himselfe and taken prisoner, and so Macedonie was recovered againe which had bene lost before.


Of the LI. booke.
CArthage, which tooke up in circuite the compasse of foure and twentie miles, was with exceeding paine and travaile besieged and woon by peece-meale: first under the conduct of Mancinus the lieutenant; afterwards of Scipio the Consull, unto whom without lot the province of Africke was extraordinarily graunted. The Carthaginians having made a new peere (for that the old haven was choked and stopped up by Scipio) and gathered secretly in a small time a good fleet, fought a battaile at sea unfortunately. Moreover the campe of Asdruball their Generall: pitched in a place of most difficult accesse neere the towne Nepheris, was forced, and his armie defeated by Scipio: who also in the end was the very cittie of Carthage, in the seven hundred yere after it was first founded. The greatest part of the spoile and pillage there found, was restored to the Sicilians, from whome it had been taken. In the utmost extremitie and finall destruction of that citie, when Asdruball had yeelded and submitted to Scipio; his wife (who some daies before could not obtain at her husbands hands to abandon the towne and flie to the conquerour) cast her selfe with her two children headlong from the castle into the mids of the flaming fire, wherewith the citie burned. Scipio, following the example of his father Aemylius Paulus who had conquered Macedonie, set forth certaine solemn and plaies and pastimes; wherein

the renegates and fugitives he presented and obiected to savage beasts. The causes of the Athaean warre bee heere reported. The Romane embassadours who had bene beaten and ill intreated by the Achaeans, were sent unto Corinth, to sever and disioine those citties (which had bene under the seignorie of Philip) from the generall diet and parliament of the Achaeans.


Of the LII booke.
QVintus Caecilius Metellus fought a battaile at Thermopylae with the Achaeans, that had to aid them the Boeotians and Chalcidians: who being overcome, Critolaus their chiefe captain shortned his owne life by poison: and in his place Crraether Dic^^. Pansan.in Achai^^^. Drachus the first authour of the troubles in Achaea, was by the Achaeans chosen Generall of the field, and by L. Mummius the Consull vanquished neere to Isthmus: who having received all Achaea by surrender, rased and destroied utterly Corinth, by an Act and commission directed out of the Senate; because the Romane embassadours were there abused. Thebes also and Chalcis which had aided the Achaeans, were overthrown and pulled downe. Mummius for his owne part, bare himself most abstinent and uncorrupt: for of all that wealth, and those goods and ornaments wherewith Corinth was mightily enriched, there came not one parcell into his house. Quintus Caecilius Metellus triumphed for the conquest of Andriscus, and Publius Cornelius Scipio Affricanus Aemylianus likewise over Carthage and Asdruball. Viriatus in Spaine, first of an heardman became an hunter, and of a hunter prooved to bee a very theefe and robber: and within a while after, was chosen Generall of a complete and maine armie, and seized to his owne use all Portugall. He took prisoner M. Vitilius the Pretor, when he had first discomfited his hoast in the field. After whom C. Plautius the Pretour sped no better in fight. This enemie so terrified the Romanes, that to make head against him they found it necessarie to employ a full consular armie, and a Consull commander. Moreover in this booke be recorded the troubles of Syria, and the warres between the kings.(...) ius he (...). Alexander an obscure person and base borne, having staine (as is beforesaid) Demetrius the king, reigned in Syria. Him Demetrius (the son of Demetrius) slew, by the help of Ptolomaeus king of Aegypt, whose daughter Cleopatra he had espoused and married. This Demetrius in times past had bene sent out of the way into Gnidos by his father, fearing the doubtfull chaunces of the war: and he entred upon this action by occasion of the contemptible sloth and cowardise of the said Alexander. Ptolomeus was grievously wounded in the head: and in the cure, whiles the Chirurgians went about to (...) trypanize the bones of his skull, died under their hand. And in his stead Ptolomeus his younger brother who reigned in Cyrenae, succeeded and tooke upon him the crowne. Demetrius for his crueltie which he exercised upon his people by racking and other torments, was vanquished in battaile by Diodorus, one of his owne subjects: who made claime to the kingdome in the right and title of Alexanders sonne, a young child hardly two yeeres old: whereupon he fled to Seleucia. Lucius Mummius triumphed over the Achaeans, in which solemnitie he carried in pompeous shew sundrie images as well of brasse as marble, besides pictures and peinted tables.


Of the LIII. booke.
APpius Claudius the Consull subdued the Salassians, a nation inhabiting the Alpes. A second (...) Mock-Philip there was in Macedonie, who by L. Tremellius the treasurer was with his army defeated and slaine. Q. Cecilius Metellus the Pro-consul gave the Celtiberians an overthrow. The most part of Portugal was regained by Q. Fabius the Pro consull, and many cities therof by assault forced. C. Iulius a Senator by calling, wrate the Romane historie in the Greeke tongue.


Of the L IIII. booke.
QVintus Pompeius the Consull subdued the Termeslines in Spaine: with whome verily as also with the Numantines, by occasion of his infirmitie and sicklinesse, he concluded peace. Areview and numbring of the citizens was taken by the Censors: wherein were enrolled foure hundred twentie eight thousand,* (...) 524342. three hundred fortie two polls. At what time as the Macedonian embassadours came to complaine of D. Iunius Syllanus, the lord deputie over them, for that hee tooke their money, and neverthelesse made an havocke of the province, and thereupon the Senate was willing to have the hearing of their complaints: T Manlius Torquatus the father of Syllanus, exhibited

a request, and obtained, that the inquirie and decision of such a matter as this might bee referred over and committed unto him. And after he had sitten upon this commission at home in his own house and found his sonne guiltie, he both condemned him and put him away: nay, when afterwards as hee had hanged himselfe, for that was his end, he would not be so much as present at his funerall, but according to his ordinarie manner and custome, sat in his house, attending all clients and commers to him for counsell. Q. Fabius the Proconsull, after he had managed the warres in Spain right prosperously, marred all with this foule blot and spot of dishonour, in that he contracted a peace with Viriatus, upon even and equal conditions. This Viriatus by a practise complotted by Servilius Caepio, was trecherously murdered by traitors, and of his own armie was much bewailed. At his death he was rung out of this world with a notable peale of Adieu, adieu. farewell, and right honorably enterred: an excellent man, and most brave captaine for the space of thirteene yeeres, during which time he warred with the Romanes, and ever for the most part went away with the winning hand.


Of the LV. booke.
VVHiles P. Cornelius Nasica, who by way of mockerie was surnamed Serapio, by scoffing Curatius a Tribune of the Commons, and D. Iunius Brutus the Consul took the musters, there happened in the very sight of the new and raw souldior an occurrent of great consequence, and for example sake exceeding profitable. For C. Matienus was iudicially accused before the Tribunes of the Commons, for that he had abandoned and forsaken his owne armie in Spaine, whereupon he being convict, was condemned and scourged a long while with rods, carrying a forke or crosse upon his shoulders, and in the end sold as a slave for a small peece of silver of Sestertio numo, the fourth part of Denarius. three halfepence farthing cue. The Tribunes of the Commons, because they might be allowed to exempt from militarie service tenne souldiors apeece, whom it pleased them to chuse, commaunded the Consuls to prison, Iun. Brutus the Consul, whiles he was in Spaine, endued those soldiors who had served under Viriatus with land and living, and gave them a towne to inhabit called Valentia. M. Popilius, together with his armie was soiled and put to the rout by the Numantines, with whom the peace that was concluded, the Senate had passed an act, that it should not stand in force. The occasion was this: As C. Mancinus the Consull was devoutly sacrificing, the sacred chickens chaunced to flie away out of their cage or coupe. Afterwards, as he was about to take sea and goe a shipboord for to passe over into Spain, there happened a voice to be heard, saying, Stay, Stay Mancinus. These proved in the effect to be unfortunate and heavie presages unto Mancinus, for he received an overthrow at the Numantines hands, and was turned cleane out of his camp. And seeing nohope els to save his armie, he entred into a dishonorable peace with them, but the Senat expresly revoked and annulled the same. 30000 Romans were defeited by 4000 Numantines and no more. D. Iunius made a generall conquest of all Portugall, even as far as to the Ocean, by forcing and sacking their citties and strong townes: and when his soldiors were loth to passe over the river A river in Spaine, called sometime Li^nea, or L^^he, ard at this day limia. Oblivio, hee caught up a banner from the port-ensigne, and carried it over with him, and by this means persuaded them to go through. Alexanders son, king of Syria, a child not above ten yeers old at the most, was trecherously murdered by Diodorus his guardian or protector, surnamed Tryphon. There were physicians by corruption bribed and suborned to give it out and beare the people in hand most falsly, that the young prince pined away with the paine of the stone in the bladder, and whiles they would seeme to cut him for it, they killed him out of hand in the very section.


Of the LVI. booke.
DEcius Iunius Brutus had good fortune in the farther province of Spaine, fighting with the Gallicians. But M. Aemylius Lepidus pro-consull sped far otherwise in his wars against the Vaccci, and suffered the like overthrow to that other received from the Numantines. When Mancinus the autheur and maker of the accord

(...) when he was unwilling to accept thereof, by reason of a law forbidding expressely,(...) that any (...) hee created Cos. the second time, hee had a dispensation, and was freed from the law in that (...) as from the (...) other in his former Consullship. There was an insurrection of bondslaves arose (...) when it could not be suppressed by the Pretours and lord governours, C. Fulvius had the charge of that province and service. This war began by occasion of one Etinus a bondslave and a Syrian borne, who having assembled together a power of rusticall peasants and countrie slaves, broken prisons sons and horses of correction, came to have a full and complete armie. Moreover, Cleon also another notable slave, raised to the number of 70000 villaines like himselfe: and they both ioining their forces together, waged war many times against the people of Rome and their armie in those parts.


Of the LVII. booke.
SC^pio Africanus laid s^g^ to Numantia: and whereas the armie was grown to be corrupted through (...) and loose l^s^, hee reclaimed the same, and reduced it unto a most streight and severe (...) ^ed (...). For he cut off all the meanes and occasions of delight some pleasures: hee sent pas^^ing away two thousand whores and truls that followed the campe: hee held the souldiours hard to (...) everyday: hee forced each one to carrie on his shoulders corne for thirtie daies, and seven good slaves besides for a palla^sad^, if he spied one of them to go heavily under his lode, he would say thus unto him, S^^^ha, when you have the skill to empale your selfe with your swords point, then cease to carrie p^^^, but not before. When hee saw another practise to weeld very nimbly a little light buckler, hee commaunded him to beare a targuet of a bigger size, and weightier than ordinarie, as finding fault, that he (...) better how to hold his shield for defence of his owne bodie, than to handle his sword for offence of the enemie. Met he with a soldior out of his ranke and file? if he were a Roman, up he went and was well ^^dged and swaddled with v^ne-wands by the centurions, if a stranger, swinged and tierked he was with [birthjen] (...) rods by the Lictors. And verily all the pack horses and other labouring beasts he caused to be sold; because they should not ease the soldiors of their cariage. Well, many a time he bare himselfe worthily in fight, and had a fortunat hand against the enemies that sallied forth against him. The Vacceans were strenghtly besieged: and after they had killed their wives and children, they slew their owne selves upon them. Scipio, at what time as Antiochus king of Syria had sent unto him most rich and stately presents: whereas other Generals of the field were wont to conceale the gifts of KK. he avowed the accepting of them in open sight of all men, even at the very Tribunall seat. And when he had so done, he commaunded the tr^^s^^er to receive all, and enter in his booke of receits for the state; promising out of that stock to reward the hardiest men and most valiant knights. When he had blocked and invested Numentia on every side, and saw the enemies driven to great distresse for hunger, hee for bad expressely to kill any of t^^m that went forth of the towne to forage and purvey victuals, saving, That the more they were in number, the sooner they would consume and spend up the corne which they had.


Of the LVIII. booke.
ITherius Sempronius Gra^chus a Tribune of the Commons, when hee promulged an Agrari^n law, that no man should hold and occupie above (...) five hundred arpens or acres of the citie lands, seeing the Senat and order of gentlemen to storme against it, grew into such an heat of chol^r and furious rage, that presently by an act made, hee deprived of Tribunitian power (...) his Coll^gue, for maintaining the cause of the adverse part: and withall, created himselfe, his brother C. Graechus, and App. Claudius his owne wives father, Triumvirs or commissaries for dividing of the said lands. He proposed also and published another Agrarian law, by vertue whereof if any man encroched farther, and went above that stint and proportion, the same Triumvirs and none but they should set down and determine, how far forth the common grounds and the privat lands should r^^ch. Afterwards, when there sell out to be lesse ground than could be devided, he protested that without the offence of the common people (because erewhile he had stirred up their appetite to hope for great matters) he would preferre a law, That amongst all them, who by vertue of the law Sempronia ought to receive lands, the mony which belonged sometime to King Attalus should be devided. Now this Attalus the king of Pergamus and son of Eumenes, had left behind him, the people of Rome his fall beire of all that he had. The Senat upon these so many indignities offered by Gracehus, was highly displeased, and Pub. Mucius the Consull above the rest: who after hee had enveighed in the Senate against him,

was by him haled forth before the people, and accused unto the Commons, howbeit hee declaimed against him once againe openly from the Rostra. When Gracchus would have been chosen Tribune of the Commons a second time, by the advise and procurement of P. Cornelius Nasica, the cheefe peeres and nobles slew him in the Capitoll. He caught his first knocke with the broken peeces of the Tribunes pu^s. And he among others slaine in that seditious garboile, was never committed to the earth, but throwne into the river. Moreover, this booke containeth the battels in Sicilie, fought against the fugitive slaves with variable fortune and event.


Of the LIX. booke.
THe Numantines forced by great extremities, and of famine especially, murdered themselves in course by turnes. After the citie was woon, Scipio Affricanus rased and destroied it utterly: and over it triumphed, in the foureteenth yeere after the ruine of Carthage. P. Attilius the Consull dispatched and ended the warre in Sicilie, with the foresaid fugitives. Arislonicus the sonne of king Eumenes, invaded Asia and held it to his owne use; whereas by the last will and testament of king Attalus, it was bequeathed as a legacie unto the people of Rome, and ought to have ben freed. Against him, P. L^tinius Crassus the Consul and Archbishop besides (a thing never done or seene before) took a iourney with an armie out of Italie, and in a ba^tel was overthrowne and lest his life. M. Perpenna the Consull overcame Aristonicus, and received him by surrender. I. Pomponius and I. Metellus were elected Censors, the first Commoners that ever both together attained to that dignitie. A review was taken by the Censors; wherin were numbered 368823 citizens, besides orphans and widows. Q. Metellus the Censor gave his advise and opinion, that all men should be compelled to take wives, for the breeding of children. His Oration to that purpose is extant: which Augustus Caesar, at what time as he went in hand to ioine in mariage all the three states and degrees of the citie, rehearsed in the Senate, as if it had beene penned to fit these times wherein we now live. C. Atinius Labeo, a Tribune of the Commons, commaunded Q. Metellus the Censor (who in the review and new choise of the Senators did him that disgrace as to l^ave him out) to be pitched down headlong from the rock Tarpeia: but the rest of the Tribunes assisted the Censour all that ever they could, that this commaundement should not bee executed. When Carbo, a Tribune of the Com. proposed a bill, that it might be lawfull to create the same man Trib. of the Commons so often as one would; P. Africanus dis^uaded this law in a most grave and pithy Oration: wherein hee used these words especially, That he iudged Tib. Gracchus to have ben iuslly slaine for his deserts. Gracchus on the other side maintained the law, and pleaded that it might passe: but Scipio imported and prevailed in the end. In this booke are related the wars betweene Antiochus king of Syria, and Phraates king of the Parthians: as also the troubles of Aegypt, which stood as then in no better terms. Ptolomaus surnamed Evergetes, for his exceeding crueltie grew hatefull and odious to his owne subjects: and when the people had set on fire and burned his roiall pallace, he sled by stealth into Cyprus; and when the kingdome was by the people made over to his sister Cleopatra, whom (after hee had defloured by force her daughter, a virgine, and so taken her to wise) he had turned away in great displeasure and malice unto her; he killed that son whom he had by her, in Cyprus, and sent unto the mother his head, hands and feet. Certain seditions were raised by the Triumvirs, Fulvius Flaccus, C. Gracchus, and L. Carbo, who were created for the decision of land. Against whom P. Scipio Africanus made resistance: but being in perfect health strong and lustie, he went home to his house as it might bee to day, and was found dead in his bed chamber the next morrow. His wife Sempronia was deeply suspected to have given him a cup of poyson, and hereupon especially, because she was sister to the Gracchi, between whom and Africanus there was grudge and enmities. Howbeit, there was no question and streight enquirie made how hee came to his death. When his head was once laid, the Triumvir all seditions beforesaid, brake forth into a more light and hot fire. C. Sempronius the Consull fought against the Iapida, first unfortunately, but soone after he made amends for that losse received, with a victorie atchieved by the special valor of C. Iunius Brutus, the same man who before had conquered Portugall.


Of the LX. booke.
AVrelius the Consull subdued the Sardians. Fulvius Flaccus was the first man that vanquished in fight the Ligurians beyond the Alpes, being sent to aid the Massilians against the French Salyes, who lay sore upon the borders of the Massilians, and spoiled them. Lucius Opimius the Pretour, received under his subiection the Fregellanes who had revolted, and destroied the towne Fregella.

Here is reported a pestilence in Affrick, by an exceeding multitude of locusts, killed and lying dead afterwards upon the ground. A survey was taken of the citie by the Censors, wherein were numbred 390736 citizen^. C. Gracchus, brother of Tyberius, a Tribune of the Commons, but of the twain more eloquent, preferr^d certain dangerous and pernicious laws: and among the rest, one as touching grain, namely, that the Commons should be served in the market, at the rate of one halfe, and a third part of ob. Asse, a Mod^us; another, concerning division of lands, the same which his brother before him had published, and a third (whereby hee meant to corrupt the order of gentlemen, which then accorded with the degree of Senators) namely, that from out of those gentlemen, 600 should be taken into the Senat: and for as much as in these daies, there were but three hundred Senatours, those sixe hundred gentlemen should bee enter^ing^d with the said three hundred; that is to say, that the order of gentlemen should be double in number to the Senatours, and twise as strong. This Gracchus having continued his Tribuneship another yeere, by proposing still the Agrarian lawes prevailed, that many Colonies more should bee planted in Italie, and one besides, upon the very plot of ground where Carthage lately destroied, had stood: and there himselfe (chosen Triumvir therfore) erected a Colon^e. Moreover, this booke containeth the exploits of Q. Metellus against those Baleare Islands, which the Greekes call Gyvenesia, because the people go naked all the summer time. But Baleares they be named either of (...). slinging darts, or of Bal^^u the companion of Hercules, whom he left behind there, at what time as he sailed to Geryon. Also, the troubles in Syria be here reported, wherein Cleopatra slew both her husband Demetrius and his sonne Selencus; ^aking great indignation, than when his father was by her killed, hee without her warrant had taken the diad: me upon him.


Of the LXI. booke.
Aius Sextius the Proconsull, after he had conquered the nation of the Salyes, built the Colonie Aquae Sextiae, so called of the plenteous abundance of waters, by reason of springs both hote and cold, and also of his owne name. C. Comi^ius the Proconsull fought fortunately against the Sa^^, (...) and (...). Allo^roges, neere the town:(...). Vindalium. The cause why hee levied warre against them was, for that they had received and releeved by all meanes they could, Teutomalius the king of the (...) Salvij when he fl^d unio them, and had wasted also the territories of the (...) Heduans, who were the allies of the people of Rome. C. Gracchus, after he had borne his Tribuneship with much sedition, and kept the Aventine hill with a multitude of the Commons in armes, was by L. Opimius the Consull (who by vertue of an act of Senate had put the people in arme.) disseized of his hold and slaine; and together with him Fulvius Fl^ccus a Consular man, his associate and companion in this furious outrage. Q. Fabius Maximus the Consull, and nephew of Pa^lus, woon a field of the Allobryges, and Bituttus king of the Arverni. Of B^tuitus his armie were slain a hundred and twentie thousand. And when himselfe in person was gone to Rome to satisfie the Senate, he was committed toward in Alba, for that it seemed daungerous and hurtfull to the peace, for to send him backe againe into Fraunce. Also there passed a decree, that Congentiatus his sonne should be apprehended and sent to Rome. The Allobroges submitted and were received. L. Opimius being accused before the bodie of the people by Q. Decius a Tribune of the Commons, for imprisoning certaine citizens uncondemned, was acquit.


Of the LXII. booke.
CAlus Marcius the Consull vanquished the Stonij, a people dwelling upon the Alpes. Micipsa, king of the Numidians died, and lest the kingdome unto to his three sonnes, Adherbal, Hyempsal, and Iugurtha his brother: sonne, whom he had adopted for his owne child. L. Caecilius Metellus subdued the Dalmatians. Iugurtha the levied warre upon Hyempsall his brother, overcame him in fight, and slew him: Adherball his third brother, hee drave out of the realme, but by the Senate of Rome restored he was againe. I., Caecilius Metellus, and Cn. Demitius Ahenobarbus the Censours, deprived two and thirtie Senatours of their place and dignitie. Besides, this booke containeth the troubles of the Syrian kings.


Of the LXIII. booke.
CAllus Percius Cato the Cos. fought with the (...) Scordisci in Thracio, and lost the field. The Censors took a survey of the citie: in which were enrolled 394336 pols of Roman citizens. Aemylia, Licinia, and

Marcia, three vestall virgines were convicted and condemned for incest. The manner how this their fornication was committed, detected, iudged, and punished, is here set down. The Iui^landert. Cimbrians, an huge and mightie nation, invaded Illyricum and put it to the wast: by whom Papirius Carbo the Consull was defeited, both he and his armie. Livius Drusus the Consull, warred in Thrace upon the Scordisci, (a people descended from the Gaules) and woon much honour.


Of the LXIIII. booke.
ADherball warred upon by Iugurtha, was within the cittie Cirta besieged, and by him slaine, notwithstanding the commaundement of the Senate to the contrary. For which cause warre was proclaimed against Iugurtha himself. Calparnius Beslia had the commission and charge to mannage this warre: who made peace with Iugurtha, without warrant from the people and Senate. Iugurtha being cited and called foorth under safe-conduct, to appeach and bewray the authours of his plots and designes, for that the voice went that he had bribed and corrupted with summes of money many of the Senat, came to Rome: where he was in trouble and ieopardie for a murder committed upon the person of a certaine prince called Massiva (who seeing him to be hated of the Romans, sought for his kingdome) whom hee slew at Rome. Beeing commaunded to aunswere for his life in regard of this murder, he secretly fled, and as he departed from the citie, uttered (by report) these words, O corrupt citie and set to sale; how soone will it perish, if it may meet with a chapman? A. Posthumius a lieutenant Generall, after he had likewise sought an unfortunat battaile against Iugurtha, amended the matter ful well by making an ignominious and dishonourable peace with him, which the Senat iudged not meet to be observed and kept.


Of the LXV. booke.
QVintus Caecilius Metellus the Consul in two battailes discomfited Iugurtha and over-ran all Numidis. M. Iun. Syllanus the Consull sped unluckily in a battaile fought against the Cimbrians: whose embassadours demaunding of the Senate a place of habitation and lands to occupie, were denied. M. Minufius Pro-consull, had good successe in fight against the of Zurich. Thracians. L. Cassius the Consull together with his host, was defeated and cut in peeces in the borders of the Allobroians by the French Tigurines, a country of theSwitzers. Helvetians, who had divided the^selves and were departed from the rest of the State. The souldiours remaining alive after that over throw, capitulated with the enemies for safetie of their lives, to put in pledges for to part with the one moity of all that ever they had, unto them.


Of the LXVI. booke.
IVgurtha driven out of Numidia by C. Marius, had the helpe and aid of Bocchus king of the Moores: but when the power of Bocchus also was defeated in battaile, and himselfe unwilling to maintaine the warre any longer (so unfortunately begun) Iugurtha was overcome, and delivered up to C. Marius. In which exploit the service of L. Cornelius Sylla treasurer unto Marius, was singular above the rest.


Of the LXVII. booke.
AVrelius Scaurus lieutenant to the Consull, was with his armie overthrowne by the Cimbrians, and himselfe taken prisoner. When by them he was called forth to counsell (at what time as they intended a voiage into Italie) in which he seemed to fright them for passing over the Alpes, saying, That the Romanes might not possibly be overcome; he was by Bolus their king a proud and fierce prince, killed. At the same enemies hands Cn. Manlius Cos. and Q. Servilius Caepio, Pro-consull, received an overthrow in the field and lost both their campes. Slaine there were foureskore thousand souldiours: of porteri, scullians, landers, and such followers of the camp besides, fortie thousand. By the verdict and censure of the people of Rome, Caepio (through whose rashnes this losse and overthrow hapned) was condemned: and he was the first after king Tarquine whose goods were confiscat; and finally deprived he was of his government. In the triumph of C. Marius, Iugurtha with his two sonnes was led before his chariot: and afterwards murdred in prison. Marius entred into the Senat, with his triumphant mantell of estate, which never any man before him had done, and for feare of the Cimbrians war he continued in his magistracie many yeeres together. To his second and third Consulship hee was chosen Notwithstanding a law to the contrarie. absent, and hee attained to bee Consull the fourth time: which hee gaped for, albeit hee dissembled

the contrarie. C. Domitius was by the suffrages of the people created the chiefe Pontisie. The Cimbrians having laid wast all the partes about the river Rhodanus and the mountaine Pyrenaeus, passed over into Spaine through the streights: where after they had spoiled many places, they were by the Celtiberians chased away: and being returned into France, they ioyned with the The Datchor (...) Teutones, a warlike nation.


Of the LXVIII. booke.
MArcus Antonius the Pretour persecuted the rovers at sea, and chased them as far as into Cilicia. C. Manlius the Consul manfully defended the campe, assailed with all most forcible means by the Theutones and An^^landers Ambrones. Afterwards in two battailes one after another about (...) Aquae Sextiae, hee utterly defeated those enemies: where (by report) were slaine two hundred thousand, and ninetie thousand taken prisoners. Marius in his absence was created Consull now the fift time: and when a triumph was offered unto him, he differred and put it off, untill he had made a full and finall conquest also of the Cimbrians. The Cimbrians repelled and drave from the Alpes Q. Catulus the Pro-consull, who had beset the narrow gullet of the Alpes, and kept a castle highly mounted over the river Athesis, which he now abandoned: and when by their valor they had cleered the passage, they pursued the Pro-consull with his armie and passed over into Italie, where in battaile they were over throwne by the same Catulus and C. Marius, who had ioyned their forces together: In which (they say) one hundred and fortie thousand men were slaine, and 60000 taken prisoners. Marius was honourably received at his returne with a generall accord of the whole cittie: and whereas two triumphes were offered unto him, hee was content with one. The principall peeres and nobles of the cittie, who a long time before had envied him as a man newly start up, risen, and advaunced to so great honours, confessed now that the common weale by him was preserved. Publicius Metellus for murdering his owne mother, was the first man sowed up in a leather bag and so throwne into the sea. Here is recorded how the sacred shields Ancilia stirred of themselves with a great rusling noise before the Cimbrians warre was finished. Finally this booke comprehendeth the warres betweene the two kings of Syria.


Of the LXIX. booke.
CNeus Apuleius Saturninus, by the helpe of C. Marius, and by occasion that A. Nonius his competitour and concurrent was by his souldiours slaine, was by forcible meanes created Tribune of the commons, and bare the Tribuneship as violently as he gat it. And when he had proposed an Agrarie law and passed it by force, he arrested Metellus Numidicus to aunswere at a day, for that he had not subscribed and sworne to the said law: who being manteined and defended by the cittizens of the better sort, because he would give none occasion of unseemly debates and evill contentions, went in voluntarie exile to Rhodes: and there he emploied his time in reading of bookes, and giving audience to great and famous men. After he was departed, C. Marius the chieftaine and authour of that sedition, who now had purchased a sixth Consullship by a largesse of money skambled amongst the tribes, proclaimed him as excommunicate and enterdicted from fire and water like an outlaw. The same Apuleius Saturninus Tribune of the commons, slew C.Numius. Memmius in his white gowne standing to be Consul, for that he feared him above all others to crosse his proceedings: wherupon the Senat was exceedingly moved in the cause and behalf of C. Memmius: and when C. Marius a man by nature mutable, and in his counsaile variable, one who ever loved to be on the better side of the hedge and to band with the mightier, was not able to beare him out and protect him, the said Saturninus together with Glaucia the Pretour and other his complices in that outrage, was slain by one Rabirius. Q. Caecilius Metellus was recalled out of banishment with exceeding great love and favour of the whole citie. Manius Aquilius the Proconsull dispatched and ended the slaves-warre raised in Sicilie.


Of the LXX. booke.
VVHen Manius Aquilius should plead his owne defence, or aunswere in case of extortion, hee would not himselfe intreat and crave the favour of the Iurie. But M. Antonius his advocate, who pleaded for him at the bar, sitt his coat downe along his brest, to shew the honourable skarres received in the forepart of his bodie: which being by the Iudges seen, they made no doubt,

but acquit him. Of this thing Cicero is the onely authour. Didius the Pro-consull mannaged his wars against the Cel^berians, happily. Ptolomaeus K. of Cyrenae surnamed Apion, when he died, lest the people of Rome his heire: and the Senat ordained that the cities of his realme should be free. Ariobarzanes was restored to his kingdome of Cappadocia, by L. Cornelius Sylla. The Parthian embassadours sent from their K. Arsaces came unto Sylla, to treat and sue for amitie with the people of Rome. P. Rutilius a man of uncorrupt and innocent life, who (beeing lieutenant under L. Mucius the Pro-consull) had defended Asia from the wrongful dealings of the Publicans or common farmers (being odious to the order of knighthood or gentlemen of Rome, who now as iudges had the iurisdiction in their hands) was condemned for extortion and banished. C. Geminus the Pretor fought untowardly against the Thracians. The Senate would no longer abide the unrulines and wilfull abuses committed by the gentlemen in excercising of their iurisdiction, and therefore began by all meanes possible to endevour, for to reduce and translate that prerogative again to themselves: in which enterprise M. Livius Drusus a Tribune of the commons stood in their behalfe: who to gain more strength to the cause, raised the commons by proposing unto them a pernicious hope of a largesse. Moreover in this booke are comprised the sturres and troubles of the kings in Syria.


Of the LXXI. booke.
MArcus Livius Drusus a Tribune of the commons, for the better maintenance of the Senates cause, which he had undertaken, solicited the allies and the nations of Italie, upon hope to bee enfranchised citizens of Rome: by whose assistance having gone through by strong hand, with the Agrarian and Frumentarian lawes, hee obtained also the foresaid law Iudicialis, in this manner, That all iudgements should passe indifferently and equally by Senate and gentlemen. After this, when the freedome of Rome promised to the allies could not bee compassed and performed; the Italians in a chase and heat of choler began to complot how to revolt: whose conventicles, conspiracies, and orations delivered in the assemblies and diets of their princes, are in this booke reported: In regard whereof, Livius Drusus became hatefull even to the Senate, as the author of a sociall warre, and in his owne house was murdered, but by whom God knoweth.


Of the LXXII. booke.
THe Italian states revolt, namely the Picents, Vestines, Marsians, Pelignians, Marrucines, Lucanes, and Samnites. The Picents first entred into armes and began the warre. Quintus Servilius the Pro-consull was slaine in Asculum, together with all the Romane citizens which were in that towne: whereupon the whole people of Rome put on armes and souldiours coats. Servus Galba being surprised by the Lucanes, escaped captivitie by the meanes of one woman, in whose house he toke up his lodging. Esernia and Alba two colonies, were by the Italians besieged. After this, heere are reported the aids of the Latines and other forreine nations sent unto the people of Rome: moreover the expeditions and alternative winning of citties, as well by the one side as the other.


Of the LXXIII. booke.
LVcius Caesar the Consull, in a battaile against the Samnites went downe and had the worse. Nola the colonie fel into the hands of the Samnites, together with L. Posthumius the Pretour, who there was slain. Many more nations revolted to the enemies, for that P. Rutilius the Consul had fought with losse against the Marsians, and lost his life in the battaile. C. Marius his lieutenant had a better conflict with the enemies in the end and upshot. Servius Sulpitius vanquished the Pelignians. Q. Caepio another lieutenant of Rutilius, who having bin by the enemies besieged, had sallied forth upon the enemies and gotten the upper hand: for this good successe he was made equall in government and commaund with C. Marius. But heereupon he grew to bee too rash, and being over-taken by an ambush of the enemies, was slaine, and the armie defeated. L. Caesar the Consull woon a field of the Samnites: for which victorie the souldiours coates were laid off againe at Rome. Yet because the fortune of the field would shew her selfe variable, the colonie Essernia together with M. Marcellus, was taken by the Samnites. On the other side, Marius in a battaile vanquished the Marsians, and slew Hirmius Asimius the Pretour of the Marrucines. C. Caecilius overcame the Salvij that rebelled in that province of Gaule beyond the Alpes.



Of the LXXIIII. booke.
CNeus Pompeius discomfited the Picents in battaile and held them besieged: for which victorie the embrodered purple robes, with other ornaments and badges of the magistrates were taken up againe and put on. C. Marius fought against the Marsians with doubtfull event. The libertines then and never before, began to serve in the warres. Aurelius Plotius the lieutenant, in a battaile overcame the Vmbrians: likewise L. Porcius the Pretor vanquished the Marsians, when as both these nations had rebelled. Nicomedes was placed againe in the kingdome of Bithynia, and Ariobarzanes of Cappadocia. Cu. Pompeius the Consull overthrew the Marsians in a pight field. When the cittie was deeply engaged and plunged in debt, A. Sempronius Asellus the Pretour, because he gave sentence respectively in the favour of the debtours, was slaine in the market place by their creditours the usurers. Moreover this booke relateth the inrodes and invasions of the Thracians into Macedonie, together with their wasting of those parts.


Of the LXXV. booke.
AVlus Posthumius Albinus a lieutenant generall, being the Admirall of a fleet, was upon an infamous imputation of betraying his soldiors massacred by his own army. L. Cornelius Sylla a lieutenant overthrew the Samnites in fight, and woon two campes of theirs. Cn. Pompeius received the Vestines upon their submission. L. Porcius the Consull, after fortunate successe in battaile, and that he had sundrie times discomfited the Samnites, as he assaied to force their campe lost his life: which accident gave away the victorie of that battaile to the enemie. Cosconius and Luceius overcame the Samnites in battaile, slew Marius Egnatius a most noble and renowned commaunder of the enemies, and had many of their townes surrendred up into their hands. L. Sylla tamed the Hirpines, and defeated the Samnites in many battailes; and certaine States submitted unto him: who having atchieved so worthie and brave exploites before his Consulship (as seldome any other man besides, the like) repaired to Rome for to sue to be Consull.


Of the LXXVI. booke.
AVlus Gabinius a lieutenant, having fought fortunately against the Lucanes, and woon from them many townes: as he laid siege to the enemies leaguer, was cut off and slaine. Sulpitius in qualitie of lieutenant had the execution of the Marrucines, and the surrender of that whole nation. Cn. Pompeius the Pro-consull tooke the submission of the Vestines and Pelignians. The Marsians likewise having bene in certaine battailes quelled by L. Murana and Caecilius Pinna lieutenants, craved peace. Asculum was woon by Cn. Pompeius: and the Italian people, by Mamercus Aemylius the lieutenant were put to the sword. Silo Popedius, Generall of the Marsians, and the authour of this villanie, was slaine in battaile. Ariobarzanes of Cappadocia, and Nicomedes of Bithynia were driven both out of their kingdomes, by Mithridates king of Pontus. Last of all, this booke discourseth of the incursions and spoile that the Thracians made in Macedonie.


Of the LXXVII. booke.
VVHen P. Sulpitius a Tribune of the commons, by the advise and instigation of C. Marius had promulged certaine pernicious laws, That the banished should be restored, and new citizens together with Libertines be sorted into Tribes: also that Marius should be chosen Generall against Mithridates king of Pontus: and when he offered violence against Q. Pompeius and L. Sylla the Consuls, who contradicted his proceedings; and had slaine the sonne of Pompeius the Consull, who had married Syllaes daughter: then L. Sylla Consull, entred Rome with an armie, and within the very cittie fought against the adverse side of Sulpitius and Marius, and drave them forth: of which faction twelve were by the Senate iudged enemies, and amongst them C. Marius both father and sonne. As for P. Sulpitius, when he lurked in a certaine ferme-house of the countrie, was bewraied and betraied by his own bond-servant: and so pulled forth from thence and killed. The slave, because he might seem to be rewarded for revealing his maister according to promise, was manamised and set free: but for

his wicked treacherie in betraying his owne maister, he was throwne downe the rocke Tarptia. C. Marius the sonne crossed these sinto Affricke. C. Marius the father lay hidden amongst the marishes of the Miuturnians, and was plucked out from thence by the townesmen: and when a certaine bondslave and a Frenchman borne, was sent to kill him, he was so affrighted at the maiestie and countenance of so brave a man, that he went backe and would not doe the seat: whereupon Marius was embarked at the charges of the cittie, and carried into Affricke. L. Sylla reformed the State of the citie, and drew out from thence inhabitants to people the colonies. Q. Pompeius the Consull, tooke his iourny to receive the armie of Cn. Pompeius the Cos. and by his counsell was slain. Mithridafes king of Pontus seized upon Bithyni^ and Cappadocia; drave out Aquilus the lieutenant, and with a mightie armie invaded Phrygia the province of the people of Rome.


Of the LXXVIII. booke.
MIthridates held Asia with his garrisons; he cast into prison Q. Oppius the Pro-consull, and likewise Aquilius the lieutenant. Also by his commaundement, all the Romane citizens to bee found in Asia, were in one day massacred. The cittie Rhodes, which onely continued true and kept alleageance, hee assailed: but being in certaine battailes at sea overcome, hee gave over and retired. Archelaus a chiefe governour and commaunder under the king, entred Greece with an army, seized upon Athens and held it. Moreover, this booke conteineth the fearefull troubles of certain c^ties and lands: whiles the inhabitants endevoured to draw their states, some to side with the king; others, to take part with the Romanes.


Of the LXXIX. booke.
LVcius Cornelius Cinna, at what time as by force and armes hee published daungerous lawes, was thereupon by his Collegue Cn. Octavius, driven out of the cittie with sixe Tribunes of the commons besides: and being thus deprived of his rule and authoritie, he became commaunder of Ap. Claudius his armie by corruption: and ioyning with C. Marius and other banished persons, out of Affricke hee marched in warlike manner against the cittie of Rome. In which war, it fortuned that two brethren, the one of Pompeius his armie and the other of Cinnaes, encountred in fight and knew not one another. New when the conquerour was in disarming and spoiling him whom he had slaine, he saw what he had done, and tooke knowledge that it was his brother: whereupon hee fell into an exceeding p^teous fit of wailing and lamentation: made a funerall f^^e for his brothers corps, stabbed himselfe through thereupon, and in the same fire was burnt and consumed to ashes. Now whereas these civill warres might have bene suppressed in the beginning; such was the fraudulent dealing of Cn. Pompeius, who seeming to mainteine both partes, gave strength to Cinna, and set not to his helping hand, before that the Nobles side went down; such also was the faintnes and coldnes of the Consull, that Cinna and Marius tooke heart and grew strong: and so with foure armies, whereof two were committed to the conduct of Q. Sertorius and C. Carbo, they invested the cittie of Rome. Marius wan by force the colonie Oslia, and most cruelly ransacked it.


Of the LXXX booke.
THe Italian nations were by the Senat enfranchised, and obteined the freedome of Rome. The Samnites who onely continued in armes banded againe with Cinna and Marius. By them was Plancius slaine and his armie defeated. Cinna and Marius together with Carbo and Sertorius were possessed of Ianiculum, and being discomfited and repelled by Octavius the Consull, retired and departed. Marius spoiled and laid desolate Antium, Aricia, and Lavinium three colonies. When as now the nebilitie and LL. of the Senate had no hope at all left to withstand the contrary faction, by reason of the cowardise and treacherie as well of souldiours as leaders, who upon corruption either would not fight at all, or else went over to the adverse part; Cinna and Marius were received into Rome: who as if it had beene an enemie-cittie forced by assault, made havocke of all with saccage and massacres. In this garboile Cn. Octavius the Consull lost his life, and all the nobilitie of the other side were murdered: and among the rest, M. Antonius a most eloquent oratour, and C. Caesar: whose heads were set upon the pulpit Rostra. Yong Crassus the sonne was by the horsemen of Fimbria killed: and Crassus the father, because he would

not endure any indignitie unworthie his vertue, fell upon his owne sword. Without any assembly or election at all, L. Cinna and C. Marius declared themselves Consuls for the next yeere: and the same day whereon they entered into their magistracie, Marius caused Sex. Licinius a Senatour, to bee throwne downe the rocke Tarpcia: and after many wicked and heinous outrages committed upon the Ides of Ianurie, he departed out of this world a man whose vices (if they were weighted together with his vertues) hardly could it be determined, whether he were in warre a better souldiour, or in peace a more daungerous citizen. For the common weale which hee in his armour saved, the same in his long' gowne hee overthrew, first, with all manner of cousenage and deceit; and last, by plaine hostilitie and force of armes.


Of the LXXXI. booke.
LVcius Sylla streightly beleaguered Athens, which Archelaus a governour under king Mithridates held with a garrison: and after much toile and labour wan it. To the cittie hee graunted their libertie again, and restored unto the citizens all that was their own. Magnesia the onely cittie in Asia that remained true and lo^al, was most valiantly defended against Mithridates. Over and besides, heere ye shall read the exploits performed by the Thracians in Macedonie.


Of the LXXXII. booke.
SYlla vanquished in battaile the power of king Mithridates, which having kept Macedonie in obedience, was now come into Thracia. He slew one hundred thousand enemies, and was maister of the campe. Afterwards, when the war was renued, hee discomfi^ed and defeated quite the kings whole armie. Archelaus together with the kings fleet yeelded to Sylla. L. Valerius Flaccus the Consull and companion in government with Cinna, being sent to succeed Sylla, was (for his covetousnesse) so odious unto his armie, that he was slaine by C. Fimbria his owne lieutenant, a most audacius and desperate person: and so the conduct and command of the armie was translated to Fimbria. Moreover, here is recorded what citties in Asia Mithridates wan; how cruelly hee spotled and vexed the province; and how the Thracians made rodes and invasions into Macedonie.


Of the LXXXIII. booke.
CAius Fimbria after hee had discomfited certaine forces of Mithridates, wan the cittie Pergamus; besieged the king there, and missed but a little of taking him prisoner. The cittie Ilion, which stood out and reserved it selfe to the behouse and devotion of Sylla, he forced and destroied, and the greater part of Asia he recovered. Sylla in many battailes defeited the Thracians. When L. Cinna and C. Papyrius Carbo (who for two yeeres together were Consuls of their own making) prepared war against Sylla; by the meanes of L. Valerius Flaccus the President of the Senate (who made an oration in the Counsell-house) and those who loved concord and sought for amitie, affected it was in the end, that embassadours should be sent unto Sylla, to treat about a peace. Cinna was murdered by his owne souldiours, whom hee forced against their wils to be embarked and to take a voiage against Sylla: by which occasion Carbo alone bare the Consulship. Sylla beeing passed over into Asia, made peace with Mithridates upon this capitulation, That the king should quit these provinces, namely, Asia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia. Fimbria being forsaken of his owne armie, which revolted unto Sylla, gave himselfe a fore wound, and yeelding his neck unto his own bondslave, obtained this favour at his hands, as to dispatch him outright.


Of the LXXXIIII. booke.
Sylla returned this answere unto the embassadours sent unto him from the Senate, That he would bee ordered by them, in case those citizens who (upon the hard usage of Cinna) fled unto him, might be restored. The Senate thought this a reasonable condition and a iust demand: but by means of Carbo and that faction, who made reckoning that warre would bee more commodious unto them, there ensued no agreement and accord. The same Carbo when he was minded to exact hostages of all

the townes and colonies of Italie, thereby to bind them upon their alleagance against Sylla, was by a generall consent of the Senate crossed and inhibited. The new enfranchised citizens, by vertue of an act by the Senate granted, were allowed the priviledges of their suffrages and voices. Q. Metellus Pius, who had sided with the nobilitie, whiles he levied warre in Affricke was by C. Fabius the Pretour discomfited: and by the faction of Carbo and those that followed the part of Marius, an Act of Senat passed, That all armies and forces wheresoever should be cassed and discharged. The Libertines were distrib^ted indifferently throughout the five and thirtie tribes. Besides all this, heere is specified the preparat^on of warre which was raised against Sylla.


Of the LXXXV. booke.
SYlla crossed the seas with an armie over into Italie: and when those embassadours which hee sent to treat for peace, were by the Consull C. Norbanus evill intreated, he overcame the said Norbanus in a battaile. And when he was about to assaile the campe of L. Scipio the other Consull, with whom hee had travailed and assaied all meanes to conclude peace, and could not compasse it; the whole armie of the Consull in generall, beeing sollicited by souldiours whome Sylla had sent out under hand to that purpose, turned their ensignes unto him, and followed his standerd. Scipio, when hee mought have bene killed was let go. Cn. Pompeius the sonne of that Cneus who woon Asculum, enrolled an armie of voluntaries, and c^me unto Sylla with three legions: unto whom also the nobilitre all and whole ranged themselves; as, abandoning the citie they repaired to the campe. Finally in this booke report is made of the expeditions performed by captaines of both sides, throughout all Italie.


Of the LXXXVI. booke.
THat yeere, wherein C. Marius (the sonne of C. M^rius) was by forcible meanes and strong hand created Consull before he was twentie yeeres of age; C. Fabius in Affricke was burnt quicke in his owne pav^lion, for his bloudie crueltie and greedie avarice. L. Philippus lieutenant unto Sylla, seized Sardinia, after he had d^scomfited and slaine. Q. Antonius the Pretour. Sylla contracted a league with the States of Italie, to put them out of feare that he would not bereave them of their freedome of Rome and libertie of suffrages, lately graunted unto them. In like manner, upon assured confidence (that he had alreadie) of undoubted victorie, he commaunded all those that were in suite and resorted unto him for iurisdiction, to adiourne their apparance in court, and to appeare at Rome. Whiles the cittie yet was divided and distracted two waies, L. Damasippius the Pretour, having according to the will and pleasure of C. Marius the Consull, gathered the Senate together, massacred all the nobilitie of the cittie. Out of which number Q. Mutius Scaevola the Arch-Pontifie, as hee fled, was in the very porch and entrie of Vestaries temple murdered. Besides, this booke conteineth the war renewed by L. Muraeim against M^thridates in Asia.


Of the LXXXVII. booke.
Sylla after he had discomfited and overthrowne the armie of C. Marius, neere a place called Sacriportus, besieged him within the towne Preneste. The cittie of Rome bee recovered out of the hands of his enemies: and when Marius made an offer to sallie forth, hee repelled him. Moreover this booke conteineth the exploits atchieved by his lieutenants, with the like fortune of that side in all places.


Of the LXXXVII. booke.
Sylla after he had discomfited and overthrowne the armie of C. Marius, neere a place called Sacriportus, besieged him within the towne Preneste. The cittie of Rome bee recovered out of the hands of his enemies: and when Marius made an offer to sallie forth, hee repelled him. Moreover this booke conteineth the exploits atchieved by his lieutenants, with the like fortune of that side in all places.


Of the LXXXVIII. booke.
SYlla after that he had defeated and put to the sword the armie of Carbo at Clusium, Faventia and Fidentia chased him forth of Italie. With the Samnites who alone of all the Italian nations had not yet laid down armes, he fought one finall battaile, and vanquished them neer the cittie of Rome, even before the gate Collina: and thus having recovered and gotten into his hand the (...) mannaging of the state, he polluted and staind this most goodly and beautifull victorie, with the faulest (...) that ever man committed. He cut the throats of 8000 in the great hostit^ie called Villa Publica; even those that had yeelded the^selves. He set up the table of proscription and out lawrie. The citie of Rome and al Italy throghout filled with masacres. Among the rest, he caused al the Prenestines disarmed as they were, to be slain.

Marius a Senatour by calling, he killed in this manner, by breaking his armes and legs, by cropping his eares, and digging out his eies. C. Marius besieged within Preneste, by Lucretius Asella and that side with Sylla; when hee sought meanes of evasion by a mine under the ground, seeing how hee was environned by the armie, slew himselfe within the said mine: for perceiving that he could not escape, hee and Pontius Telesinus that accompanied him in this flight, ran one at the other with their drawn naked swords: and when he had killed him, and was himselfe hurt, he found so much kindnes at his slaves hand, as to make an end of him quite.


Of the LXXXIX. booke.
LVcius Brutus sent from Cn. Papyrius Carbo, who was arrived at Corcyra, in a fishers boate to Lilybaeum, in espiall to see whether Pompeie were there: being compassed and hemmed in round about by those vessels which Pompeie had sent out, turned his swords point to his bodie, and set the pummell against a seat within the boat, and so bending forward with the poise of his bodie, was pierced through and died. Cn. Pompeius sent by the Senate with full commission of rule and commaund, tooke Cn. Carbo prisoner, who was arrived in the Ilands Cossura, and slew him, who kept a puling and weeping like a woman when he should die. Sylla became Dictator, and that which never any man had done besides him, kept his port abroad with foure and twentie Huishers or lictors going before him with their rods and axes. Hee altered the state, and in that innovation established it. The Tribunes of the commons hee abridged of their authoritie, and wholly deprived them of their power to preferre and publish lawes. The Colledge of the Pontifies and Augurs he amplified and augmented, to the number of 15. The bodie of the Senate he supplied out of the order of gentlemen. The children of those whom hee had prescribed and outlawed, hee disabled for beeing elegible to any honourable office, and of their goods made port-sale, whereof at first hee seized much by violence and had it way. A mightie masse of money hee raised thereof, amounting to ^^^^ lib. a hundred and fiftie millions of Sesterces. He commanded Q. Lucretius Ofellas to be killed in the very Forum of Rome, for that hee presumed without his leave and licence to sue for a Consulship: and when the people of Rome were highly offended at this indignitie, he assembled them to a publicke audience, and before them avowed the fact and tooke it upon him. Cn. Pompeius in Affricke vanquished and slew in battaile Cn. Domitius, one of the proscript outlaives: and Hiarbas king of the Numidians, who prepared to levie warre. He being but foure and twentie yeeres of age, and no better as yet, than a gentleman of Rome (a thing that never any man attained unto) triumphed over Affricke. C. Norbanus, a man who had been Consull, and now proscript and outlawed, was apprehended in the citie of Rhodes, and thereupon slew himselfe. Mutilus likewise one of them that were outlawed and out of protection, being come privily disguised with his head covered to the backe doore of Bastia his wives house, was not let in, for that she said he was an outlaw: whereupon he tooke the stab at his owne hands, and with his heart bloud bespreint the doore of his wives house. Sylla recovered and woon againe Nola in Samnium. He brought seven and fortie legions into the lands conquered from the enemies, planted them therein, and divided the grounds amongst them. Hee besieged the towne Velaterra, which yet stood out and bare armes, and at length upon surrender, got it. Maylene also, the onely cittie in Asia (which after that Mithridates was subdued mainteined war) was fired and rased downe to the ground.


Of the XC. booke.
SYlla departed this life, and this honour was done unto him by the Senate, that he was enterred in Mars field. M. Lepidus going about to cancile and abolish the acts of Sylla, raised new warre: and by Q. Catulus (his companion in government) was driven out of Italie: and when he prepared to wage warre (but to no effect) in Sardinia, there he perished and came to his death. M. Brutus who held (...) Lumbardie, was by Cn. Pompeius slaine. Q. Sertorius another proscript outlaw, levied a great war in the netherlands of Spaine. Lucius Manlius the Pro-consul, and M. Domitius a lieutenant, were in fight overcome, by Herculeius the treasurer. Moreover this booke conteineth the acts performed by P. Servilius the Pro-consull, against the Cilicians.



Of the XCI. booke.
CNeus Pompeius being as yet but a gentleman of Rome, was sent with full commission of Consular commaund against Sertorius. Certain cities had Sertorius woon by assault, and brought under many States to be at his devotion. Ap. Claudius the Proconsull overcame the Thracians in divers and sundry battels. Q. Metellus the Proconsull, defeated and slew L. Hirculeius the treasurer of Sertorius, with all his armie.


Of the XCII. booke.
CNeus Pompeius hither to fought with Sertorius in doubtfull event, so as of both parts, one of the wings and points of the battell had the better hand. Q. Sertorius overthrew in fight Metellus and Perpenna with their two armies. Pompeius desirous to carie away his part in that victorie, entred into the field, but made no saving game of it. Afterwards Sertorius was besieged within Caligurium, but by daily and continuall sallies forth, gave the enemies that lay in siege within as good as they brought. Over and besides, herein are contained the deeds atchieved by Curio the Pro-consull in Thrace against those Dardanians, together with sundry cruel and bloudie parts plaied by Q. Sertorius, even with those of his owne side. For many of his owne friends, and such as were with him outlawed, upon imputations of treason pretended against them, he put to death.


Of the XCIII. booke.
PVblius Servilius the Proconsull in Cilicia, subdued the Isaurians, and wan certaine townes of the pirates. Nicomedes king of Bithynia at his death made the people of Rome his full heire, and his kingdome was reduced into the forme of a province. Mithridates contracted a league with Sertorius, and waged warre against the people of Rome. Herein is shewed the great preparation of warre that the king made as well by land as sea, and how he seized upon Bithynia. M. Aurelius Cotta the Consul was in battell vanquished by the king at Chalcedon. Moreover, this book containeth the exploits of Pompeius and Metellus against Sertorius, who in all warlike feats and martiall prowesse was equall unto them, whom also he raised from the siege before the towne Calagurium, and compelled to goe into divers countries, Pompeius into the farther province of Spaine,Plutarch otherwise in Se^orius. and Pompeius into Gallia.


Of the XCIIII. booke.
LVcius Lucullus the Consull fought against Mithridates, and in horse-service had the better hand of him. Certaine rodes he made with good successe; and when his souldiors called hard upon him for battell, he staied them from mutinie. Deiotarus a tetrarch of Gallogrecia, defeated the captaines of king Mithridates who levied warre in Phrygia. Moreover this book containeth the fortunat atchievements of Pompeius against Sertorius in Spaine.


Of the XCV. booke.
CAius Curio the Pro-consull vanquished and subdued the Dardanians in Thrace. Threescore and foureteene sword-plaiers of Capua fled out of the fenseschoole of Lentulus at Capua: who having gathered together a number of slaves, and hired hines, raised warre under the leading of Chrysus and Spartacus, and vanquished in plaine field, Cl. Pulcher a lieutenant, and P. Varinius the Pretour. L. Lucullus the Proconsull with the famine and the sword together tamed and subdued the hoast of Mithridates at the citie Cizicus: and when they had chased him out of Bithynia after many overthrowes in warre and misfortunes of shipwracke at sea, wherewith his heart was quailed, he compelled him to flie into Pontus.


Of the XCVI. booke.
OVintus Arrius the Pretour defeated and slew Chrysus the captaine of the fugitives, and with him twentie thousand men. Caius Lentulus the Consull received a foile and overthrow at the hands of Spartacus. Hee also overcame in fight Lu. Gellius the Consull and Quintus Arrius. Sertorius was at a banket slaine by Manius Antonius and M. Perpenna with other conspirators in the

eight yeer of his dukedome. A captain and brave warrior he was. He fought with Pompeius and Metellus, two famous Generals and commaunders. Many a time he saved his owne, but more oftener hee went away winner, howbeit, in the end he was abandoned and betraied. The soveraigne commaund of that side was made over to Marcus [Perpenna,] whom Cn. Pompeius vanquished tooke prisoner and slew: so about the tenth yeere after the warre began, he recovered Spaine. C. Cassius the Proconsull, and Cneus Manlius the Pretor, were foiled by Spartacus in the field, and that war was committed over to the managing and conduct of M. Crassus the Pretour.


Of the XCVII. booke.
Marcus Crassus the Pretour first fought with a power of the fugitives aforesaid, consisting of Frenchmen and Germanes, and woon the better: for he slew 35000 enemies, and their cheefetain Granicus. After that, he warred against Spartacus, killed him also and 40000 with him. Manius Antonius the Pretour maintained war unfortunately against the Cretensians, and by his death it tooke an end. M. Lucullus the Proconsull brought the Thracians under subiection. L. Lucullus had the upper hand in a battell of Mithridates in Pontus, and slew above sixtie thousand enemies. M. Crassus and Cn. Pompeius were created Coss. and as Crassus immediately by out of his Pretorship stepped to that dignitie, so Pompey was of a gentleman of Rome and no better advanced thereunto, even before he had borne the office of Treasurer. They restored againe the Tribunes power and authoritie. By the meanes of Aurelius Cotta, the preheminence of iudges also was translated unto the gentlemen of Rome. Mithridates, seeing his owne estate lying in despaire, fled unto Tigrantes king of Armenia for succour.


Of the XCVIII. booke.
MAchares the son of Mithridates, king of Bosphorus, was by L. Lucullus received into amitie. Cn. Lentulus and L. Gellius the Censors administred their office with great severitie and rigor, and deposed three score from Senators dignitie they also held a review and purged the citie. Enrolled there were 450000 citizens of Rome. L. Metellus lord Pretor in Sicilie fought fortunatly against the pyrates and rovers. The temple of Iupiter in the Capitoll, which by fire had ben consumed, was reedified by Qu. Catulus, and dedicated anew. L. Lucullus in Armenia discomfited in many battels Mithridates and Tigranes, with a mightie power of both kings. Q. Metellus the Proconsull having the charge of the warre against the Candiotes, besieged the citie (...) Cydonia. C. Triarius a lieutenant under Lucullus received a foile of Mithridates in fight. Lucullus was impeached and staied for pursuing Mithridates and Tigranes that he could not accomplish his victorie, by occasion of a mutinie among his owne souldiors, who would not follow, because the Valerian legions forsooke Lucullus, alleadging that they had served their time fully out.


Of the XCIX. booke.
QVintus Metellus the Proconsull forced by assault Gnosos, Lyctus, Cydonia, and many other cities [in Crete] L. Roscius a Tribune of the Commons published a law, that the gentlemen of Rome should be allowed the foureteene next seats in the scaffolds of the Theatre, to behold the games and plaies. Cn. Pompeius being commanded by a law promulged unto the people for to pursue the rovers abovesaid, who had debarred and cut off all commerce for corne and victuals, within 74 daies, rid the sea of them quite, and after the war with them finished in Cilicia, he received them upon submission, and gave them cities and lands to possesse. Moreover this booke containeth the worthie exploits of Qu. Metellus against the Cretensians. The letters also of Metellus and Cneus Pompeius, sent from the one to the other: in which Metellus complaineth that Pompeius by sending his own lieutenant into Crete, to receive the surrender and homage of the cities there, annutted and passed by the glorie of those acts which he had atchieved. Pompeius againe rendereth a reason thereof, and alledgeth that so he ought to doe.


Of the C. booke.
CAius Manilius a Trib. of the Com. preferred a bill, to the exceeding displeasure and indignation of the nobles, That the war against Mithridates, should be assigned to Pompeie. His speech to the people imported and was effectuall. Q. Metellus having subdued the Cretensians, gave

lawes unto that Island, which until that time enioied freedome of State. Cn. Pompeius went his iourney for to levie war against Mithridates, and with Phraates king of the Parthians he renewed the league. In a battell performed by horse-service he overcame Mithridates. Also herein is contained the warre, first betweene Phraates king of the Parthians, and Tigranes king of the Armenians: afterwards between Tigranes the son and his father.


Of the CI. booke.
CNeus Pompeius vanquished Mithridates in a battell fought by night, and compelled him to flie to or Bosporui. Bosphorus. He received Tigranes upon his submission: and when he had taken from him Syria, Phaenicia and Cilicia, he gave him againe the kingdome of Armenia. Their conspiracie, who having been condemned for the inordinate and ambitious suite of the Consulship, were consedered to kil the Consuls, was surprised and dasht. Cn. Pompeius following the chase after Mithidrates, entred into farre remote countries and unknown nations. The Georgians at this day. Iberians and Albanes who would not grant him passage, he overcame in battell. Over and besides, this booke sheweth how Mithridates fled by Colchij and Heniochi, and what his acts were in Bosphorus.


Of the CII. booke.
CN. Pompeius reduced the realme of Pontus into the forme of a province. Pharnaces the son of Mithridates made war upon his own father, by whom Mithridates was besieged within his own roiall court and palace. Whereupon he dranke poison, and seeing it was not He had so ordinarily used a norabic Antidote or preservance, called now Mithridate. that the poyson would not worke. effectual and strong ynough to dispatch him, he was killed by a French soldiour, named Bitaetus, whose helping hand hee requested for to rid him out of the world. Cn. Pompeius subdued the Iews: their famous temple of Ierusalem, which until that day never had suffered abuse and violence, bee forced and woon. Catiline, by occasion that hee had twise suffered a repulse in suing to be Consull, conspired together with Lentulus the Pretor, Cethegus and many others, to massacre the Consuls and the Senat, to set the citie on fire, and to subvert and overthrow the State of the commonweale, and to this purpose had levied an armie in Tuscane. This treason and conspiracie was by the industrie of M. Tullius Cicero, detected and found out. Catiline was banished the cittie. The rest of his complices and adherents every one suffered death accordingly.


Of the CIII. booke.
CAtiline together with his armie, was by C. Antonius the Proconsull defeited and slaine. P. Clodius was accused, for entring (in the habit and apparel of a woman) that Of the goddesse Bona. chappell which it was not lawfull for a man to go into, and notwithstanding he had committed adulterie with the archpontifies wife, yet he was acquit and went cleer away. Cn. Pompeius the Pretor, vanquished at Solone the Allobroges, who had rebelled. P. Clodius left the nobilitie, and raunged himselfe with the Com. C. Caesar subdued the Portugals. At what time as he was in election to be Cos. and went about to invade and make havocke of the C.W. there arose a conspiracie among three of the most principal personages of the citie, Cn. Pompeius M. Crassus and C. Caesar. The Agrarian lawes were by Caesar the Cos. published with great strife and contention: the Senat was unwilling therunto; but by the other Consull M. Bibulus they passed. C. Antonius Proconsull in Thracia sped but badly in his war affairs. M. Cicero was banished the citie by vertue of an act promulged by P. Clodius Trib. of the Com. for that he had put to death certain Romane citizens uncondemned. Caesar made a voiage into the province of Gaule, where hee subdued the Helvetians, a vagarant and wandering nation in those daies, who seeking a place to inhabit, intended through the province of Caesar, to travell into Narbene. Narbo. Moreover, it containeth the situation of France. Pompeius triumphed over the children of Mithridates, also over Tigranes and his sonne, and by one voice and generall consent of the whole assembly, was saluted by the name of Great. Magnus.


Of the CIV. booke.
THe forepart of this book compriseth the s^e and description, together with the maners of Germany, C. Caesar at what time as he led his armie against the Germans, at the request of the Heduans and Sequanians, whose territorie by them was possessed, and who under the conduct of Ariovistus were

come downe into France, by an Oration to his armie staied the timorous disposition of the souldiours, which arose upon the feare they had of new and straunge enemies, vanquished the Germanes in plaine fight, and drave them cleane out of Fraunce. M. Cicero, by meanes of Pompeius (who among others made an Oration in his behalfe) and of T. Annius Milo, a Tribune of the Commons, who likewise pleaded his cause, was with the exceeding ioy of the Senate and ail Italie, called home from exile. Cn. Pompeius had commission for five yeere space, to looke unto the provision of corne and victuals. Caesar overcame in fight the Ambians, Suessiones, Viromanduans, Atrebates (nations all of the Belgae) of whome there was an exceeding multitude, and received them upon yeelding, to his protection. Afterwards hee fought with passing great hazard and ieopardie against the Nervij, one of the foresaid States, and in fine utterly destroied and extinguished their whole generation: for they had waged war so long, untill of sixtie
 thousand armed men, there remained but three hundred, and of ninetie five of their noblemen, three onely escaped and no more. There passed a law for to reduce Cyprus into the forme of a province, and to confiscate the kings treasure: by vertue whereof, the managing of that affair was committed to C. Cato. Ptolomaeus king of Aegypt suffered many wrongs and iniuries at his owne subiects hands, and being by them expelled out of his kingdome came to Rome. C. Caesar in a battell at sea vanquished the Venetians, a State and citie seated in the very Ocean. Last of all, it reporteth the exploits by his lieutenants performed with like good fortune.


Of the CV. booke.
AT what time as the assembly for election of magistrates might not bee holden, by reason of the negatives and inhibitions of C. Cato a Trib. of the Com. the Senate generally in token of sorrow put on mourning weed. M. Cato in his sute for a Pretorship, suffered a repulse, and Vatinius was preferred before him. The same Vatinius when he would have impeached the law, whereby were graunted to the Coss. the provinces for five yeers, unto Pompey the government of both Spains, unto Crassus Syria and the Parthian war, and unto Caesar France and Germanie, was by C. Trebonius a Trib. of the Commons, and the first maker of the said law, committed to prison. A. Gabinius the Proconsull established Ptolomaeus againe in the kingdome of Aegypt, and disseized Archelaus whom they had set up for their king. Caesar after he had vanquished and put to sword the Germanes in France, crossed over the Rhene, and subdued that part of Germanie which is next thereto: which done, hee failed over into Brittaine with much trouble and dammage, by reason of the crosse and contrary winds whiles he was at sea; and hee sped little better when he was there: but after he had slain a mightie great number of men, he brought into subiection the rest of the Island.


Of the CVI. booke.
IVlia daughter to Caesar and wife to Pompeius departed this life, and had this surpassing honour done unto her by the people, as to be enterred in Marsfield. Many of the States of France revolted by the leading of Ambiorix a duke of the Eburones, by whom Cotta and T. Aurunculeius the lieutenants of Caesar, were by an ambuscado surprised and environed, and by meanes thereof they and the armies whereof they had the conduct, were put to the sword. And at what time as the campe of the other legions also were besieged, assailed, and with difficultie defended, and among them Q. Cicero, who was lord president of the Trevires; the enemies were by Caesar himselfe in person overthrowne in fight. M. Crassus intending to warre upon the Parthians, passed over the river Euphrates, and being vanquished in battell, wherein his owne sonne was slaine, after hee had rallied the broken ends of his armie, and retired them to a little hill, he was trained forth by the enemies (whose captaine was Su^^^as) to a parley and treatie of peace, and therupon attached: but because he would not suffer any indignitie and villanie alive, he made resistance, and in that struggling of his was slaine, and there an end of him.


Of the CVII. booke.
CAius Caesar having vanquished the Trevirs in Gaul, passed over the second time into Germany, but finding no enemie there to make head, returned into France, where the Eburones and other cities which had conspired, he overcame, put their K. Ambiorix to flight, and followed him in chase. The bodie of P. Clodius slain in the high way Appianeer Boville by T. Annius Milo a competitor of the

Consulship, the Commons of Rome burnt in a funeral fire within the Curia [Hostilia.] By occasion of a seditious variance between two Candidates for a Consulship, namely Hypseus Scipio, and Milo, who with force and armes tried the issue by the eares; Cn. Pompeius was sent out of the Senate to suppresse such enormious debates. Created Consull hee was the third time in his absence, and (which prerogative no man ever had) alone without Colleague. A commission was granted forth to sit upon the death of Pub. Clodius, by vertue where of Milo was iudicially condemned, and had his iudgement to bee banished. A bill was proposed, that C. Caesar notwithstanding he was absent, should bee accepted of in the election of Consuls, albeit M. Cato was unwilling thereto, and gaine said it. Moreover, this book containeth the warlike acts atchieved by C. Caesar against the Gaules (who generally in maner revolted) under the leading of Vercingetorix the Arvernian: also the painefull sieges of certaine cities, and namely of ^^^^gesse. Avarium in in Be^ie. Biturige^, and Clerment. Gergovia in Auvergne.


Of the CVIII. booke.
CAius Caesar vanquished the Gaules at Alize. Alexia, and received all the cities in France which had been in armes, into his protection upon their submission. C. Cassius the treasurer of M. Crassus, put the Parthians to the sword, who had passed over into Syria. M. Cato sued to be Consul, and had the repulse, and Ser. Sulpitius with M. Marcellus were created Consuls: C. Caesar subdued the Beau^^ifin. Bellovaci, with other States and cities in Fraunce. Also it containeth the strife and debate betweene the Consuls about sending of a successor to C. Caesar. For M. Marcellus the Consull was earnest in the Senate, that Caesar should come to stand for a Consulship, considering that hee by a law made in that behalfe was to govern his provinces unto that time of his Consulship. Last of all the martial deeds of Mar. Bibulus in Syria are here reported.


Of the CIX. booke.
THe causes of the civile warre and their beginnings be here set downe. The contentions likewise about a successor to be sent in lieu of Caesar, who denied flatly to dismisse the armies, unlesse Pompey also discharged his forces. Moreover, this booke treateth of the actions preserved by C. Curio, a Tribune of the Commons, first against Caesar, and afterwards for him. When there passed an act of the Senate, that one or other without faile should bee emploied to succeed Caesar, M. Antomus and Q. Cassius, two other Tribunes (for that by their negatives and inhibitions they seemed to crosse and stay that act) were expelled the citie and a commission was directed by the Senat to the Consuls, and to Cn. Pompeius, in this forme, To see that the Commonweale sustained no dammage. C. Caesar intending to persecute his adversarie, came with his armie into Italie. Corsinius together with L. Domitius and L. Lentulus he tooke prisoners, and let them goe again: but Cn. Pompeius and the rest of that side he utterly chased forth of Italie.


Of the CX. booke.
CAius Caesar besieged Massiles, which had shut the gates against him: who leaving C. Trebonius and D. Brutus at the siege, tooke a iourney into Spaine, where hee received upon submission Lu. Afranius and C. Petrcius, two lieutenants of Pompeius, together with seven legions at Leridae. Ilerda, and dismissed them all with no harme done unto them. Varro also a lieutenant of Pompeius, together with his armie came under his obeisance. The Gaditanes he enfranchised and gave the citie unto. The Massilians after two overthrowes in sea fight, and a long siege which they had endured, submitted at last and were at the devotion of Caesar. C. Antonius a lieutenant of Caesar, fought an unfortunate battell against the Pompeians, and in Illyricum was taken prisoner: during which war, the inhabitants of Oderso. Opitergium, beyond the river of Padus (who were the auxiliaries of Caesar) seeing their chained bridge of boats and lighters locked up and fast shut within the enemies ships, rather than they would fall into the hands of their enemies, ran one upon another, and died every one. C. Curio, a lieutenant of Caesar in Africk, after hee had fought against Varus a captaine of the Pompeians, was together with his armie defeited and cut in pecces by Iuba king of Barbarie. Mauritania. C. Caesar passed the seas over into Greece.



Of the CXI. booke.
CAius Caecilius Rufus the Pretour going about to raise commotions and seditions all that ever he could within the cittie, and having solicited the commons upon the hope of cancelling all debtbookes, was first deposed from his magistracie, and after driven out of the cittie. Then hee banded with Milo a banished person, who had levied a power of fugitive outlawes: but both of them in this preparation of warre came short of their purpose and were slaine. Cleopatra queen of Aegypt was by her brother Ptolomaeus expelled out of her kingdome. By reason of the avarice and crueltie of Q. Catulus the Pretour, the (...). Cordubians in Spaine together with two Varian legions, revolted from Caesar and his side. Cn. Pompeius was besieged by Caesar at Brundusium: but having woon his skonces with the guards thereto belonging, and that with great losse of the adverse part, he was delivered from the siege. But after the warre was translated into Thessalie, he was at Pharsalia in a battaile overthrowne. There remained still within the campe, Cicero, a man by nature framed for nothing more unfit than war. Caesar pardoned all those of the adverse part, who after his victorie submitted themselves to his mercie.


Of the CXII. booke.
HErein is related the fearfull condition of that side which was vanquished, and how they fled in sundrie parts of the world. Cn. Pompeius being arrived in Aegypt, by the commaundement of Ptolomeus the king, as yet an infant under age; and persuasion of Theodorus his teacher and schoolmaster, who might of all other over-rule the K. most; also of one Photinus, was killed by the hands of Achilla, one who had a warrant to execute that feat, even in his very barge before hee was landed. But Cornelia his wife, and Sextus Pompeius his sonne, fled backe into Cyprus. Caesar three daies after the foresaid victorie, pursued Pompeius: and when Theodorus presented unto him his head and signet of his finger, he was displeased in his heart and wept withall. He entred Alexandria without any daunger, notwithstanding the troubles and hurliburly therein. Caesar was created Dictatour. Hee restored Cleopatra unto the kingdome of Aegypt: and when Ptolomeus made warre by their advise and counsell who moved him to murder Pompeius, Caesar vanquished him, with great perill and hazard of himselfe. As Ptolomeus fled, his vessell wherein he was embarked ran a ground in Nilus, and there stucke fast. Besides, this booke sheweth the painfull and toilsome iourney of Marcus Cato with his legions, in Affricke through the desert wildernesse: and the war which Cn. Domitius fortunatly managed against Phraates the Parthian king.


Of the CXIII. booke.
VVHen the side of Pompeius had gathered heart and strength in Affrick, the soveraigne command thereof was committed to P. Scipio: for Mato who before had equal power and commission with him, gave place and yeelded his right. Now when it was debated in counsell as touching the subversion and utter ruine of Vtica, for that the cittie was so inclined and favourable to Caesar: whiles Marcus Cato stood stifly in this point, that it should not be destroyed; and Iuba [the king] was earnest to have it rased: the guard and keeping thereof was committed unto Cato. The sonne of Pompeie the great, having levied forces in-8 paine (the conduct and leading whereof, neither Asranius nor Petreius were willing to undertake) made fresh warre upon Caesar. Pharnaces king of Pontus and sonne of Mithridates, endured no time of warre, but was soone overcome. At what time as P. Dolabella a Tribune of the commons, raised seditions in Rome, by meanes of a law by him published in the behalfe of bankerouts, That the old debts should be stricke^; off, and new order taken with the creditors: upon which occasion there ensued a commotion of the commons; M. Antonius, General of the Cavallerie, entred the cittie with a strength of sould ours; and eight hundred of the commons lost their lives. Caesar discharged all his old souldiours, who in a mutinie demanded the same: and having sailed into Affricke, he fought against the power of king Iuba with exceeding great ieopardie.


Of the CXXIIII. booke.
CAecilius Bassus a gentleman of Rome and one of Pompeies side, levied warre in Syria. Sextus Caesar was both forsaken by the legion which revolted and went to Bassus, and also slaine.

Caesar vanquished Scipio the Pretor, Afranius, and Iuba, neer Tapsos, and forced their campe. Cato bearing thereof, wounded himselfe at Viica: and when his sonne came betweene and staied his hand, his hurt was dressed, but in the very cure, as the wound was newly launched againe, bee yeelded up his vitall breath and died, in the nine and fortieth yeere of his age. Petreius killed Iuba and himselfe. P. Scipio in his ship was beset round, and at his death, which he tooke manfully, he uttered a brave speech: for when the enemies made search and enquirie what was become of the General, The Generall (quoth he) is well. Faustus and Afranius weere slaine. Catoes sonne had his pardon. Brutus, a lieutenant of Caesar vanquished the Bellovaci in France that rebelled.


Of the CXV. booke.
CAesar rode in foure triumphs over France, Aegypt, Pontus, and Africa. A solemne feast he made, and exhibited unto the people shewes of all sorts. Vnto M. Marcellus a man of Consular dignitie, at the request of the Senate he graunted leave to returne: which Marcellus, could not enioy the benefite of this grace and favour, by reason that hee was murdered at Athens by Cn. Magius Chilo, his owne client and vassale. Caesar also held a review of the citie, wherein were enrolled a hundred and fiftie thousand citizens, whereas before there had been numbered foure hundred thousand. See the calamitie of civile warre. He tooke a voiage into Spaine against Sex. Pompeius: and after many rodes and expeditions on both sides made, and some cities forced, in the end he attained one finall victorie for all before the citie Munda, but with exceeding perill and daunger. Sex. Pompeius escaped and fled.


Of the CXVI. booke.
CAius Caesar triumphed a fift time over Spaine. When many honors and those right excellent, were by the Senate ordained for him, and namely among the rest, to be called Pater Patriae; to bee sacrosanct and inviolable; and withall to bee Dictator for ever; he gave occasion to bee envied and maliced: first in that, when the Senate bestowed upon him these honourable titles, at what time as hee sat before the temple of Venus Genetrix, he rose not up nor did reverence unto them: secondly, for that when Mar. Antonius the Consul and his colleague ran among the Luperci, he laid upon his yvorie chair of estate the wreath or diademe which was by him set upon his head; thirdly, because hee deprived from their authoritie Epidius Marullus and Caesetius Flavus, two Tribunes of the Commons, who went about to bring him into hatred, as if hee affected and sought to bee king. Vpon these causes, a conspiracie was contrived against him, wherof the principall heads, were M. Brutus, C. Trebonius, and C. Cassius, also one of his owne side D. Brutus; by whom he was massacred in the court of Pompeius, and received three and twentie wounds: and by these murderers was the Capitoll seized and held. But after that the Senat had passed a decree to forget this murder, the conspirators aforesaid, having received for their securitie the children of Antonius and Lepidus, as hostages, came downe from the Capitoll. By the last will and testament of Caesar, C. Octavius (his sisters sonne) was made his halfe heire, and adopted into his owne name. The bodie of Caesar being brought into Marsfield, was by the Commons burnt in a funerall fire before the Rostra. The honor and dignitie of Dictatorship was for ever abolished. Chamaces a person of most vile and base condition, avowed himselfe to bee the sonne of C. Marius: and whiles hee raised a sedition among the credulous common people, was cut off and killed.


Of the CXVII.
CAius Octavius from out of Epirus repaired to Rome: for Caesar had sent him thither before, when he minded to make war in Macedonie, where hee was received with For as he entred the citie, the circle of the sunne gathered about it an Halo round like a rainbow or guirland, even over his head. good tokens and fortunate presages, and withall tooke upon him the name of Caesar. In this confusion of state and tumultuous trouble of all things, Lepidus attained by stealth to the highest pontificall dignitie. But when M. Antonius the Consull demeaned himselfe most lordly and proudly in his place, and by force published a law as touching the exchange of the provinces; and withall offered much wrong and abuse to Caesar, when he made request that he would assist and stand with him in revenge of those that murdered his unckle: Caesar, to the end that he might make both himselfe and the Commonweale strong against him, raised and excited those old soldiors whom he had before placed in Colonies. The fourth legion also, and that called Martia, fel from Antonius and turned their ensigns to Caesar. After this, more besides (by occasion

that many through the crueltie of M. Antonius were murdered every where in their tents because they were once suspected, revolted from him and raunged to Caesar. D. Brutus purposing to stop Antonius, as he should passe into Lumbardie, seized upon Mutina with an armie. Finally this booke declareth the running too and sro of those on both parts, to be possessed first of the provinces, and the preparation for warre.


Of the CXVIII. booke.
MArcus Brutus in Greece (under a pretence of maintaining the slate, and enterprising warre against Antonius) possessed himselfe of the armie whereof Vetinus had the conduct, together with the province. Vnto Caesar, who first tooke arms in defence of the C.W. the government and commaund of a Pro-pretour was graunted, with the Pretorian ornaments and ensignes thereto belonging, and withall, he had this addition to bee reputed Pro-praetor. M. Antonius besieged D. Brutus in Mutina. Certaine embassadours were sent unto him from the Senat as concerning peace, but little availed they in the treatie and conclusion thereof. The people of Rome generally betooke them to armes and souldiours habite. Brutus in Epirus subdued C. Antonius the Pretour together with his armie.


Of the CXIX. booke.
CNeus Trebonius was by the guilesull practise of P. Delabella, slaine in Asia: for which fact Dolabella was by the Senat iudged an enemie to the state. When Pansa the Cos. was at the point to loose the field against Antonius, A. Hirtius the other Cos. come with his armie to the rescue, discomfited the forces of M. Antonius, and so made the fortune of both parts alike and equall. Afterwards, Antonius being vanquished by Hirtius and Caesar, fled into France, and ioined unto him M. Lepidus with the legions which were under him. Both he and all they who were within his holds in garrison, were by the Senat attainted. Aulius Hirtius, who after his victorie was slaine within the campe of the enemies, and L. Pansa, who died of a wound received in an unfortunate fight, were both buried in Mars field. To C. Caesar the onely captaine of the three now remaining alive, the Senate was not so kind as they ought to have bene: for having ordained that D. Brutus (who by Caesar had bene delivered from the siege at Mutina) should triumph, they made no thankful remembrance of Caesar and his soldiors, as was meet and requisite. For which discourtesies, C. Caesar (being reconciled to M. Antonius by the means and meditation of M. Lepidus) came to Rome with an armie: and when they were sore dismaied at his comming, who had before intreated him so unkindly, created Consul he was [with Q. Poedius] being but nineteen yeeres of age, or not full twentie, for he wanted one day, as Velleius Paterculus saith.


Of the CXX. booke.
CAesar now Consull, proposed a law for an inquisition to be made of them by whose meanes his father Caesar was killed: and by vertue of that law, M. Brutus, C. Cassius, and D. Brutus were endited, attainted and condemned in their absence. When together with M. Antonius, Asinius Pollio also and Munatius Plancus had ioined their armes, and therby much strengthened and augmented their forces, D. Brutus whom the Senat had sent with commission to pursue Antonius, being now forlorne of his owne legions and fled, was at the commaundement of Antonius (into whose hands hee fell) killed by one Capenus a Burgonian. Caius Caesar contracted a peace with Antonius and Lepidas, wherein it was capitulated betweene them, that those three should for five yeres have the soveraignetie over all, onely to set in order and establish the state of the commonweale: to wit, himselfe, Lepidus, and Antonius, and ech of them proscribe and outlaw their own adversaries and enemies. In which proscription were conteined the names of very many gentlemen of Rome, and one hundred and thirtie Senatours, and among the rest, were L. Paulus the brother of M. Lepidus, L. Caesar the unckle of Antonius by the mother, and M. Cicero, slaine by Popilius a legionarie souldiour, in the 63 yeere of his age: whose head and hands was set upon the Rostra. Moreover this booke sheweth the deeds by M. Brutus atchieved in Greece.



Of the CXXI. booke.
CAssius, who had in commission from the Senate, to pursue by force of armes Dolabella iudged an enemie to the commonweale, being borne out by the authoritie and warrant of the State, possessed himselfe of Syria, and became maister of three armies which were in that province. He besieged Dolabella within the citie of Laodicaea, and did him to death C. Antonius was likewise taken prisoner, and by commaundement from M. Brutus, slaine.


Of the CXXII. booke.
MArcus Brutus had but bad successe in fight against the Thracians. After that all the provinces beyond-sea, and the armies, were under his hands and Caius Cassius; they complotted both together at Smyrna, what course to take for the future warre. Publicola the brother of M. Messala they vanquished, and yet by common consent they pardoned him.


Of the CXXIII. booke.
SExtus Pompeius the sonne of Magnus, assembled together out of Epirus a number of outlawes and banished persons, and having a long time with this armie robbed only by way of piracie, and setled as yet upon the possission of no peece upon the land, first seized Messana a towne in Sicilie, and afterwards the whole province. And after that A. Pompeius Bithynicus the Pretour there, was by Pompeie slaine; he the said Pompeie in a battaile at sea vanquished Q. Salvidienus a lieutenant of Caesar. Caesar and Antonie with their armies sailed over into Greece, with intent to wage warre against Brutus and Cassius. Quintus Cornificius in Africke over came in plaine fight T. Sestius the captain of the Cassian faction.


Of the CXXIIII. booke.
CAius Caesar together with Antonie fought at Philippi with variable fortune against Brutus and Cassius, in such sort, as the right points of both battailes had the better, and ech of them woon the others campe. But the death of Cassius was it that turned the ballance and made the difference: who being in that point that reculed and went downe, supposed that the whole armie and maine battaile was discomfited, and so killed himselfe. In another conflict afterwards, M. Brutus also was overcome, and there ended his life: for hee intreated Strato (that accompanied him in his flight) to set his swords point toward him, and so hee ran upon it. The same did some fortie more of the principall Romanes: among whom was Q. Hortensius likewise slaine.


Of the CXXV. booke.
CAius Caesar left Antonie (for to his share fell the empire of some provinces beyond-sea) and returned into Italie. He divided lands among his old souldiours. The mutinies of his owne armie by occasion that the souldiours were seduced by Fulvia the wife of M. Antonius and rose against their Generall, be repressed with exceeding daunger and ieopardie: L. Antonius the Consull and brother to M. Antonius, by the ungracious counsell and persuasion of the said Fulvia, made warre upon Caesar: and having procured those nations to side and take part with him, whose lands had bene made over and assigned to the old souldiours aforesaid; and withall, discomfited M. Lepidus, who with an armie had the government and guard of the cittie, entred perforce by way of hostilitie into Rome.


Of the CXXVI. booke.
CAius Caesar when hee was but three and twentie yeeres of age, besieged L. Antonius in the towne Perusia: and when he made sundrie offers to sallie out and break forth, he repelled and chased him back, yea and for very hunger forced him to yeeld and come under his obeysance. As for Antonie himself and all his souldiours, he pardoned, but Perusia he rased and destroied. Finally after hee had brought all the

armies of the adverse side to submit and to stand to his mercie, he finished the warre without effusion of any bloud.


Of the CXXVII. booke.
THe Parthians under the conduct of Labienus, who had taken part with Pompeie and that side, invaded Syria; evercame Didius Saxa, the lieutenant of M. Antonius, and held all that province to their owne use. M. Antonius being sollicited by the instigation of his wife Fulvia to make war against Caesar, put her away, because she should be no let nor hinderance to the accord and agreement of the three rulers in their Triumvirate. Then made hee a peace with Caesar, and tooke to wife his sister Octavia. Q. Salvidienus who complotted mischiefe against Caesar, he detected and bewraied: who being thereupon condemned, wrought his owne death. P. Ventidius a lieutenant under Antonius, overcame the Parthians in battaile, and chased them forth of Syria, having before slaine their leader Labienus. When as Sextus Pompeius held Sicilie, and being a neere enemie and ill neighbour to Italie, staied the transporting of corne and victuals by sea: upon request Caesar and Antonie made peace with him for this consideration, that he should governe Sicilie as his province. Also herein are set forth the troubles and warres of Africke.


Of the CXXVIII. booke.
VVHen Sext. Pompeius infested the sea againe with roverie and piracie, and would not make good and maintein that peace, which he had accepted of Caesar, he was forced upon necessitie to undertake war against him, and in two navall battailes sought with doubtfull event. L. Ventidius a lieutenant of M. Antonius, vanquished the Parthians in Syria, and slew their king. The Iewes also were by Antonies lieutenant subdued. Herein besides, is set downe the preparation for the Sicilian warre.


Of the CXXIX. booke.
SVndrie battailes were fought at sea against Sex. Pompeius with variable issue: so as, of Caesars two fleets, the one which was conducted by Agrippa, got the better hand: but the other, led by Caesar himselfe, had the overthrow: and the souldiours being set a shore, were in exceeding great daunger. But afterwards Pompeius was defeated, and thereupon fled into Sicilie. Marcus Lepidus crossed the seas from out of Africke, pretending to take part with Caesarin his warres to bee made against Sex, Pompeius. But when Caesar warred upon him also, he was abandoned of his armie, and being content to resigne up the honour and dignitie of the Triumvirat, obteined life. M. Agrippa was by Caesar rewarded with a navall crowne, an honour to no man ever graunted before him.


Of the CXXX. booke.
MArcus Antonius, in his rioting time with Cleopatra, entred into the province of Media with eighteen legions, and sixteene thousand horsemen; levied warre upon the Parthians, and after he had lost two of his legions, seeing nothing chieve well on his side, he retired back. But efisoons the Parthians followed him in chase: whereupon in exceeding fearfull hast and great perill of the whole armie, he returned into Armenia: so as in 27 daies he fled three hundred myles. About 8000 men hee lost by tempesteous weather. But he was himselfe the occasion that he suffered these daungerous tempests, over and besides the Parthian warre which unfortunately he enterprised, because he would not winter in Armenia, for hast he made to his love Cleopatra.


Of the CXXXI. booke.
SEx. Pompeius having once submitted, whiles he was in the protection of M. Antonius, went about to levie warre against him in Asia: but by his lieutenants he was surprised and slain. Caesar staied the mutinie of the old souldiours, which with great mischiefe was begun: he subdued the Iapides; the Dalmatians and Pannonians. Antonius having upon his word and promise of safetie and protection

trained unto him Artauasdes the king of Armenia, commaunded him to be laid up fast in Irons, and gave the kingdome of Armenia to his owne sonne, which he had by Cleopatra: for now by this time he began to avow her as his wife, upon whom long before he was enamoured and doted in love.


Of the CXXXII. booke.
CAius Caesar subdued the Dalmatians in Illyricum. When M. Antonius for the love of Cleopatra (who bare him two sonnes, Philadelphius and Alexander) would neither returne to the cittie of Rome, nor after the time of the Trium virat expired, resigne up that dignitie and government, but prepared for warre, which he ment to levie against Rome and Italie: and thereto had raised a mightie power, as well of sea-forces as land; and withwall, had renounced the marriage with Octavia, Caesars sister, and sent her a letter of divorcement and so put her away: Caesar therupon, with an armie sailed into Epirus. The battailes at sea afterwards, and the horse-fights, wherein Caesar had the upper hand, be here related.


Of the CXXXIII. booke.
MArcus Antonius was with his fleet overcome at Actium, and thereupon fled to Alexandria: where being by Caesar besieged, and in utter dispaire of recovering his former state, but mooved especially upon a false rumour that was spred, how Cleopatra was killed, hee slew himselfe. When Caesar was now master of Alexandria, Cleopatra likewise because she would not fal into the hands of the conquerour, willingly procured her owne death. Caesar upon his returne to the cittie of Rome, had the honour of three triumphs: the one over Illyricum, another for the victorie at Actium, and the third in regard of Cleopatra. Thus when he had finished all civill warres which had continued one and twentie yeeres, M. Lepidus, the sonne of Lepidus the Triumvir, conspired against Caesar: and whiles hee went about to make warre, was prevented and slaine.


Of the CXXXIIII. booke.
CAius Caesar having set the state in good order, and reduced all provinces into one certaine forme, was surnamed also Augustus: and the moneth Sextilis to honour his name was likewise so called. Whiles he sat in visitation at Narbone, he tooke a review of the three provinces of Gaule, which his father (Caesar) had conquered. The war which M. Crassus made against the Bastarnians, Maesians and other nations, is here reported.


Of the CXXXV. booke.
THe warre which M. Crassus levied against the Thracians, as also which Caesar made upon the Spaniards is here set downe. Likewise how the Salassians, a people in habiting the Alpes, were utterly subdued.


Of the CXXXVI. booke.
RHetia was conquered by Tiberius Nero, and Drusus his wives sonne. Agrippa Caesars sonne in law died: and by Drusus was the generall review and taxe taken.


Of the CXXXVII.
THe citties of Germanie situate on either side the Rhene, are by Drusus besieged and assailed. The tumult and insurrection which arose in France, by reason of the foresaid review or tax, was appeased. An altar was erected unto Divus Caesar at the confluent of the two rivers,Saone. Arar and Rhosne. Rhodanus: and a priest was created to offer thereupon, one C. Iulius Vercondaridubius an Heduan.


Of the CXXXVIII. booke.
HEre is shewed how the Thracians were by L. Piso tamed. Likewise how the Therusci, Temachateri, the Cauci, and other nations of Germanie beyond the Rhene, were subdued and brought under

by Drusus. Octavia the sister of Augustus departed this life, having buried before, her sonne Marcellus: whose monuments still remaine, namely the Theatre and gallerie bearing his name, as if they had bene dedicated by Marcellus.


Of the CXXXIX. booke.
THe warre which Drusus mannaged against the nations beyond Rhene is heere reported. In which warre the chiefe persons that fought were Senectius and Anectius, Tribunes of the Norvians state. Nero the brother of Drusus, subdued the Dalmatians and Pannonians. Peace was contracted with the Parthians: and upon capitulation the militarie ensignes were delivered up againe to their king, which first under the conduct of Crassus, and afterwards of Antonius were lost, and by them taken.


Of the CXL. booke.
IN this booke is related the warre which Drusus fought against the citties and states of Germanie beyond the Rhene. Himselfe fell from his horse and brake his leg, by reason that his horse fell thereon: upon which sracture he died thirtie daies after. His corps was by his brother Nero (who being sent for upon the newes of his sicknesse, rode in post) brought through to Rome, and bestowed in the tombe of C. Iulius. Praised he was by Caesar Augustus his father in law, and at his funerals for a finall farewell, he was entituled with many honourable names.



To the Reader.
THe historie of Titus Livius, as it was by him passing well penned otherwise, and none thereto in Latine comparable: so in the calculation and date of times, which they call Chronologie (a singular light to give direction in a storie) hee is somewhat defective and unlike himselfe, so as he cannot be praised without exception. But if a man consider the huge volumes which he wrate, and namely in his declining age; the varietie and disagreement of former authours, whom he followed, who before him faulted also in this point, and where of he much complaineth; he is to be pitied and pardoned, if his memorie failed somewhat in this behalfe. For where shal we find a man that is (...), omnique exparte beatus? And in deed, if we weigh the thing aright, as it was a profession by it selfe and required a whole man: so, many travailed therin alone, and they that performed well but it only, deserved high thanks and commendation. And to let many others passe, how worthily is T. Pomponius Atticus praised by Cicero his friend, for digesting the head magistrates of seven hundred yeeres in one booke? As for Verrius Flaccus, who lived in the time of Augustus Caesar, he collected a catalogue and register of the chiefe rulers of Rome, how they were chosen successively, and how they governed from time to time: which as hee caused to be cut and engraven in a marble wall within the Capitoll for a perpetuall memorie to posteritie: so, thereby he deserved also to have his owne statue erected neere the temple of Vesta, for an everlasting memoriall of so great a benefit. But what is there so durable, that time wasteth not? what so conspicuous and evident, but troublesome daies may overwhelme and hide in oblivion? Thus amid that havock which the Goths and Vandals made in Italie, there remained not one fourth part extant of Livies storie: thus in that generall confusion of Rome, these records of Verrius Flaccus were defaced, broken, and buried deepe under the ruines of the capitoll and other stately edifices. But the revolution of times, as it hath brought to light againe some reliques of Livie; so it hath discovered also those marbles of Verrius: for in the time of Paule the third, Pope of Rome, the fragments of the said stones were digged out of the ground betweene the Roman Forum and the broad street Via Sacra; brought forth also and laid abroad in the capitol to the view of the world. To which, as the true touch-stone, certain learned men of late daies have laid to their owne labours in that kind, namely Bartholomew Marliau of Millaine, Onuphrius Panvinius of Verona, Charles Sigonius of Modena, and Francis Robortellus, of (...), or Fo^^^ (...). Vdine: and comparing the same as also the annales gathered by Henry Glareanus before time, with the foresaid antiquities of Verrius late found, have recovered much light to the his
torie of Livie, and supplied his wants in that behalfe. I thought it not amisse therefore to gratifie my countriemen in some measure this way also, and deliver the same in English which I found annexed to the best editions in Latine, as followeth.



A CHRONOLOGIE TO THE HISTORIE OF T. LIVIVS, COMPILED ACCORDING TO THE TABLES AND RECORDS OF VERRIVS FLACCVS IN THE CAPITOLL, AND SET OUT VVITH MOST PROFITABLE notes, shewing the varietie and disagreement of Authors about the names of the Romane Consuls.
The causes of dissent and repugnance in Historiographers, as touching the computation and relating of the yeeres from the foundation of the citie of Rome.
SInce wee entend to setfoorth a Kalender or Register of the Consuls mentioned in the historie of Livius, which by reason of uncerteintie, obscuritie, and discordance of the times, is so darke and intricate, that not onely the learned and most experienced Historians of our age, but the best writers of the Romane storie in auncient time estsoones complained thereof; we thinke it not impertinent to our purpose, briefely to search into the causes of this dissent: which beeing once knowne, wee may follow that account of the times, which seemeth to accord best with the historicall truth, and to be grounded upon the authoritie and testimonie of the most authenticall and approoved writers. For seeing that an historie (as Cicero hath most truly said) is the witnesse of times; what is more unfitting for it, than to misse and want that which is the chiefest point therein, and without due and diligent reckoning made, to be ignorant what was first and what was last done? It seemeth therefore, that of this diversitie in the account and computation of the Romane Consuls, there be three especiall causes.
The first is, for that the yeere in which the first Consuls entred into that magistracie, is by the Romane Historiographers, not after one sort but diversly set downe. For Dionysius (a most diligent writer of the acts of Romans) in his first booke, in the end of the fourth and beginning of the fifth, reporteth, that the KK. reigned 244 yeeres: which also is collected out of the yeerely computation gathered by Varro and approoved by the authoritie of others. For Messala reporteth, how upon the expulsion of the KK. which hapned in the 244 yeer after the foundation of the citie, the Romans were ruled under the yeerly government of Consuls. To which opinion Livie also subscribeth in the end of his first booke, saying, that the regiment of KK. continued 244 yeeres from the foundation of the citie, unto the freedome and libertie thereof. But Eutropius in his 1 booke writeth, that the seven Kings reigned in Rome 243 yeers: which account agreeth with Sex. Ruffus in his abridgement. In which varietie this is to be observed, that these two last named, reckon the yeeres onely of every kings raigne, and out of the whole and grosse summe leave out the yeere of the interreigne, which Dionysius, Livius, Messala, and the rest insert betweene, and that right truly and upon good reason: for after the death of Romulus, the interreigne continued one yeere. Consider then and examine the thing diligently, and yee shall find, that in reckoning the yeeres of every kings reigne in severall, Eutropius and Sextus Ruffus both, attribute as many yeeres to the kings government, as Denis, Livie, and the rest: so that this difference is not much. But others there be (as Eusebius hath delivered in his Chronicles) who write, that the KK. reigned but 243 yeeres, and take the interregencie withall: whose judgement, Orosius, Iornandes, and Bede seeme to follow. For Orosius in the 5. chap. of his second booke recordeth, that Brutus the Consull in that very yeere, namely the 244, put his owne sonnes to death.

the KK. reigned not precisely so many yeeres just, but, for that some (and namely Romulus) went over some months and daies, Dionysius and Livius reckoned them for a full yeere, and laid it to Tarquinius Priscus: but the other above named together with Eusebius, left out those odde months and daies (because they made not up a complet yere) and assigned but onely seven and thirtie yeres to the raign of king Priscus. To this may be added another reason of the like nature: namely that, as divers authours have doubtfully reported the yeere, so they are no more certain of the month and day on which the first Consuls began their government. For Plutarch in his problemes writeth, that they entred upon the first day of Ianuary: but Macrobius in the first book of his Saturnalia and seventh chapter, seemeth to imply that they tooke their Consuls place the first of Iune, saying (according to the opinion of others) That Iune tooke the name of Iunius Brutus: for tha^ in this month, and namely upon the first day thereof (according to a vow wherto he was obliged by the banishment of Tarquine) hee solemnized a sacrifice to the goddesse Carnea upon mount Coelius. Others againe write, how this hapned the foure and twentieth of Februarie: grounding herein upon the old antiquities and records of stone, together with the testimony of Ovid, who in the second booke of his Kalender thus writeth:
King Tarquine with his sonnes then fled: The Consuls yeerly beareThe soveraigne rule at Rome: since that, no king ever reign'd there. Some there are besides of opinion, that they entred the first day of Iulie: and of their mind seemeth Ioachimus Perionius to be, in his third booke of the Greeke magistrates. In this repugnancie therefore of opinions, very doubtfull it is which to follow. As for that of Plutarch, it hath long since bene clearly and learnedly confuted by two great and excellent clerkes, Onuphrius Panvinius, and Sigonius: since it is plaine that it was the sixe hundred yeere from the foundation of the cittie, and not before, that the Consuls began their government the first of Ianuarie. But in setting downe the certaine day, they themselves are not well agreed. For Sigonius after Marlianus inclineth this way and saith, That the first day of the Consuls government was the sixe and twentieth day of May. But Panvinius thinketh that the first Consuls were created the 26 day of Februarie. And this diversitie is found not onely in the day when the first Consuls tooke their government, but also in the time after ensuing. What was the usuall day of any moneth wheron the Consuls were wont to begin their magistracie, a man can hardly find any certaintie before the sixe hundred yeere from the citties foundation. In the foure and fortieth yeere verily after the kings were exiled, the first day of Iuly, as Livie writeth, was the ordinarie day for yeerely magistrates to take their place: but how many yeeres following, that order continued, or at what time it was changed, hee sheweth not before he come to the three hundred and two yeere, and then he faith in his third booke, That the thirteenth of May was the ordinary day for magistrates to begin their government. Thus much at leastwise we may collect by him (when he saith that this time was solemne) that he meant not two or three yeeres onely, but many. For that is properly called solemne, which is by law usually observed. Againe, wee read a little after the beginning of the first booke, that this time also was altered: for whereas the fift day of December was the usuall time that magistrates began to execute their office hee saith, that it was changed, in these words, The principall nobles and lords of the Senat, were it upon the default or the infortunitie of their Generals (that so shamefull an overthrow was received) opined and advised, not to expect and stay for the ordinary time of the election, but presently to creat new militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie, who should enter into their government the first day of October, etc. Which opinion of theirs imported, and the whole house accorded to it: whereupon the other Tribunes gain said it. But Sergius and Vrginius withstood this Act of the Senate, and denied flatly to resigne up their dignity before the eleventh of December, the ordinary day of taking their othe and beginning their magistracie. And a little after, within one page, hee sheweth that the usuall day of entrance into government was altered from the eleventh of Decemb. to the first of Sept. saying, When this speech was received with a general applause of al men, and that the nobles and lords of the Senate etc. But this day was kept but a few yeares. For about sixe yeeres after, he saith, by occasion that both Consuls lay sicke, it was ordained that the first of Iuly should be the ordinary day. And this also I find was chaunged to another, whatsoever it was, for named it is nor; and therfore uncertain. But this hapned in the four hundred and thirteenth yere after the cities foundation: as Livie about the beginning of the 8 booke sheweth in these words; And when the Consuls were commaunded to resigne up their magistracie before the time, to

the end that new Consuls might the sooner be created, against so great troubles of war, etc. For in these words [The sooner etc.] he declareth that the usuall day of entrie into governement was then chaunged. But as it is not certainely set downe what day this was; so the other was as well knowne: for soone after, and namely the eight yeere following it was appointed, to wit, the first day of Iuly. Immediately therefore (quoth he) the new Consuls, L. Aemylius Mamercus, and Cn. Plautius were enjoined that day (even the first of Iuly) on which they began their office, to agree and part betweene themselves their provinces. As for the month, wherein for the most part the assembly for election of magistrates was holden, we read it was Februarie; like as the thirteenth of March was ordinarie for them to begin their government. For this day held alwaies, during the second Punicke war and the Macedonian, and longer than so. Thus Livie testifieth in many places (which to quote is needlesse) as in the sixt book of the second Punicke war, and in the beginning of the first booke as touching the Macedonian. By which, who seeth not that there is great varietie in the moneth and day both, whereupon the magistrates were wont to begin their rule? But wheras all the certainerie in computation and account of the time, dependeth upon a precise, exact, firme, and settled reckoning of yeeres, months, and daies; and seeing that in Livies storie it is neither expressely shewed, what yeere, month, or day, the magistrates began their government, nor precisely noted when the reckoning altered; considering also that nothing therin is more wavering and inconstantly delivered, than the very usuall day of entring into magistracie: what marvell is there, if authours dissent so much about the computation of the times? whiles one beginneth at this moneth, another at that: whiles some I say ascribe these magistrates created, to this yeere, others attribute the same to another?
Thirdly, there being great difference betweene Dionysius and Livie, as well about the reckoning of the times and yeeres, as the acts and affaires that therein-passed; all seemeth to have risen hereupon, that the purpose of Livie was not to deliver exactly the acts and occurrents of greatest antiquitie which happened in the State of the people of Rome, and which by many writers aforetime had ben most diligently set down and penned to posteritie: but to record and write those things especially, which from the time a little before the second Punick war had been atchieved by the people of Rome, unto the age wherein himselfe lived. But because (as Polybius most wisely and pithily writeth) a generall storie cannot be understood by particular registers; and for that an Historiographers studie and endevour ought to be emploied rather in an universall treatise, than in particular discourses: therefore, least so great a peece of work as his, wanting a beginning, should seeme maimed and unperfect; in the formost 20 books he slightly and breefely ran over the deeds of the people of Rome from the foundation of the citie, unto the beginning of the second Punick war. But Dionysius professing purposely to describe the auncient monuments of the Romanes, thought it his part to overpasse and omit nothing worthie of remembrance, but most curiously and exactly hath delivered al things pertinent, either to the calculation of the times or discourse of affaires, in so much as those things whereof Livie hath scantly made three bookes, hee hath declared at large in eleven. Here upon, if a man read in Dionysius, the auncient beginning and originall of the Roman empire, and examine well the times how they are by him digested, and compare the same with the brevitie in Livie, no doubt he will preferre the diligence of the former before the overhastinesse of the later. But if the indifferent reader consider the purpose and intent of them both, he will yeeld unto either of them their due praise, and whereas Livie making hast to other matters, hath either let passe or more slightly handled some things, he will judge him worthie rather to be excused than reproved for it.
To these three causes above rehearsed, others also may be adjoined; namely, the ordering of the yeers by Romulus, and the varietie as touching that yeere wherein Rome was founded: but it may suffice only to touch these, and point unto them with the finger. Howbeit this we thinke good to advertise and admonish the reader by the way; that albeit in the digesting and reckoning of the Coss. we have set before our eies to follow the marble tables and monuments of Verrius Flaccus, and according thereunto have framed and applied the computation of the yeers: yet that yeer before the 250, as also the other, which Verrius rejected, we have inferted with the rest, that our accompt might fall out just with the sum of the yeeres, as they are collected by Varro. Which, before us, Onuphrius Panvinius a most learned man hath done in his Kalender, thinking that the yeere which Verrius and they that followed him rased out was the 423, and therefore he hath put it to the rest without Consuls, according to the Capitoline records.


Of the computation of times usually observed by the Romanes, and of the yeere of the cities foundation.
THe calculation of yeers was taken and observed by men in old time divers and sundrie wayes. The Achaeans (as wee read) received it from the revolution of the starres: the Argives from their women priests; as for example, if Chrysis such a yeere were chiefe priest to offer sacrifices, they counted the number of yeeres from the said Chrysis. But many have derived and fetched the course and consequence of their acts and affaires, from the yeeres before Troy was built, or else after the winning thereof. Howbeit, from the 408 yeere after the captivitie thereof, by occasion of the Olympian games, which Hercules first instituted in the honour of his great grand^^re by the mothers side, and which by his sonne Iphiclus (or Iphitus, as some will have it) were renewed that yeere: from that time (I say) they began to number the yeeres by the Olympiads, especially among the Grecians, whose storie (as Eusebius affirmeth) is not of any credit but from the time of the first Olympias. The Hebrewes (like as other nations in the East) received the denomination and reckoning of the yeeres from their kings. The Atheniens, from their Eponymi (as they called them) but that in their Archaeresiae, [that is, the elections of their magistrates] which were woont to hold for certain daies about the beginning of the yeere, they counted in this ^ise, (...) the tenth or eleventh of the first Prytancia. And hereof it seemeth, that the name commeth (...); as if from thence, their acts received both the time and also the name. After the example of the Atheniens and others, the Romanes reckoned their daies, made their calender, and registred their acts by such and such Consuls; noting thereto otherwhiles the yeere from the cities foundation. Mary, about it there is much more diversitie in authors, than about that wherein the first Consuls took their government. And seeing the cleering and declaration of that point is not impertinent to this place, briefly wee will rehearse the opinions of authors as touching the time when the citie of Rome was founded.
To begin therefore at them, who (according to the common received opinion of others) have written longer agoe and further off, Timaeus Siculus (I know not upon what reason induced) hath recorded, how the citie was built by Romulus much about the time that Carthage in Africke by the Tyrians, namely in the 38 yeere before the first Olympias.
L. Cincius (a Senatour of Rome by calling) faith it was in the fourth yeere of the twelfth Olympias. Q. Fabius Pictor (amost auncient writer of the Romane storie and of greateest credit) attributeth it to the first yeere of the eight Olympias.
Polybius Megapolitanus, and Diodorus Siculus, quote the second yeere of the 7 Olympias.
Apollodorus, Q. Lutatius Catulus, C. Cornelius Nepos, Eratosthenes, M. Porcius Cato, Dionysius Halicarnassaeeus, and Theophilus Antiochenus, name the first yeere of the 7 Olympias.
M. Verrius Flaccus, (the avoucher of the Capitoline stone-records) T. Livius, C. Iulius Solinus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others, will have it to be the fourth yeere of the 6 Olympias.
L. Taruntius Firmanus, M. Terentius Varro, T. Pomponius Atticus, M. Tullius Cicero, Augustus Caesar, C. Plinius Secundus, Plutarchus Chaeronaeus, Domitianus Caesar Augustus, P. Cornel. Tacitus, Cassius Dio, A. Gellius, L. Septimius Severus Augustus, Censorinus, M. Iulius Philippus Augustus, Eusebius Pamphil. Caesariensis, Eutropius, Paulus Orosius, Paulus Diaconus Longibardus: and after the time of C. Caesar Dictatour, the common opinion of the people of Rome (which wee also goe by) will have the citie to be founded the third yeere of the sixt Olympias.
But by what motives and reasons each one of these authours is induced, and whereby they would seeme to confirme their severall opinions, needlesse it is in this place for to declare: both because the speculation hereof pertaineth properly to another profession, and also for that (besides Piutarch in Romulus, Solinus in the I chapter of his Polyhistor, and Camers in his annotation thereupon) the question hath been so throughly handled by Onuphirius Panvinius in the first booke of his Calender, that the thing requireth no further examination.
Now for the day on which the foundation of the citie of Rome was laid by Romulus, it was the (...) eleventh day before the calends of May, called Parilia or Palilia. Now was this a festivall day to Pales the goddesse of shepheards, celebrated by the said shepherds upon the eleventh calends

of Maie, in the fields and countrey villages, for the chasing away of wolves, for the preservation of their sheepe and cattell from diseases, or for the safe yeaning and bringing forth their young: whereupon they were called Parilia. Of this matter writeth Propertius in his 4. booke in this wise:
A feast there was, Palilia, our fathers did it call,And on that day they first began, for Rome to build a wall.
Ovid also in the fourth booke of his Fasti:
A time full meet they chose, with plough the plot to marke,Dame Pales was at hand, and so began the warke. The same is avouched by M. Tullius, Plutarch, Solinus, and others. And that these Palilia were solemnized ordinarily the eleventh day before the calends of May, appeareth as well by the old marble Romane calenders, as also by the same authors before rehearsed.


Of the first soveraigne magistrates of the citie of Rome, namely, of the KK. who were in number seven.
ALl sorts of policies and governments in a Common-weale which are set downe and named by auncient Writers, the cittie of Rome (were it by the fatall course of destinie, or upon some troubles in the State) hath received and endured every one: so as no common-weale in manner there can be found, wherein they succeeded so one after another, as they did in the very cittie of Rome. For in the beginning, the KK. ruled it; but when they for their excessive outrage and inordinate lust exercised upon their citizens and subjects, were deposed and expelled, the Consuls (and after them the Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie) held the soveraigntie. But in processe of time, when this frame and forme of Common-weale (simply the best) was by the outrage of the two Gracchi (Saturninus and Drusus Triburies of the Commons) put out of joynt and troubled, untill such time as their power and authoritie was by Sylla rent in twain, and the Commons disseized of their lands and killed: then the administration of the common-weale was restored againe to the Nobles and principall persons of the citie. But at length when it was oppressed againe by the civill warre of Pompey and Caesar, the soveraigne rule of the State was devolved upon the empire of Caesar alone; wherein, being first shaken a few yeeres before, through the wicked insolencie and lust of the three Triumvirs, it continued untill the time that it fell to utter ruine. Wee therefore will briefely goe through all these sorts of government, in that successive order as they followed one after another, and first begin with the KK.

37 Romulus the first K. of the Romans, reigned 37 yeeres.
ROMULUS, the founder of the citie, reigned 37 yeeres: for so many Livie assigneth unto him. Likewise Dionysius in the first booke, which hee repeateth also in the second: and Piutarch in Numa dissenteth not from them, howsoever in Romulus, hee writeth that hee departed this world in the 37 yeere of his age. Solinus in like manner rehearsing his worthie actes, attributeth unto his reigne 37 yeeres. Onely Eutropius (1. booke 4. chap.) alloweth unto him 39 yeeres: but Cuspinian thinketh verie well, that the copie is corrupt. This prince having reigned (according to the more common received opinion of authors) seven and thirtie yeeres; in which time; he laid the first ground-worke of the Roman Empire,

with excellent lawes and ordinances, and established both civile and also militarie discipline, departed this life upon the Nones of Julie, which day was called afterwards, Nonae Caprotinae: by occasion that he in mustering and reviewing his armie at the lake of Caprae, was conveighed out of mens sight: whereupon the people fled as amased at the suddaine death of their king, as Plutarch and Dionysius doe witnesse. This Romulus after his (...). deification was named Quirinus, of which surname Ovid in his (...). Kalender giveth these reasons.

Sive quod hasta quiris; Priscis est dicta Same read thus, Latinis. Sabinis:
Bellicus a telo, venit in arma. astra Deus:
Sive suo regi nomen posuere Quirites,
Seu quia Romanus vicerat, but ^^ruptly. Romanes iunxerat ille Cures.


A spear, old Sabins Quiris cald, which Romulus us'd in fight:
This martiall man a god became, and so Quirinus hight,
Quirites eke his subjects hege, their K. this name might give:
Or els the Curets, who he broght with Romans for to live.

That hee was base borne, and could not avouch his owne father, beside other writers, Plutarch especially affirmeth in his Theseus. Howbeit the old opinion went currant, that he was by Mars begotten in stealth of a vestal virgin, Ilia, Rhea, or Sylvia, for so many names ther goe of her: and that first he was called Romus, of Ruma, which signifieth a teat or pap, and afterwards by way of flatterie, Romulus.


1 Interregents.
FOr one yeere after the death of Romulus, the nobles fell to variance, and strove who should be king: but by reason, that no one person excelled above the rest in that state so newly founded, there grew severall factions and debates in their head-corporations. They who wer descended from the Sabines (because after the death of Tatius none of them raigned with Romulus in equall societie) were desirous to have a king created out of their bodie, because they would not forgoe their hold and possession in the Empire. But the old Romanes could not away with a straunger-king. Howbeit, as different as they were in affections, al were willing to set up a king, as having not tasted yet the sweetnesse of libertie. The Peeres moreover mightily seared (by reason that the neighbour States bordering round about were provoked against th^m) least some forraine force might assaile their cittie left thus without soveraigne government, and the armie without a leader. Whereupon the two hundred nobles agreed among themselves to enter into an association of rule, and made ten Decuries: and in every Decurie created one to have the sovereigntie over the rest. These Senatours were then too in number, as Livie saith, and according to Plutarch a hundred and fiftie. But Dionysius writeth, that there were two hundred of the Sabines, and as many Romanes. After this they cast lots; and their Decurie unto whom the lotterie first fell, ruled the cittie: howbeit not all of them at once, but one alone had the regall ornaments, and the lictours going before him. Five daies hee governed and no longer; and so by this order in course, the nobles of every Decurie governed the citie fiftie daies. For after five daies determined, hee whose lot was first to governe in that Decurie, delivered up unto the second the imperiall dignitie together with the ensignes thereof: and hee againe, when his five daies were expired, unto a third, and so to the tenth. Thus when these tenne first Interregents had passed one 50 daies, a second Decurie of Senatours in like manner ruled the citie other 50 daies; and thus they went round through all untill they had fulfilled a yeeres space in this regencie. This government was of the thing it selfe called Interregnum, which name it still retained afterwards, and the men likewise were named Interreges. In this yeare therefore was the magistracie of Interregents first devised among the Romanes. And not onely after the death of Romulus the State was ruled by Interregencie, but also after the decease of Numa, Tullius, and Ancus, kings. In like manner during the time of the free State and Commonweale, after the time of yeerely magistrates expired, the said governement tooke place very often, before the creation of new: for they held the assembly for elections, wherin new governours were by the people created. Now the office and charge of this Interregent was, during the time of his regencie (which ordinarily passed not five daies) to execute all those functions in the citie, which belonged either to KK. or Consuls; namely, to minister justice, to rule the Commonweale, to hold a Senate, and there to propound the affairs of State, and lastly to summon the generall assembly for chusing new magistrates. As touching the beginning of Interregents, Dionysius in his second booke, Livie in his first, Plutarch in Numa, Sext. Ruffus, Eusebius and other old writers, have written at large.


43 Numa Pompilius the second K. raigned 43 yeares.
ONe yeere of Interregencie being thus accomplished, the people of Rome thought

this a greevous and heavie manner of government; and the Commons grumbled that their servitude was many-fold more than before, as having two hundred lords over them in steed of one. Which when the Senatours perceived, they agreed at last upon this point, That the old Senatours should create a king, whome they would, so hee were not one of their owne bodie and degree. Wherupon Numa Pompilius (for that in justice and wisdome he excelled all other) was called out of Cures a cittie of the Sabines, to bee their king. That hee reigned three and fortie yeers, all accord, save Eutropius, Eusebius and Cassiodorus (late writers) who set downe but one and fortie, as Onuphrius and Sigonius have observed. Of this king, Dionysius in the second booke, Livie in his first, Solinus in his second chapter, Plutarch, Plinie, and Eutropius in his life; in like sort, Valerius Maximus have delivered much in record. Hee died not much above the age of eightie yeeres as Plutarch writeth; for born he was (as he testifieth) the same day whereon Romulus laid the first foundation of the citie, namely, the twelfth Calends of May. Now for the name of Numa, some say it was the fore-name of Pompilius. But out of Sextus Pompeius it appeareth, that neither Tullius nor Numa were fore-names, as also by this conjecture, for that the sonnes of Numa are by Dionysius called by other sundry names diverse from the familie. Some thought therefore that Numa, Ancus, Aruns, Volusus, Drufus, Faustus, Iulus, Mammurius, and certain other surnames, were at first forenames, as Marlianus in his Annales hath verie well noted.


32 Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome, reigned 32 yeeres.
NVma being deceased, the Interregencie tooke place again: during which time an act of Senat passed, wherein by the approbation of the Commons and advise of the nobles, Tullus Hostilius was created the third king of the Romans, in the fourescore and one yeere after the foundation of the cittie. Who having rased Alba, commaunded the Albans to be translated to Rome. Their Commons hee made free denizens, and the principal nobles he tooke into the order of Senators. After Numa he reigned 32 yeeres, as all writers most constantly affirm. He perished as Dionysius witnesseth, by occasion that his house was on fire, wherein his wife and children and all their houshold besides were consumed and burnt. Some say, that his pallace tooke fire by lightening through the ire of the gods, for that hee had forlet some sacrifices and holy rites: others write, that it was occasioned by the trecherous practise of Ancus Martius, who reigned next after him. Of him Dionysius writeth in his 3 book. That hee carried before him the name of Hostus it appeareth by this, that both his father and grandfire bare the said name. A prince hee was, not onely farre unlike to Numa, but also more fierce and stout than Romulus.


24 Ancus Martius the fourth K. of Romanes, reigned 24 yeeres.
KIng Tullius beeing departed this life, there was an Interregent by the Nobles declared, who held the assembly for Election in the 114 yeere from the foundation of the city: wherein the people created Ancus Martius the fourth K. of the Romanes, and the Senators approved the same. He built Hostia a town 16 miles distant from the citie of Rome; and fought seven battels. Livius, Dionysius, and Solinus say, that he reigned 24 yeeres; but Eusebius, Eutropius, and Cassiodorus, 23. What death hee died, neither Livie in his first book, nor Dionysius in his 3, do set down: notwithstanding that by them his noble acts are set out at large. Now Ancus (as Sex. Pompeius hath reported) is hee called, who harh an arme bowing inward, so as it cannot be put straight forth.


38 L. Tarquinius Priscus the fifth K. of Romans reigned 38 yeeres.
THis Tarquinius beeing left by Ancus (when he died) guardian to his children, was the first that ambitiously intercepted the kingdome to himselfe; hee sent the sonnes of Ancus, during the time of Interregencie, out of the way, as it were to hunting, and made an oration unto the people to win their harts and affections to him: and so with the suffrages of the people, and authoritie of the nobles, he was by the Interegent declared K. in the 170 yeere after the foundation of Rome, and in the 41 Olympias. This noble prince as wel for warlike prowesse as peaceable pollicie and government, at the length (being above fourscore yeere old) was forelaid by the secret traines of the two sonnes of Ancus Martius, in the eight and thirtie yeere of his raigne,

according to Livie and Dionysius, whose judgement we follow: or in the 37, as Solinus, Messala, Ruffus, Eutropius, Cassiodorus, Eusebius, and Bedas write; like as wee have before shewed. Priscus hee was surnamed afterwards, because hee lived before Tarquinius Superbus, saith Sex. Pompeius, unto whom accord Dionysius and Laurentius Valla: who writeth, that the addition of Priscus was given unto him not by men of that time wherein hee lived, but by the age following. But Livie sheweth plainely, that he had the surname of Priscus given him, even then when he came first into the citie, because he was borne before Superbus. Hee also was called Lucumo, and was the sonne of Demaratus the Corinthian, descended from the familie of the Brachiades.


44 Servius Tullius the sixt K. of the Romans reigned foure and fortie yeeres.
AFter Priscus Tarquinius was slain, presently Servius Tullius was the first that (without any election of the people, yet with the general consent of the Nobles) tooke upon him the Romane kingdom, in the yeere from the foundation of the citie 176. Concerning whose conception, wee must not let passe that which Plinie writeth in the 36 booke after this manner. During the reigne of Tarquinius Priscus, there appeared sodainly the genital member of the masculine sex upon the herth where the fire was kept, and thereupon presently a captive woman and bondservant of Tanaquil the queen, named Ocrisia, sitting there by the fire side, conceived and was with child; and so was Servius Tullius borne, who succeeded in the kingdome. Afterwards as the boy lay asleep within the kings pallace, his head was seene on a light fire, and supposed he was the son of the familiar Lar of that house. In which regard, he instituted first the Compitalia and plaies to the Lares. Concerning his birth, Plutarch hath written more in his booke of the Romans fortune. By the crastie and subtill devise of his wives mother Tanaquil, he attained to the crowne in the fourth yeere of the fifth Olympias, and reigned 44 yeeres: but by the vilanous complot of Tarquinius his sonne in law, and Tullia his owne daughter and Tarquins wife, hee was most impiously slaine in the verie street; which thereupon was called Sceleratus. As touching the yeeres of this kings reigne, some controversie there is among writers: for Livie, Dionysius, and Solinus (whom wee have followed) write, that hee reigned 44 yeeres: but Messala Corvinus, Sex. Ruffus, Eutropius, Eusebius, Cassiodorus, and Bedas, 34, and not above. Howbeit, in adding those ten to the reigne of Tarquine afterwards, they hinder not this grosse summe and computation of the yeeres: for they set them downe 35, which Livie, Dionysius, and Solinus, make but 25. This K. tooke the name of Servius, by occasion of his owne fortune, for that his mother Ocrisia a captive (but a most beautifull and wise woman of Corniculum) bare him during her bondage: but Tullius hee was called, by the name of his fathers kindred, as Dionysius writeth in his fourth booke, reckoning up many acts by him atchieved.


25 L. Tarquinius Superbus the seventh K. of Romans, ruled 25 yeeres.
IN the two hundred and twentieth yeare after the foundation of the citie, L. Tarquinius the younger having killed Servius Tullius, entered upon the Romane kingdome with force of armes, not by Interregent, ne yet any right of law. Superbus hee was named for his cruell demeanour, in that hee forbad to commit to earth the dead corps of his father in law, by him murdered; giving out that Romulus likewise died and lay unburied. Hee was the sonne of L. Tarquinius Priscus the king; as Q. Pictor, Au. Gellius, Licinius Macer, Verrius Flaccus and Livius have written. Howbeit Dionysius out of L. Piso in his Annales, by most strong reasons disproveth their errour, and by the certaine computation of the yeeres sheweth how it cannot possibly be so, but rather that hee was the sonne of Tarquinius Priscus his sonne, who died in the life of Priscus. Five and twentie yeeres he reigned according to Livie in his first book. Dionysius in his fourth, and Solinus in his Polyhistor. But Cassiodorus, Eusebius, Eutropius and Bedas, ascribe unto him five and thirtie yeeres, adding unto his raigne those ten yeares which they tooke from Servius Tullius, and thereby giving occasion of errour to the later writers. Of him Dionysius, Livie, both the Plinies, Gellius, Macrobius and Eutropius have written much. Collect then, into one summe the yeares of these kings raigne, and thereof will arise the number of two hundred fortie foure.




Of the first election of Consuls.
THis is the second chaunge of the common-weale, by occasion that Superbus the K. as well for his insolent and proud government, as for the villanie offered by Sextus the kings sonne to Lucretia, was expelled, and libertie recovered: wherupon the soveraigne government yeer by yeere was committed to two men, who first were named Pretours, for that they were set over the people: then, Iudges, because they decided their controversies: and lastly Consuls, in that they advised and provided for the good of the common-weale: as Cicero in the third book of Lawes declareth in these words: Let there be two invested in roiall government; and of ruling, judging, and counsell giving, be they called Pretours, Iudges, and Consuls: let them have also the soveraigntie of commaund in warre. Now the first Consuls or Pretors were created by Sp. Lucretius (father of Lucretia, and Interregent for the time) in a generall assembly by the voices of the Centuries, according to the commentaries of Servius Tullius the king. The first Consull had all the rights; prerogatives, and regall ensignes of the KK. this onely provided, that both of them should not have the rods and axes carried before them, for feare of presenting any terror to the people. Both of them were chosen out of the Patritij: which for this intent I advertise the Reader of, that the progresse of the common-weale might be knowne; seeing that in processe of time they came to be created out of the commons also. Moreover, as concerning the yeere, moneth, and day, when as the first Consuls entred their government, something were to be said in this place: but because we have spoken before of the varietie and dissention of Authors thereabout; therefore letting passe these circumstances, proceed wee to the very Consuls, who by the testimonie of all writers were first chosen; namely,

245 
L. Iunius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus.
IT is recorded by all writers, that L. Iunius Brutus, and L. Tarq. Collatinus, were the first Coss. or Pretors of the Rom. people: who in the end of the 244 yeer since the foundation of the citie, and upon the first day of March (after the Tarquins KK. the father and the son wer expelled the citie) in an assembly of the Centuries were solemnly pronounced and declared Coss. But after that Brutus had compelled his colleague Tarquinius to resign up his Consulship, either because hee was suspected for the affinitie and name of the Tarquins (as L. Piso in Gellius the 15 book and 29 cap. Livie, Plutarch, and Cic. 3. Offic. doe write:) or by occasion of a variance between Brutus and Collatinus about the execution of Collatinus his sisters sonne, (as Dionysius reporteth) hee subelected in his place Pub. Valerius Volusius the sonne of Volusus, whose helping hand hee had used especially in banishing the KK. Of whose Consulship, Polybius in the third booke, Dionysius, Livie, Valerius Max. 4 booke 4 chap. Plutarch in Poplicola, and Plinie 36 booke chap. 15, have made mention. But Valerius, after that Brutus in his magistracie was slaine by Aruns the sonne of Superbus (for the king his father had levied warre against the Romans) in a generall court of all the Centuries, tooke unto him for his companion in government, Sp. Lucretius Tricipitinus the father of Lucretia; and to him (being the elder) submitted the preheminence of soveraigntie. And soone after, within few daies upon his death, (for hee was very aged) hee assumed unto him M. Horatius Pulvillus for his colleague in the Consulship. The said Valerius was called Poplicola, for that during his magistracie, he enacted certaine lawes very popular, and namely, concerning the appeale from the Consuls to the people, and the receiving of the state-government from the said people, as Livius and Dionysius do witnes. In the vulgar

bookes, as also in the old written copies (whether by error or of purpose I wote not) wee read his name evermore Publicola, but still in one and the same signification. Only the letters are a little altered, which otherwise have much affinitie one with another, as Quintilian writeth, namely o with u, and p with b. For in antique titles and inscriptions, you shall read often Poplicus for Publicus. To conclude therefore, in the first yeere after the KK. were exiled, Coss. at Rome were these, L. Iunius Brutus, and Lu. Tarq. Collatinus, P. Valerius Publicola, Sp. Lucretius Tricipitinus, and M. Horatius Pulvillus.


246


P. Valerius II.


T. Lucretius.


THe Consulship of these two is recorded unto us by Dionysius, Livius, and Cassiodorus. Onuphrius Panvinius, giveth unto Lucretius the surname of Tricipitinus, both for that it was a peculiar addition to that house; and also, because by an ancient Chronologer in the records of Cuspinian, he is named Tricipitinus. Now for Publius, the Etymologie therof according to Sextus, is twofold. For some call him Pub. who hath ben brought up at the publicke charges: others again name him so, who was a ward before hee had his name given him.


247


P. Lucretius.


P. Valerius Poplicola.


LIvius calleth this Lucretius by the for-name of P. but other books of Titus Dionysius writeth, that P. Valerius Poplicola the third time, and M. Horatius the second time were Coss. Plutarch speaketh of the third Consulship only of P. Valerius. Onuphrius and Sigonius follow Dionysius. As for Cassiodorus, hee leaveth out altogether these Consuls.


248


Sp. Lartius.


T. Herminius.


AFter Poplicola the third time, and Pulvillus the second time Consuls, Dionysius hath placed Sp. Lartius and T. Herminius. The same dooth Cassiodorus. And the booke noted by Cuspinian, under an unknowne author, hath in it thus written, Poplicola III. and Pulvillo; Ruso and Aquilino; Valerio and Tuberto. Livie omitteth these Consuls, and in their place putteth downe M. Valerius and P. Posthumius: but as Sigonius thinketh, the fault is in the writers of the booke.
But that this yeere should necessarily come betweene, Onuphrius thinketh, according to the booke of M. Tullius Cicero entituled Brutus: and certain it is, that Verrius Flaccus in his Capitoline tables hath not rejected these Consuls. Now this name Lartius is derived of Lars, and so ought it to be written, and not Largius, as corruptly it is to bee seene in some coppies of Livie and Dionysius. As for the surname to Herminius, Onuphrius supposeth it to have been Esquilinus, both for that the mention of that surname appeareth in a fragment of the Capitoline marbles, as also because of what familie els it should be, no writer ever hath delivered. This Sp. Lartius was the brother of Titus Lartius the first Dictator, as writeth Dionysius.


249


M. Valerius.


P. Poslumius.


PLutarch, as also Dionysius and Livius, writeth, that this M. Valerius was brother to M. Valerius Publicola, and therefore truly is he said to bee the son of Volusus. Postumius for his surname had Tubertus. Witnesse Zonaras, together with Plutarch in Poplicola, and Dionysius in the fifth and sixt bookes. Him Dionysius calleth the brother of Quintus, where hee treateth of the Consular embassadours sent unto the Commons in the yeere 260. This Postumius as Onuphrius teacheth, was by old authours written without the aspiration (h) either because of Postea, Postumus, and Postimius, and so Postumius is derived, or for that in old time they wrote umus without the said (h.) Now is he called Postumius, who was borne last, as Cesellius witnesseth in his commentaries of ancient readings. Howbeit, lawyers pronounce the word with the aspiration, and call by that name him only, who was born after his fathers death: and with them accord Varro, and Plutarch in the life of Sylla.


250


P. Valerius IIII.


T. Lucretius.


DIonysius, Livius, Plutarch, and Cassiodorus report these for Coss. this yeere. But the registers of Cuspinian deliver unto us Poplicola the fourth time, and Tricipitinus. Valerius Maximus in the fourth booke and fourth chapter writeth thus, Valerius Poplicola began his Consulship with Brutus, and the same man bare three Consulates afterwards, to the great contentment of the people.


251


Agrippa Menenius.


P. Postumius.


DIonysius hath for Coss. this yeer, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus; and L. Postumius the second

time. Livie, Cassiodorus, Cuspinians book, and the Greek records disagree not from him. Valerius Max. 4. booke, 4. cap. corruptly calleth him M. Menenius Agrippa. Now Agrippae are they called, who are born into the world with extraordinarie throwes and birth-travels of their mothers, namely, not with their heads, but their feet forward, against nature.


252


Opiter Virginius.


Sp. Cassius.


LIvius, Zonaras, and Cassiodorus, name these Consuls barely thus. Dionysius yet is more liberall, calling Sp. C. Ssius, Vscellinus: and Opiter Virginius, Tricostus. But whome Dionysius calleth (...), Cicero in his Laelius tearmeth Cassius Becillinus. And Cuspinians kalender, Viscellinus. For first of Viscus commeth Viscellus, and so from thence they derive V. Scellinus. Opiter (to note that by the way, as Sex. Pompeius saith) is hee, whose father died before his grandsire. And the word soundeth thus much, as if hee were born after his fathers death; or because he taketh his grandsire for his father.


253


Postumius Commius.


T. Lartius.


LIvie, Dionysius, Zonaras, and Cassiodorus name these simply thus. But Cuspinians Kalender, giveth to Postumius the surname Auruncus, and to Lartius, Ruffus. And those whome Cuspinians booke nameth Ruffi, the Greek registers by another word but to the same sence, call Flavi.


254


Sev. Sulpitius.


M'. Tullius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus allow to these no surnames at all. The Sicilian records give to Salpitius the addition of Camerinus, like as the Kalender of Cuspinian; and to Tullius of Longus: as also doth Dionysius, who writeth, that Manius Tullius died in the time of his magistracie, and that in his place there was none substituted, because the yeer was welneer at an end. Of this M'. Tullius, Cicero speaketh in his Brutus, saying, As if I should avouch my selfe to be descended of M'. Tullius the Patritian, who in the tenth yeer after the expulsion of the KK. was Cos. with Ser. Sulpitius. This surname Manius, as Sext. Pompeius saith, commeth hereupon, that some one was born mane, i. in the morning, like as Lucius, who entred into the world by day light. And in another place, this Manius (qd. he) consecrated the field Nemorensis, from whom many noble and famous man sprung, and continued many yeeres. Whereupon arose the proverb, Multi Manij Aricia, ^ther bee many Manij at Aricia. Moreover, he was called Servius, who came of parents (either both or one at least) whiles they were in bondage, or els, who when his mother was dead, lived still in her wombe, and so was saved.


255


C. Vetusius.


T. Ebutius.


THe forename of this Vetusius or Veturius in some copies of Livie, as Marlian sheweth in his annales of Consuls, is Caius: in other Cneus: in Cassiodorus, Lucius: in Dionysius Publius: who also surnameth Veturius, Geminus: and T. Ebutius, Helua; and in some place (...), but faultily; for the Latin writers also affirm his surname to be Helua. The Greeke records likewise have Helua and Geminus. Moreover, they that write him Vetusius, imitate the auncient manner of putting s. for r. as when they call men Fusij, Valesij, and Papisij. But they who call him Veturius follow the latter usage. Of this matter Livie speaketh in the yeer 292.


156


Q. Clalius.


T. Lartius.


THus say Livie and Cassiodorus: but Dionysius surnameth T. Lartius, F^avus; and Q. Claelius S^culus: to whom accord the registers both of Cuspinian and Sicilie. This T. Lartius is the same, as appeareth by Dionysius, who before was Consull: and therefore is his surname Flavus rightly added. The house of the C^alij, as also of the Iu^ij, Servilij, Geganij, Curiatij and Quintilij descended from the Albanes first, as Dionysius writeth.


257


Au. Sempronius.


M. Minutius.


THus Livie and Cassiodorus deliver unto us these Coss. But Cuspinians registers and the Sicilian, surname them Atratinus and Augurinus. And Dionysius nameth them A. Sempronius Rhaetinus, and M. Minutius Augurinus, albeit he maketh no mention of Augurinus, but in the second Consulship of Minutius. As for Aulus hee was so called, who being new borne, was nourished and fostered by the gods.


258


Au. Postumius.


T. Virginius.


THus are these Coss. set down by Dionysius, Livie, and Cassiodorus. And to them verily the Greek records put to the surnames of Albus

and Caelimontanus. But the booke of Cuspinian ad Regillensis and Tricostus besides: so that by him they are thus written, Au. Posthumius Albus Regillensis, and T. Virginius Tricostus Caelimontanus.


259


App. Claudius and P. Servilius.


LIvius and Cassiodorus record these for Consuls this yeare. The registers as well of Cuspinian as Sicilie, Sabinus and Priscus: But Dionysius more fully, App. Claudius Sabinus, and P. Servilius Priscus. This App. Claudius was the top of the Claudian kinred, first named Actius Clausus, and afterwards App. Claudius; who from Regillus, a citie of the Sabines (wherupon he was called Sabinus Regillensis) came to Rome in the two hundred and fiftieth yeere after the foundation of the citie, and was raunged among the Patritij, as Livie, Dionysius, and Suetonius in Tiberius make report. This man was grandsire to that App. Claudius the Decemvir. As touching his forename, there is some difference; wherof ye may see Onuphrius and Marlianus in their Kalendars.


260


A. Virginius and T. Vetusius.


THese are thus set downe by Livie and Cassiodorus, as here they be named. Dionysius writeth them, Au. Virginius Montanus, and T. Veturius Geminus. The register of Cuspinian, barely Montanus and Geminus. The Sicilian, Caelimontanus and Geminus. Montanus and Caelimontanus are both one. Paedianus upon the Oration of Cicero for Cornelius, calleth these Consuls, Au. Virginius Tricossus, and L. Veturius Cicurinus: wherby it may be understood, that both of them had two surnames, to wit, the one, Tricostus Caelimontanus: and the other, Geminus Cicurinus; for so elsewhere other writers testifie. Cuspinianus observeth, that this Cicurinus, is also called Coturnius by some writers.


261


Sp. Cassius and Postumus Cominius.


SO Livius and Dionysius. Of them speaketh Cicero also in his Oration for Cornelius. But Cuspinian his bookes set soorth unto us, Viscellinus and Auruncus. The Sicilian records, Aruncus, and Vitellinus. And that these same were Consuls together in this yeere, and entred upon their government the first of September, sooner than the custome was, as Dionysius writeth.


262


T. Geganius and P. Minutius.


DIonysius in the beginning of the seventh booke nameth for Consuls this yeere, T. Geganius Macerinus, and P. Minutius. The same doth Livius in the second book. Cassiodorus likewise and Eutropius. Orosius also in the second book and fift chapter, leaving out one of their surnames. But the Greeke records and Cuspinians book surname them both, the one Macerinus, the other Augurinus. And these are ordinarie surnames, this to the Minutij, and the former to the Geganij.


263


M. Minutius and Au. Sempronius.


SO Livie and Cassiodorus set them downe, omitting their surnames, as also the numerall note II. But Dionysius recordeth them fully in this manner, A. Sempronius Atratinus the second time, and M. Minutius Augurinus likewise the second time. This yeere reckoneth Dionysius for the nineteenth, after that Poplicola the Consull published the law of appealing.


264


Sp. Nautius and Sext. Furius.


AFter Au. Sempronius and M. Minutius Consuls, Dionysius bringeth in to succeed them, Q. Sulpitius Camerinus, and Sp. Lartius Flavus the second time. Cuspinian registers, Cornutus and Flavus: the Sicilian, Camerinus and Flavus. Moreover, Cornutus also is an ordinarie surname to the Sulpitij, as may be gathered out of the Capitoline tables of stone. And that these Consuls are not to bee left out, either according to the account of the Capitoll, or to make up and digest the summe gathered by Varro, appeareth by the triumph of P. Valerius, which would not fall to the yeere 279, if wee should deduct these Consuls out of the Kalender.


265


T. Sicinius and C. Aquilius,


NExt after the former Consuls, there followed according to Dionysius, C. Inlius Iulus and P. Pinarius Rusus Consuls.

Cuspinian his records deliver unto us, Iulus and Mamercinus: but the Greek, Iulus and Rufus. And that Mamercus is a surname to the Pinar^, appeareth by another place. These Consuls Livie over-passeth, like as the other the yeere before: upon whome, they that undertooke the explication of the Capitoline tables have noted, that there want Consuls for two yeeres. So that of himselfe the like may be said to that which he writeth in the ninth booke of Piso, in this manner [These Consuls, Piso bringeth in immediately after Q. Fabius and P. Decius, leaving out two yeeres whereof wee have reported that Claudius and Volumnius were Consuls in the one, and Cornelius with Martius in the other.] Whether he forgat them in the digesting of the Annales, or of purpose passed by them (notwithstanding he thought of those two couple of Consuls) it is uncertain. Moreover, the surname of C. Iulius, was transformed every where into Tullus and Tullius; but that it is to be read Iulus, both Marlianus and also after him Panvinius sheweth. For this surname Iulus is set from Ascanius the sonne of Aeneas, and from the said surname is derived the denomination of a familie; and therefore Virgill saith,
The Iulian house at Rome, first cameFrom Iulus great, a prince of name. And Livie speaking of the same in this wise faith; Which Iulus, the house of the Iulij avouch for the author of their name.


266


Sp. Cassius.


Proculus Virginius.


BVt to leave these things; Sp. Nautius and Sex. Furius, are by Dionysius, Livius, and Cassiodorus raunged Consuls in this yeere. In Cuspinian his Annales, there is Rutilius, the surname of Nautius, and likewise Viscellinus. But in the Sicilian, Nautius and Fusus.


267


Servius Cornelius.


Q. Fabius.


ACcording to Livie, the Consuls this yeere were T. Sicinius, and C. Aquilius; whome Dionysius and Cassiodorus name to be T. Siccius and C. Aquilius. The surnames of these, by the Greeke records and Cuspinians Kalender, were Tuseus and Sabinus. As for Aquilius, hee was so called (as Marlianus observeth) who was aquilo colore, i. of a duskish blacke, or brownish colour.


268


L. Aenrilius.


K. Eunius.


LIvie avoucheth Consuls for this yeere, Sp. Cassius and Proculus Virginius: and Dionysius, Sp. Cassius the second time, with Proculus Virginius. And Diodorus in his eleventh book, unto Virginius addeth the name Tricostas. The Greeke records, as also those of Cuspinian, make mention of Rutilius and Viscellinus. Now as concerning the name of Proculus, some think they be so called, for that they were born when their parents were old, quasi, Proculaetate progressi, i. farre stept in yeeres.


269


M. Fabius.


L. Valerius.


DIodorus in the said II booke, declareth Q. Fabius Vibulanus, and Servius Cornelius Cossus, for this yeeres Consuls. The same doe Dionysius, Livie, and Cassiodorus, saving that they leave out the surnames. But as touching the surname of Cossus, (that yee may be resolved) men were named Cossi in the old time, who had riveld and wrinkled bodies, like to the wood-wormes breeding in trees, called Cossi. Plinius in his 17 book and 24 chap. saith: Royot and wantonnesse hath brought up the use at the table of the daintier wood-wormes breeding in okes. Hereupon Saint Hierome against Iovinian: In Pontus (quoth hee) and Phrygia, it is counted high and delicate fare to eat Xylophagion: for so he calleth those plumpe and fat wormes which came of rotten wood, and among them are reckoned to yeeld a great revenue and commoditie to the housekeeper. Of them the Romanes tooke their names of Cossi, Cossutij, Cossanij, and Cossutiani.


270


Q. Fabius.


C. Iulius.


LVcius Aemilius the sonne of Mamercus, and Caeso Fabius the sonne of Caeso, are by Dionysius recorded the Consuls of this yeere. Livie and Cassiodore approove the same. Diodorus likewise, saving that hee addeth to L. Aemilius the surname of Mamercus: but they leave out the sore-names of their fathers. The Greeke records have Mamercus and Fabius. As for the surname of Mamercus, Dionysius giveth it unto Aimilius himselfe in his third Consulship. Moreover, Sex. Pompeius affirmeth, that the kindred Aemil^a tooke name of Mamercus the

sonne of Pythagoras the Philosopher, who for his singular humanitie and courtesie, was surnamed Aemilius. But as he saith, Aemilius is a name and not a surname. Now was this Aemilius the sonne of Mamercus, as witnesseth Dionysius.


271


K. Fabius.


Sp. Furius.


DIonysius hath for this yeeres Coss. Marcus Fabius Vibulanus, and L. Valerius Potitus. Dionysius, Livius, and Cassiodorus, M. Fabius and L. Valerius. The Greeke records, Fabius and Volusius: and finally Cuspinians booke, Fabius and Potitus.


272


M. Fabius.


Cn. Manlius.


DIonysius matcheth togither in the Consulship this yeere, C. Iulius and Q. Fabius. Livius and Cassiodorus, Q. Fabius and Caius Iulius. The Sicilian registers and Cuspinian, Iulius and Fabius.


273


K. Fabius.


T. Virginius.


DIonysius writeth, that Caeso Fabius the second time, and Sp. Furius Medullinus were Consuls this yeere: but Livie and Cassiodorus put in stead of them, Q. Fabius and C. Iulius: The Sicilian registers, as also Cuspinian, Iulius and Fabius.


274


L. Aemilius.


C. Servilius.


BY the testimonie of Dionysius, there followed Consuls next after, M. Fabius the second time, and C. Manlius. But Diodorus, Livius, and Cassiodorus, deliver unto us M. Fabius and Cn. Manlius for Consuls. The Greeke records, name Fabius the second time, and Cincinnatus. Cuspinians booke hath Vibulanus the second time. The Capitoline stone sheweth, Cn. Manlius the sonne of Publius.


275


C. Horatius.


T. Menenius.


LIvius, Cassiodorus, Diodorus, and Dionysius, make report of Caeso Fabius to have been Consull this yeere with T. Virginius: but the Sicilian registers, Fabius with Rutilus. Dionysius noteth that Caeso the brother of the Cos. who gave up his place, was a third Consul this yeere. And Livie saith, that T. Virginius Rutilus died in time of the pestilence the 290 yeere.


276


A. Virginius.


Sp. Servilius.


ACcording to Livie, Dionysius, and Cassiodorus, the Consuls this yeere were L. Aemilius and C. Servilius: but Diodorus nameth, Lu. Aemilius Mamercus with C. Cornelius Lentulus: the Sicilian registers, Aemilius with Esquilinus. Another fragment of the Capitoline stone, onely Structus Ahala: with Esquilinus substituted in his roume. Moreover, Mamercus (as Sext. Pompeius writeth) is an Oscane fore-name; who also reporteth, that the House Aemilia was so called of Mamercus the sonne of Pythagoras the Philosopher, who for his passing courtesie was surnamed Aemilius.


277


C. Nautius.


P. Valerius.


LIvius, Cassiodorus, Dionysius, and Diodorus, put down for Consuls, T. Menenius and C. Horatius. As for Diodorus, he addeth unto Horatius the surname of Pulvillus: and the Capitoline stone surnameth Menenius, Lanatus. And even so, both in Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian registers, are to be seen Lanatus and Pulvillus. Of these Consuls, Gellius maketh mention in the 17 booke and 21 chap. but not without fault.


278


L. Furius.


A. Manlius.


LIvius, Cassiodorus, and Dionysius, set downe for Consuls, A. Virginius and Spurius Servilius. Diodorus, A. Virginius Tricostus, and C. Servilius Structus. In Cuspinian his Kalender, Virginius, for his surname hath Rutilus: and the Capitoll marbles, give Structus to Servilius: the Sicilian records have both.


279


L. Aemilius.

Opiter Virginius, or

Vopiscus Iulius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus nominate for this yeeres Coss. P. Valerius and C. Nautius. Dionysius, P. Valerius Poplicola and C. Nautius. Diodorus, P. Valerius Poplicola, and C. Nautius Rufus. The Sicilian registers thus, Nautius and Poplicola. Cuspinian, Poplicola and Rufus. The Capitoll stones, have for Ru^^^, (...): like as Dionysius before in La^tius, for Ruf^^ putteth downe Flavus.



280


L. Pinarius.


P. Furius.


DIodorus this yeere nameth for Consuls, L. Furius Medullinus and M. Manlius Volso. Livius and Cassiodorus, record L. Furius and C. Manlius. Dionysius commeth with A. Manlius and Lu. Furius. Marlianus giveth warning to read Vulso, not Volso.


281


App. Claudius sonne of Appius.


T. Quintius.


DIonysius would have L. Aemylius Mamercus to be Consull the third time this yeer, with Vopiscus Iulius: but Livie, L. Aemilius and Opiter Virginius. Howbeit, he saith that in some Annales hee found Vopiscus Iulius, in steed of Virginius. And them, Diodorus, the Greeke records, and the avouchers of the Consuls tables within the Capitoll, have followed. In the fragments wherof is read Iulius, which is a surname of the Iulij. And therefore in the Sicilian registers, it is thus written, Aemilius and Iulius: but in those of Cuspinian, Mamercus and Vopiscus. Cassiodorus hath followed Livie. Moreover, Appius is a peculiar name of the Claudij, which no citizen els of Rome used: because it was a strangers name.


282


L. Valerius.


T. Aemylius.


LIvius, Dionysius, and Cassiodorus, name for this yeeres Consuls, L. Pinarius, and Lu. Furius. Diodorus, L. Penarius Mamercinus, and P. Furius (...), but faultily, as Sigonius and Onuphrius think. Of these Coss. M. Varro maketh mention, and Macrobius in the first booke of the Saturnalia.


283


T. Numicius Priscus.


A. Virginius.


DIonysius saith, the Consuls of this yeere were App. Claudius the sonne of Appius, surnamed also Sabinus, and T. Quintius Capitolinus. Livie leaveth out their surnames.


284


T. Quintius.


P. Servilius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus set downe for Consuls this yeere, T. Aemylius and L. Valerius. Diodorus, L. Valerius Poplicola, and T. Aemylius Mamercus. Dionysius, L. Valerius the second time, and T. Aemylius. The Sicilian registers yeeld us nothing but the bare names, Aemylius and Valerius; but Cuspinian, Potitus and Mamercus.


285


T. Aemylius.


Q. Fabius.


DIonysius hath for Consuls this yeer, A. Virginius Montanus (whom the Greek records call Caelimontanus) and T. Numicius Priscus. Diodorus, Livius, and Cassiodorus, conceale their surnames: and whome the Sicilian registers name Caelimontanus, Cuspinian calleth Nomentanus.


286


Q. Servilius.


Sp. Posthumius.


IN Dionysius wee read for this yeeres Consuls, T. Quintius Capitolinus, and Q. Servilius Priscus. Livius and Cassiodorus are silent for their surnames: but in Diodorus there bee T. Quintius, and Q. Servilius Structus. In Cuspinians Kalender, Capitolinus and Priscus: in the Sicilian registers, Caelimontanus and Priscus.


287


Q. Fabius.


T. Qui^^tius.


LIvius and Cassiodorus match together (...) Consulship for this yeere, T. Aemylius and Q. Fabius. Dionysius, T. Aemylius the II. time, and Q. Fabius. The Sicilian registers, Aemylius and Vibulanus. Cuspinian, Mamercus and Vibulanus. Diodorus, Aemylius Mamercus and Q. Fabius Vibulanus. This is that Fabius who afterwards was foure times Consull, and was the onely Fabius that survived, when the Fabij were slaine at Cremera: not a child at that time of fourteene yeers of age, but a serviceable and an active man of his hands, (as Dionysius reporteth) and was the son of Marcus, a man who had been Consull.


288


A. Posthumius Albus.


Sp. Furius Fusus.


THis yeere had for Consuls, Q. Servilius and Sp. Posthumius, as Livie and Cassiodorus report: but Priscus and Albinus, as Cuspinian saith. And by Dionysius his testimonie, Sp. Posthumius Albinus, and Q. Servilius Priscus the second time: but Diodorus nameth Q. Servilius and Sp. Posthumius Albinus. Howbeit, in the fragment of the Capitoll marble, Sp. Posthumius is surnamed Albus Regillensis, and not Albius, and so Marlian thinketh it ought to bee read.



289


L. Ebutius.


P. Servilius.


LIvius nameth T. Quintius and Q Fabius. Cassiodorus, T. Quintius the second time, and Q. Fabius the second time. Diodorus, T it. Quintius Capitolinus and Q. Fabius. Dionysius T it. Quintius Capitolinus the third time, and Q. Fabius Vibulanus the second time.


290


L. Lucretius Tricipitinus.


. Veturius Geminus.


ACcording to the Capitoline table, Aulus Pesthumius; out of Livie, Dionysius, and Cassiodorus, Pab. Furius Fusus, are noted for Consuls this yeere. Diodorus putteth to Furius, the other gentile surname Medullinus for Fusus. This Au. Posthumius was the soone of A. Posthumius the Dictatour.


291


P. Volumnius.


Serv. Sulpitius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus write, that there followed as Coss. this yeere, P. Servilius; but Dionysius nameth L. Aebutius and P. Servilius Priscus. Diodorus, Lu. Aebutius Elva and Pub. Servilius Stractus. The Sicilian registers shew Priscus and Flavus: Cuspinian, Elva and Priscus. The Capitoll stones exhibit unto us, P. Servilius the soone of Sp. P.N. i. the sonnes sonne of Publius, and surnamed Priscus.


292


C. Claudius, soone of Appius.


P. Valerius Poplicala.


LIvie, Cassiodore, and Denis, represent unto us as Consuls this yeere, L. Lucretius Tricipitinus, and T. Veturius [or Vetusius] Geminus: but Diodorus, L. Lucretius and T. Veturius Cicurinus. Cuspinian his Kalender, Geminus and Tricipitinus. The Sicilian registers, Tricipitinus and Veturius: the Capitoline monuments L. Lucretius Tricipitinus.


293


Q. Fabius Vibulanus III.


L. Cornelius Maluginensis.


LIvius and Cassiodorus prosesse for Consuls this yeere, P. Volumnius and Serv. Sulpitius Dionysius, P. Volumnius, and Serv. Sulpitius Camerinus. The Capitoll marbles have P. Volumnius Amintinus Gallus. Of The same Consuls Valerius speaketh, in his first book and sixt chapter.


294


L. Minutius.


C. Nautius.


LIvie and Dionysius name, P. Valerius Publicola, and C. Claudius Sabinus Consuls for this yeere: Diodorus, P. Velerius Poplicola, and C. Claudius Regillanus. The Sicilian registers and Cuspinian, call them Poplicola and Sabinus. The Capitoline marble hath this record, P. Valerius P.F. [sonne of P.] Volusi N. i. the sonnes sonne of Volusus, surnamed Poplicola: but Livie, Dionysius, Orosius, and they that have raunged the Consuls in the Capitoll, have reported that P. Valerius the Consull was flame in the battell against the bond slaves, who this yeere (under the leading of Ap. Herdonins the Sabine) held the Capitoll by force, and that in his stead L. Quintius Cincinnatus was substituted.


295


Q. Minutius.


C. Horatius Pulvillus


LIvius, togither with Cassiodorus, declare for Consuls this yeere, Q. Fabius the third time, and L. Cornelius Maluginensis. Dionysius, Q. Fabius Vibulanus the third time, and L. Conelius. Diodorus, Q. Fabius Vibulanus, and L. Cornelius (...). The Sicilian registers, and Cuspininan, Vibulanus and Maluginensis. The Capitoll marble, Q. Fabius Vibulanus the third time.


296


M. Valerius.


Sp. Virginius.


BOth Livie and Cassiodore, deliver unto us for Consuls, L. Minutius and C. Nautius. Dionysius, L. Minutius, and C. Nautius and second time. Diodorus, L. Minutius (...), and C. Nautius Rutilius. The Capitoll stones, C. Nauticus Rutilius the second time. What this surname (...) should meane, Sigonius and Onuphrius confesse they know not, and thinke instead thereof, wee should read (...). Valerius Maximus (5 booke 2 chap. Of thankfull persons) writeth these Consulls corruptly, Q. for Nautius, and Minutius.


277


T. Romulius


Sp. Veturius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus name for Coss. this yeer, Q. Minutius and M. Horatius Pulvillus; but herein they do amisse, as Sigonius and Onuphrius suppose: for the same Livie writeth, that Caius Horatius Pulvillus died beeing Augure

in the yeere 302. Diodorus nameth L. Posthumius and M. Horatius. Dionysius, Q. Horatius and Q. Minutius. The Capitoll records, C. Horatius Pulvillus. And the Sicilian registers, Pulvillus and Augurinus.


298


Sp. Tarpeius.


A. Atterius.


IN Livie, Cassiodorus, and Dionysius, we find Coss. this yeere, M. Valerius with Sp. Virginius. But in the twelsth booke of Diodorus, M. Valerius Lactuca, and Sp. Virginius Tricostus. In Cuspinians Kalender Maximus and Caelimontanus. In the Sicilian, Maximus and Virginius. In that of the Capitol, M. Valerius Max. As for Lactucinus, Plinie sheweth, that it is a surname of the Valerij. Of these Consuls also, Censorinus maketh mention in his discourse of the plaies called Seculares.


299


P. Curiatius.


Sext. Quintilius.


ACcording to Livie, Cassiodorus and Dionysius, this yeere, C. Veturius and T. Romilius entred upon the Consulship. Diodorus delivereth unto us C. Veturius Cicunus,.and T. Romulius Vaticanus. Cuspinians kalender sheweth Geminus and Vaticanus. The Sicilian, Rocus and Veturius. The Capitoline records, T. Romulius, son of T. nephew or sonnes sonne of Ti. Vaticanus. Of the same Romulius, Plinie speaketh also, 7. booke, chapter 28.


300


T. Menenius.


P. Sestius Capitolinus.


SPurius Tarpeius sonne of M. and nephew of M. surnamed Montanus Capitolinus, the kalender of Verrius Flaccus sheweth unto us for one Consull this yeer. Of whom, Diodorus, Dionysius, Livie, Pedianus upon Cicero his Oration for Cornelius, and Cassiodorus make mention, save onely the surnames. Cuspinians booke, and the Greeke records, have Capitolinus. As for his Colleague, they dissent and disagree. For Diodorus would have him to bee Aulus Asterius Fontinalis; but Dionysius Aulus Termenius. Livie and Plinie, the seventh booke, chapter seven and twentie, A. Aeternius. Solinus chapter 4, Gell. I booke, chapter II. A. Thermus. Lastly, Cassiodorus, Au. Aterius. Whom Sigonius and Onuphrius follow.


301


App. Claudius.


T. Genutius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus likewise, report for this yeere Consuls, Sex. Quintilius and P. Curiatius. Dionysius, Sex. Quintilius and P. Horatius. Diodorus, Sex. Quintilius Tergeminus. The Capitoll stones name him Sext. Quintilius, sonne of Sex. nephew of Pub. For this surname Tergeminus is common both to the Horatij and Curiatij. But Sigonius and Onuphrius allow Horatius rather.


302


Sext. Quintilius sonne of Sextus, nephew of Pub.


TO this Consull the Greeke records give the surname of Varus, and so the Capitoline tables of stone do represent him. But Diodorus, Dionysius, Livie, and Cassiodorus deliver the same man unto us without the surname. Who was his Colleague, it is doubtfull. For by Dionysius it was P. Horatius: by Livie and Cassiodorus, Pub. Curiatius: by Diodorus, Tergeminus: which is a surnmane as well of the Curiatij as the Horatij. Onuphrius rather approoveth of Curiatius.


303


Decemvirs Consular.


LIvie and Diodorus, together with the Capitoline registers (as farre foorth as may bee gathered by the broken fragments of the tables) shew that App. Claudius and T. Genutius were Coss. elect for this yeer, but they resigned up the place, in regard of creating Decemvirs. Now as touching this Decemvirat, the law Terentia brought it into the commonweale: which law A. Terentius Arsa, a Tribune of the Commons promulged as touching five Quinquevirs to be created, who should set downe lawes to gage the Coss. authority. For the Commons complained. That their governement was too great and intollerable, and therfore required that it might be abated and made more moderate. Which law, after it had been for six yeers together hotely canvassed by the Trib. to no effect, in the end waxed cold againe, by reason that the said Trib. obtained a graunt to double their own number. But afterwards upon occasion that Romilius and Veturius the Coss. bare themselves too extreame in rigor against the Commons refusing warfare, the said law was set on foot

againe, and the suit followed more hotly than before. Whereupon when the LL. of the Senat were doubtfull what to doe, at length they resolved upon this point, (whereof the principall adviser was T. Romulius) to create certain lawgivers, who should set down the rights and priviledges both of nobles and commons. And looke what ordinances by them were decreed, the same should bind both the one state and the other. The Commons agreed to this determination: and so three Embassadours, namely, Sp. Posthumius Albus, Au. Manlius Vulso, and Serv. Sulpitius Camerinus, were sent into Greece to learn the statutes, customs, rights, and lawes of the Atheniens and other cities of Greece, and the same to bring with them to Rome. These went their embassage when Atinius and Tarpeius were Consuls, and three yeeres after returned with the said lawes, whiles Sestius and Menenius were Consuls. Now when the Tribunes were instant and called hard upon them, to begin once for to make these positive lawes; and that now alreadie Ap. Claudius and T. Genetius were elected Coss. for this yeere; there passed an act of the Senat, (according to the advise of Ap. Claudius) That all other magistracies should surcease, and 10 Decemvirs be created in consular, nay in roiall authoritie absolutely, without libertie of appealing from them to the people: who should choose as well out of their owne customes and ordinances, as the forreine lawes above-said, the best and most profitable to the commonweale, and set downe the rights of the people of Rome. And looke what they prescribed and presented, (if the Senate and people of Rome allowed therof) that should stand in force and bind the whole bodie of the state for ever. When this act was approoved by the Commons, the Consuls resigned and gave over. In whose stead, were chosen Decemvirs consular, namely Ap. Claudius, T. Gentius, (the same that gave up their Consulship;) Spar. Posthumius, Serv. Sulpitius, Au Manlius, (those that went in embassie from the Coss. to Athens:) T. Romulius, C. Iulius, P. Sestius, Pub. Horatius, all men of Consular calling, and such as had been Consuls before. Besides, Sp. Veturius, according to Livie, Diodorus, and Dionysius: although Dionysius calleth Posthumius by the name of Publius and not Spurius, as Livie and Diodorus doe. Likewise Livie fore-nameth Veturius, Lucius; Dionysius Titus; but Diodorus and the Capitoline stone, Spurius. These Decemvirs began their government in the 301 yeere after the foundation of the citie, as Live writeth; and after him Cassiodorus goeth. But the avouchers of the Capitoll records, say it was the yeer 302; and with them agreeth Solinus. But Varro (whome Onuphrius followeth) accounteth the yeer 303. These sat in judgement and ministred justice to the people by turnes every one his tenth day: on which day the said chiefe justice bare the soveraigne port, with his 12 Lictors before him; the other nine had but one sergeant apeece to give attendance: and the singular concored among themselves, which otherwhiles was an agreement profitable when they were private, prooved exceeding great equitie to others.


304
BY this time the Commons, besides that they detested the name of Coss. no lesse than KK. found no misse of the Tribunes assistance, nor sought once after it, seeing the Decemvirs yeeld one unto another in reciprocall appealing. With great affection therefore and endeavour, as well of nobles as commons, there were created for this yeere also Decemvirs in Consuls authoritie absolutely without appeale, Ap. Claudius the secondtime, Q.Fabius who had been four times Consull, M. Cornelius Maluginensis brother of L. Cornelius, who had been Consull in the yeere 295; Manius Sergius, L. Minutius, T. Antonius Merenda, M. Rabuleius: and three likewise of the Commons, Q. Petilius, K. Duilius, and Sp. Oppius Cornicen, as witnesseth Diodorus, Dionysius, and Livie; although the gentile names for the msot part are by Diodorus omitted.


305
WHen the more part of the former yeer was past, and that upon the adding of two other tables to the former ten, there remained no more to doe, (in case the said tables were once in the high court and assembly of the Centuries passed) why the common-weale should have any need of the Decemvirs, insomuch as the commons expected, that soone after, the solemne court and assembly aforesaid for creation of Consuls should be published: then the Decemvirs without any word at all made of that election or assembly, came abroad guarded with whole troupes of young gentlemen Patritians, and demeaned themselves more proudly and insolently to every man. But before the yeere was fully expired, by occasion of the lecherous lust

of Ap. Claudius, who chalenged a maiden (one of the commons daughters) as a bondservant, according as Livie more at large writeth; and also of the commons insurrection and departing into the Aventine, the foresaid Decemvirs gave over their magistracie: and when Q. Furius the high Pontifex called a generall assembly of the tribes, ten Tribunes of the Commons were againe chosen: and so at length in another assembly of Centuries for the Consuls, holden by the Interregent, created there were Consuls,
L. Valerius Potitus.M. Horatius Barbatus.
THese Consuls Onuphrius casteth upon a third yeere of the Decemvirs (although Livie seemeth to dissent) to the end that hee might jumpe with the account of the Capitoll, which he supposeth to be collected by Varro: for by their calculation, the triumphs of these Consuls declared in the Capitoll records, are engraven upon this verie yeere, i. 304: so as it appeareth evidently, that part of this yeere was taken up by the Decemvirs, and part by the Consuls. Tacitus and Rufus write, that the Decemvirs continued but two yeeres.


306
LIvius putteth down for Consuls, Sp. Herminus and T. Virginius Caelimontanus. Cassiodorus saith, L. Herminus and T. Virginius. Dionysius writeth (...): and Diodorus thus, (...): the Greeke records, Herminius, Tricostus: whereby Onuphrius feareth that it be corruptly written in Diodorus, Sructus for Tricostus: for Structus was surname of the Servilij and not of the Virginij. As for his colleague Herminius, that he is to be fore named Lars, besides Diodorus and Dionysius, Valerius also sheweth in his tenth booke, where he writeth thus: The fore-name of Lars is derived from the Lares.


307


M. Geganius Macerinus.


C. Indius.


THese are recorded likewise to be the Consuls this yeere. The surname Macerinus is suppressed by Cassiodorus and Diodorus, who also nameth the other L. Iulius. In Dionysius certaine pages be wanting in this place. Cuspinian his Kalender hath for Macerinus, Macrinus.


308


T. Quintius Capitolinus IIII.


Agrippa Furius.


DIonysius and Livie both, name the Coss. of this yeere, T. Quintius Capitolinus the fourth time, and Agrippa Furius. Diodorus and Cassiodorus conceale the surname and the numerall note of foure. The Greeke records have Furius and Capitolinus. Onuphrius unto Furius addeth the surnames of the grandsire, to wit, Medullinus Fusus.


309


M. Genutius.


C. Curtius.


LIvie delivereth unto us for Coss. this yeere, M. Genutius, and P. Curiatius. Cassiodorus likewise M. Genutius and P. Curiatius: but Dionysius, M. Genutius and C. Quintius: and Diodorus hath, M. Genetius and Agrippa Curtius Chilo. But as Sigonius, and after him Onuphrius have noted, it is falsly read in Livie, Curiatius for Curtius; and that is prooved by the authoritie of Varro de lingua latina: and therefore in the Sicilian registers written they are, Genutius and Curtius.


310


A. Sempronius Atratinus. Militarie Tribunes in Consular authoritie: upon whose resignation Consuls were chosen in their roume,


T. Claelius. Militarie Tribunes in Consular authoritie: upon whose resignation Consuls were chosen in their roume,


L. Atilius. Militarie Tribunes in Consular authoritie: upon whose resignation Consuls were chosen in their roume,


L. Papirius Mugilanus.


L. Sempronius Atratinus.


VVHen C. Canuleius as Tribune of the Commons, had the former yeere published a second law, That one of the Consuls should be created out of the Commons, (whereby the dignitie of the Patritii was empaired) the nobles fearing least the said lawe would passe in deed maugre their heads, drew to a point; whereof C. Claudius made the first motion and was the adviser, That in stead of Consuls ther should be created militarie Tribunes, three of the Patritii, and as many of the Commons; who beeing endued with Consull authoritie, should governe the common-weale. Also, that when their yeeres government was expired, the advise both of Senat and also of people should be once again required, Whether they would have Consuls rather than Tribunes consular? and looke which pleased them, they should be created. These points being resolved upon and decreed, three militarie Tribunes were created onely,

all Patritii: and well ynough were the Commons content therewith, because themselves were eligible and capable of that dignitie. Howbeit, this regiment of their newly set up, stood not firmely established. For within 3 moneths after, by a decree of the Augurs, they resigned up their honourable place, as if there had been some errour committed in their election: and then T. Quintius Barbatus (nominated Interreget) created Consuls, L. Papyrius Mugillanus, and L. Sempronius Atratinus. These Consuls are left out in the Sicilian registers. Well saith Livie therefore, that these Consuls are found neither in auncient annales and yeerly records, nor yet in the Kalender of the magistrates. But Cicero maketh mention of them in his epistle to Papyrius Paetus.


311


M. Geganius Macerinus II.


T. Quintius


Capitolinus. V.


DIonysius and Cassiodorus avouch these for Consuls this yeer. As for Dionysius, he saith that they entred in the moneth of December. Cassius concealeth both their surnames, and Diodorus the one, namely Capitolinus. The Greeke records have Macrinus the second time, and Capitolinus the fifth time. Zonaras nameth them Macrinus and Barbatus.


312


M. Fabius Vibulanus.


Postumus Ebutius Cornicen.


LIvie saith, that Consuls of this yeere, were so named. Dioldorus and Cassiodorus are silent in their surnames. The Greeke records have Vibulanus and Helua. Diodorus attributeth to Ebutius the surname of (...), but what manner of addition that might bee, Sigonius knoweth not, and thinketh that it should be read, (...).


313


C. Furius Pacilus.


M. Papyrius Crassus.


THese Consuls by Livie and Cassiodorus are in this wise represented unto us. But by Diodorus after this sort, Q. Furius Fusus, and Mantus Papirius Crassiu. And by the Greek records thus, Pacilus and Crassus.


314


Proculus Geganius Maccrinus.


L. Menenius Lanatus.


LIvius and Cassiodorus, deliver these Consuls thus fully named, Proculus Geganius Macerinus, and L. Menenius Lanatus. Diodorus T. Menenius, and Proculus Geganius Macrinus. The Sicilian registers, Macerinus and Lanaus.


315


T. Quintius Capitolinus VI.


Agrippa Menenius Lanatus.


BY Livie and Cassiodorus, these were the Consuls for this yeer: but after Diodorus, T. Quintius, and T. Menenius. According to the Sicilian rolls, Menenius and Capitolinus.


316

Mam. Aemyltus. Militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie.
L. Quintius son of Cincinnatus. Militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie.
L. Iulius. Militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie.

THe Tribunes of the Commons imported and prevailed, that there should be an election holden for Tribunes militarie, rather than Consuls; making no doubt, but in the chusing of sixe (for so many now by law might be created) some of the commoners by making profession that they would be revenged for the death of Melius, would step into the place: howbeit the Commons created no more than three Tribunes with Consular authoritie, and among them L. Quintius, the son of Cincinnatus. In which election, Mumerius Aemylius, a right honourable man and of great worth, was by their suffrages preferred before Quintius, and Iulius they made the third. In like manner, Diodorus nameth three Tribunes militarie for this yeere; but in this fort, Manius Aemylius Mamercus, C. Iulius, and L. Quintius.


317


M. Geganius Macerinus III.


L. Sergius Fidenas.


WHen the Commons, together with their Tribunes were quiet, and carefully regarded the maine state of the Commonweale, no question there was nor controversie, but that Coss. were chosen, to wit, M. Geganius Macerinus the third time, and L. Sergius, so saith Livius. Cassidorus doth the same, but that he setteth down the names of the Coss. onely in this wise, M. Geganius the third time, and L. Sergius, without surnames. Diodorus likewise, M. Geganius and L. Sergius. Cuspinians kalender, and the Sicilian registers, Macerinus and Fidenas. For this Sergius was surnamed Fidenas (as Livie reporteth) by occasion of the warre which hee made against the Fidenates.



318


M. Cornelius Maluginensis.


L. Papirius Crassus.


LIvie and Cassiodorus report these abovenamed, for this yeere Consuls. Diodorus nameth them, L. Papirius and An. Cornelius Macerinus: but doubtlesse not wihout errour, as Sigonius supposeth: for both in Cuspinians Kalendar and the rols of Sicilie, we find Malugensis and Crassus.


319


C. Iulius II.


L. Virginius.


THese Consuls are found for this yeere in Livie and Cassiodorus; but in Diodorus, C. Iulius and Proculus Virginius Tricostus. In Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian records, Iulius and Virginius.


320

C. Iulius III. or M. Manlius.
L. Virginius II. or Q. Sulpitius.

I Find in Licinius Macer, that the same Coss. were chosen againe for the yeere following, to wit, Iulius the third time, and Virginius the second. Valerius Antias and Quin. Tubero alledge for this yeeres Consuls, M. Manlius and Q. Sulpitius. But in these so different records of theirs, Tubero and Macer both, professe to goe by the linnen bookes; and neither of them dissmuleth but that the ancient writers report of militarie Tribunes that yeere created. As for Licinius, he doubteth not to follow those linen records, and Tubero cannot resolve of the truth. But among other things, which by continuance of time are unknowne, this also is left uncerteine. Thus much Livie. But Diodorus instead of Consuls, setteth downe three millitarie Tribunes, namely, M. Manlius, Q. Sulpitius Pratextatus and Servius Cornelius Cussus. The Greeke records )following Antias and Tubero) have delivered to us Consuls. Capitolinus and Camerinus


321

M. Fabius Vibulanus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
L. Sergius Fidenas. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
Marcus Foslius. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.

The Tribunes of the Commons in thier orations, continually forbad the election of Consuls: and when they had brought it so about, that he governmet was at the point of interregencie, they wan the masterie in the end, that militarie Tribunes might bee chosen with Consular authoritie. But reward of this their victorie which they shot at, namely to have a commoner created, they obtained none: for all were elected out of the Patritij, namely, M. Fabius Vibulanus, M. Foslius, Lu. Sergius Fidenas. Thus much Livius. Diodorus likewise nameth three, but corruptly, to wi^, M. Fabius, M. (...), and L. Servilius. As for Foslius in some of the Capitoll monuments, hee is written Flaccinator and not Folius, as in the common editions of Livie, whom Diodorus calleth (...).


322

L. Pinarius Mamercus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. autoritie.
L. Furius Medullinus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. autoritie.
Sp. Postumius Albus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. autoritie.

No motion was made of Consuls election. So, Tribunes militarie were created in Consuls authoritie these, L. Pinarius Mamercus, L. Furius Medullinus, and Spurius Posthum. Albus; as Livie writeth. In Diodorus they are named thus, L. Furius, Sp. Pinarius Mamercus.


323

T. Quintius, [soone of Lucius.]

Cincinnatus Pennus.


C. Iulius Mento.


AN act of the Senate passed, that an election of Coss. should be holden, wherin T. Quintius, [sonne of Lucius] Cincinatus, surnamed also Pennus, and C. Iulius Mento, were made Consuls, saith Livie. The same Coss. Cassiodorus also avoucheth.The Greeke records have Pennus and Mento: but Diodorus nameth them barely, T. Quintius and Caius Iulius.


324


L. Papirius Crassus.


L. Iulius.


THe Tribunes of the Commons made much adoe, and kept a canvassing in the citie, that Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie should bee created, but could not prevaile. So Consuls were chosen, L. Papirius Crassus and L. Iulius. So say Livie and Cassiodore: but Diodorus nameth them falsly, Caius Papirius and L. Iunius: the Greeke records, Crassus and Iulius.



325


L. Sergius Fidenas II.


Hostus Lucretius Tricipitinus.


THe Consuls this yeere in Cassiodorus, are L. Sergius and Hostus Lucretius: in Diodorus, Opiter Lucretius and L. Sergius Fidenas: in Livie L. Sergius Fidenas the second time, and Hostus Lucretius Tricipitnus. In the Sicilian registors, Tricipitinus and Fidenas. One these, Valerius maketh mention in his Epitome.


326


A. Cornelius Cossus.


T. Quintius Pennus. II.


THese Consuls are named by Livie and Cassiodorus for this yeere. But Diodorus avoucheth L. Quintius and Se^pronius; but corruptly, as Sigonius and Onuphrius suppose. For in the Sicilian records are written, Cossus and Pennus, the surnames of Cornelius and Quintius. Of these Consuls Livie spake before, in the yeere 316.


327


C. Servillus Ahala


L. Papirius Mugillanus.


LIvie and Cassiodorus, name Consuls for this yeere, C. Servilius Ahala, and L. Papirius Mugillanus. Diodorus for Ahala, putteth downe Structus: for well it may be, that Structus was also called Ahala


328

T. Quintius. Pennus. Military Tribunes in Coss. authoritie.
M. Postbumius. Military Tribunes in Coss. authoritie.
C. Furius. Military Tribunes in Coss. authoritie.
A. Cornelius Cossus. Military Tribunes in Coss. authoritie.

THe commons caried it cleere, that no Consuls this yeere were created: so, foure there were elected militarie Tribunes in Consuls authority, namely, T. Quintius Pennus immediatly upon his Consulship, M. Posthamius, C. Furius, and Au. Cornelius Cossus. Thus writeth Livie: and the same, Diodorus nameth.


329

A. Sempronius. Atratinus. Tribb. militarie in Coss. authority.
L. Quintius Cincinnatus. Tribb. militarie in Coss. authority.
L. Furius Medullinus. Tribb. militarie in Coss. authority.
L. Horatius Barbatus Tribb. militarie in Coss. authority.

THese abovenamed (as Livie reporteth) were Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie this yeere. Diodorus leaveth our all their surnames, and L. Horatius full and whole.


330

Ap. Claud, the Decemvirs son. Tribb. militarie in Consuls authoritie.
Sp. Nautius Rutilus. Tribb. militarie in Consuls authoritie.
L. Sergius Fidenas. Tribb. militarie in Consuls authoritie.
Sext. Iulius Iulus. Tribb. militarie in Consuls authoritie.

THese Tribunes militarie in Coss. authority Livie seretth downe for this yeere. The same doth Diodorus also nominate, all but their surnames, and Ap. Claudius whom hee calleth Titus. Livie moreover saith, that there were two, Spurij Nautij Rutili, Tribunes in those daies: (but no doubt, as Onuphrius thinketh, there is some error in the copies of the booke) the one who is now the first time, and a second time shall bee in the yeere 338; the other, who was first in the yeere 335, and once againe in the yeere 350. The capitoll monuments of stone have the same: but they shew that the one was but once, and the other thrice Tribune.


331


C. Sempronius Atratinus.


Q. Fabius Vibulanus.


THe Consuls this yeere created were according to Livius and Cassiodorus, C. Sempronius Atratinus and Q. Fabius Vibulanus [Diodorus overpasseth them] whome Livie reporteth to have entred into governement, upon the Ides of December. Of C. Sepronius Atratinus Consull. Valerius writeth, 6. book, cap. 5. whom hee forenameth Lucius: but in the third booke and second chapter, hee speaketh of both, although untruely; for Q. Fabius, hee nameth Q. Catulus.



332
L. Manlius Capitolinus. Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie.
Q. Antonius Merenda. Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie.
L. Papyrius Mugillanus. Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie.
L. Servilius Structus. Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie.

THe Senate being offended with the very name of Consuls, for the hatred they bare to Sempronius, commaunded Tribunes militarie to be created with Consuls authoritie. And these they were, L. Manlius Capitolinus, Q. Antonius Merenda, and L. Papyrius Mugillanus. Thus much Livie, in whose storie the name is missing of the fourth, to wit, L. Servilius Structus, who in the yeere three hundred thirtie seven, is found engraven in the Capitoll stones, Tribunes militarie the second time. Of these, Diodorus saith not a word. In a fragment of the Capitoline marble, there is to be seene the surnames of Mugillanus, belonging to L. Papirius.



333


T. Quintius Capitolinus.


N. Fabius Vibulanus.


NOt only Livie, but Cassiodorus also recorteth, that the Coss. this yeere were N. Fabius Vibulanus and T. Quintius Capitolinus. Diodorus over-passeth them; but so doe not the Sicilian registers. In a fragment of the Capitoll marbles, we find engraven T. Quintius Capitolinus Barbatus, and N. Fabius. This Fabius was the sonne of Q. Fabius the Decemvir, who after the three hundred Fabij slaine at Cremera, survived, and was the first of all that kindred and familie forenamed Numerius: as Valerius Maximus in his 10 booke, and Sex. Pompeius doe report. As for T. Quintius, sonne hee was (as Livie writeth) to that Capitolinus who was Consull six times.


334


An Interregencie.


WHen the greater part of the yeer was spent in troubles and contentions, between the new Tribunes of the Commons and certaine Interregents, whiles the Tribunes one-while would not suffer the Patritij to goe together about the declaring of an Interregent, and another while impeached the Interrregent that hee could not passed an act of the Senat for the election of Consuls; at length L. Papirius Mugillanus the Interregent, by rebuking as wel the Senatours as the Tribunes of the Commons, prevailed, that an assembly should be holden for chusing of Tribunes consular. So there were created Tribunes militarie with Consuls authoritie, and all Patritij, T. Quintius Cincinnatus the third time, L. Furius Medullinus, M. Manlius, L. Sempronius Atratinus. Thus much Livie.


335

Agrippa Menenius Lanatus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
P. Lucretius Tricipitinus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
Sp. Nautius. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
C. Servilius. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.

MIlitarie Tribunes with Consuls authoritie for this yeere, are set downe by Livie, Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, P. Lucretius Tricipitinus, and Sp. Nautius: for the name of the fourth is wanting; and that was C. Servilius, sonne of Quintus and nephew of Caius, surnamed Axilla; who the yeere following, in the Capitoll tables is numbred among the Tribunes consular, with the numerall note of II. So as it must needs be, that he was the first time in this yeere, for as much as there is no other fit void place left for him. Diodorus nameth Sp. Veturius.


336

L. Sergius Fidenas. Tribb. military in Coss. Authoritie.
M. Papirius Mugillanus. Tribb. military in Coss. Authoritie.
C. Servilius the son of Priscus. Tribb. military in Coss. Authoritie.

FOr Tribunes Consular this yeere, Livie nameth these. This C. Servilius, is by Vertius Flacus cleped Axilia. Diodorus calleth them, L. Sergius, M. Servilius, and M. Papirius. Now this M. Papirius was sonne to L. Papirius Mugillanus the first Censor.


337


Agrippa Menenius Lanatus.


P. Lucretius Tricipitinus.


L. Servilius Structus.


Sp. Veturius Crassus.


ALl these are recorded by Livie for Tribb. militarie this yeere. Of these, L. Servilus Structus was the first time in the 332 yeere, but left out in Livie through fault of those that wrote the copies. Diodorus hath the same Tribunes besides their surnames, and L. Servilius, whome he calleth Caius. In a Capitoline table their names are thus cut, P. Lucretius soone of Hostus, Agrippa Menenius soone of T. nephew of Agrippa.


338


A. Sempronius Atratius III.


Sp. Nautius Rutilus II.


M. Papirius Mugillanus II.


ONely these are by Livie recorded: but, that the pen-men who wrate out the bookes, left out the fourth Tribune of this yeere (Quintus Fabius son of Quintus and nephew of Marcus, surnmaed also Vibulanus) the Capitoll stones and Diodorus doe testifie. Livie himselfe also doth shew the same, who writeth that Quintus Fabius was Tribune militarie the second time, in the yeere three hundred and fortie: but in what yeere hee was first, it appeareth not. Moreover, Au. Sempronius is by Verrius Flaccus named, the sonne of Lucius and nephew of Aulus. Diodorus reckoneth all foure, but hee concealeth their surnames.



339


P. Cornelius Cossus.


C. Valeriuws Potitus.


Q. Cincinnatus.


N. Fabius Vibulanus.


THese doth Livie deliver unto us for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie. Diodorus in this wise, P. Corneleus, Caius ..... Fabius. The table of the Capitoll thus, P. Cornelius ..... F. nephew of P.C. Valerius, sonne of L. nephew of Volusus. The sorename of Quintius is unknowne.


340


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


Q. Fabius Vibulanus II.


L. Valerius Potitus.


L. Postbumius Regillensis.


THese declareth Livius for this yeere: but Diodorus, Titus Posthumius, Caius Cornelius, C. Valerius, and Caso Fabius. But Verrius Flaccus nameth P. Posthumius, soone of A. nephew also of Aulus; whome Livie writeth to have been stoned to death by his owne armie for his crueltie.


341


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


C. Furius Medullinus.


THen the Nobles and LL. of the Senate imported, that there should be Consuls created in a Centriare assembly, which Q. Fabius held. And the Consuls were M. Cornelius Cossus, and L. Furius Medullinus. The same are named by Diodorus and Cassiodorus, but that they leave out their surnames. The Greeke records have Cossus and Medullinus.


342


Q. Fabius Ambustus.


C. Furius Pacilus.


LIvie and Cassiodotus name these for Consuls: Diodotus suppresseth their surnames.


343


M. Papyrius.


C. Nautius Rutilus.


BOth Livie and Cassiodorus report for this yeere Consuls, M. Papyrius and C. Nautius Ratilus. Diodorus hath not a word of their surnames. Cuspinians booke setteth them downe by their surnames only Mugillanus and Rutilus.


344


M. Aunilius.


C. Valerius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus call these Consuls, M. Atmilius and C. Valerius. Diodorus instead of M. hath M'.i. Manius. This Aimilius in the table of the Capitoll, is named in his first and third Tribuneship, M. Aimilius sonne of Manius, nephew of M. and surnamed Mamercinus.


345


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


L. Furius Medullinus II.


LIvie putteth these downe for the Consuls of this yeere. Cassiodorus passeth over their surnames, and the numerall note of two. Diodorus hath Lu. Furius and Cn. Pompeius: but he is to be written Cn. Cornelius, out of the end of a broken fragment in the Capitoll: and the other L. Furius, by his Tribuneships testified in the Capitoll records.


346

C. Iulius Iulus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
P. Cornelius Cossus. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.
C. Servilius Ahala. Tribunes militarie in Coss. authoritie.

THese are set downe for Tribunes militarie this yeere by T. Livius. Diodorus saith nothing of their surnames, which the Capitoline tables exhibit unto us. C. Servilius is written in his second Tribuneship (after the Capitoll records) the sonne of Pub. and nephew of Q. surnamed Ahala.


347


L. Furius Medullinus II.


N. Fabius Vibulanus II.


C. Valerius Potitus II.


C. Servilius Ahala II.


LIvie reporteth, that the four Tribunes consular were all Patritij this yeer, and had born that dignitie once before, to wit, L. Furius Medullinus, C. Valerius Potitus, N. Fabius Vibulanus, and C. Servilius Ahala; and that this man last named was chosen againe and continued in his place still this yeere with the former, as well in regard of other vertues as for the fresh favour and late grace gotten by his singular moderation and rare carriage in his government. Diodorus hath C. Furius, C. Servilius, C. Valerius, and N. Fabius. In the Capitoline tables, two are written short, Potitus Volusus II. and Medullinus; the other two at full: wherby it doth appeare, (as Onuphrius reporteth) that Livie was deceived. For Medullinus was not this yeere Tribune the second time, but the first: who had been twise Consull before, and after this yeer, will be no lesse than seven times Tribune militarie.



348


P. Cornelius Cossus.


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


N. Fabius Ambustus.


L. Valerius Potitus.


OF these foure Tribunes militarie, L. Valerius Potitus, and N. Fabius Ambustus stand upon record in the Capitoll tables; the other two, as appeareth by a fragment thereof, by Livie also and Cassiodorus, were Pub. Cornelius, sonne of Aulus, nephew of M. Rutilius Cossus, so written by his Dictatorship. Diodorus reckoneth Terentius Maximus for the fourth Tribune.


349


T. Quintius Capitolinus.


Q. Quintius Cincinnatus.


C. Iulius Iulus. II.


A. Manlius.


L. Furius Medullinus III


M. Aemilius Mamercus.


DIodorus saith, that this yeere sixe Tribunes were created, but hee nameth but three, T. Quintius Capitolinus, C. Iulius, and Au. Manlius. Livie rehearseth them all as here they be set down. The Capitoline stone hath Iulus. II. Capitolinus Barbetus, Cincinnatus, and the other three. And this was the first yeere that had sixe Tribunes militarie, notwithstanding that the law permitted it before, at what time as first it was graunted, that Tribunes should be created: and in this yeere began the siege first before Veij.


350


C. Valerius Potitus. III.


M. Sergius Fidenas.


P. Cornelius Maluginensis.


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


K. Fabius Ambustus.


Sp. Nautius Rutilus. II.


THe same Tribunes that Livie nameth, Diodorus also reherseth, but that heee leaveth out the surnames, and corruptly calleth Cn. Cornelius by the name of Iunius Lucullus. In the Capitoline stones they are written, Maluginensis, Cossus. II. Ambustus: and the other three fully out. Nautius Rutilus Livie nameth the second time, but Verrius Flaccus the third time.


351


M. Aimilius Mamercus. II.


L. Valerius Potitus. III.


App. Claudius Crassus.


M. Furius Camillus.


M. Quintius V^us.


L. Iulius Iulus.


M. Posthumius.


M. Postunius Albinus.


LIvie writeth, that the number of Tribunes militarie were by the Romanes augmented, and eight of them created, which were more than ever any time before, whose names we have set downe. In Diodorus they are thus named, Manius Claudius, Mar. Quintilius, Lu. Iulius, M. Furius, L. Valerius. And albeit there be wanting in him some Tribunes, yet Onuphrius thinketh, and so doth Sigonius, that himselfe by hiw owne writing delivered not eight, but sixe: which Verrius Flaccus also observed in the Capitoline tables.


352


C. Servilius Ahala. III.


Q. Servilius.


L. Virginius.


Q. Sulpitius


A. Manlius II.


M. Sergius. II.


IN Livie the Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie, are C. Servilius Ahala the third time, Quin Sevilius, and Lu. Virginius: the rest, as in the tables of the Capitoll, but onely the forenames. Livie nameth Qu. Servilius, Fidenas in the othe sixe Tribuneships following, which hee shall beare. To Lucus Virginius, Onuphrius addeth Tricostus, a surname usuall in that house. Diodorus squareth not out of this raunge, but as Sigonius noteth, hee dooth fault in the name, (...). In a fragment of the Capitoll, they are thus named, Qu. Sulpitius the sonne of Servius. N. Camerinus Cornutus, Au. Manlius soone of Aulus, nephew of C. Vulso Capitolinus the second time, M. Sergius sonne of Lucius, nephew of Lucius, surnamed Fidenas, the second time.


353


L. Valerius Potitus. IV.


M. Furius Camillus.


M. Aemi. Mamercinus. III.


Cn. Cornelius Cossus.


K. Fabius Ambusius.


L. Iulius Iulus.


LIvie reckoneth all these Tribunes this yeere. Diodorus putteth downe Lu. Iulius, M. Furius, Aemylius Mamercus, Caius Cornelius, Caeso Fabius, (...), but amisse. In the fragment of the Capitoll, they are thus named, Lucius Iulius, sonne of Lucius, nephew of Vopiseus, surnamed Iulus. Marcus Aemylius, sonne of Manius, nephew of Mar. Mamercus. K. Fabius sonne of Marcus, nephew of Qu. Ambuslus the second time. These were commaunded to enter into government upon the first day of October (whereas the thirteent of December was the usuall day beforetime) by reason

son of an overthrow received the former yeere at Veij by M. Sergius. Camilius made an expedition in the Faliscians countrie, Cornelius to the Capenates, Valerius to the Volscians for the recoverie of Anxur, Aemylius and Fabius to besiege Veij.


354


P. Licinius Calvus.


T. Titinius.


L. Furius Medullinus.


P. Maenius.


P. Maelius.


L. Publius Vulscus.


THese by T. Livius are this yeere named the Tribunes militarie. But Diodorus rehearseth onely three, namely P. Melius, Sp. Maenius, and L. Furius. But Onuphrius thinketh that he is to be read, not L. Furius but Sp. Furius. The same author hath put to P. Licinius, the surname of Calvius, whom Livie writeth to have bene the first man of the communaltie chosen Tribune militarie, onely to take possession of the said right and interest.


355


M. Veturius.


C. Duilius.


Cn. Genutius.


M. Pomponius.


Volero Publilius.


L. Atilius.


THese Diodorus sheweth for Tribunes. But Livie setteth downe Marcus Veturius to have beene the onely Patritian, and the rest commoners, namely M. Pomponius, C. Duilius, Volero Publilius, Cn. Genutius, L. Atilius. Cuspinian his booke, who every yeere delivereth the names onely of two Tribunes, hath Augurius and Longus, surnames of Genutius and Attilius.


356


L. Valerius Potitus. V.


M. Valerius Max.


M. Furius Camillus. II.


L. Furius Medullinus.


Q. Servilius Fidenus. II.


Q. Sulpitius Camerinus.


ALl these Tribunes militarie for this yere created, were Patritij, as Livie writeth: neither differeth Diodorus, although he recite two names corruptly, to wit, (...). Plutarch in the life of Camillus maketh mention of the said Camillus, the second time Tribune militarie; and the Capitoline stone, of Medullinus the third time.


357


L. Iulius Iulus.


L. Furius Medullinus. IIII.


L. Sergius Eidenas


A. Posthumius Regillensis.


P. Cornelius Malugine^sis.


A. Manlius


IN this wise Livie reckoneth them: but Diodorus L. Sergius, A. Posthumius, P. Cornelius (...), Q. Manlius (...). But in those two Greek-written names, as Sigonius and Onuphrius observed, there is a foule errour.


358


P. Licinius. P. F. Calvus.


P. Menius. II.


Cn Genutius. II.


L. Titinius. II.


P. Maelius. II.


L. Atilius. II.


IN this manner are these Tribunes militarie delivered unto us by Livie. But Diodorus nameth them thus, L. Titinius, P. Licinius, P. Malius, Q. Maenius, Cn. Genutius, and L. Attilius. All these, but L. Licinius the sonne of Publius, (as Livie saith) bare the dignitie of Tribuneship a litle before: who writeth moreover, that Genutius was slaine in a battaile against the Faliscines.


359


P. Cornelius Cossus.


K. Fabius Ambustus. IIII.


M. Valerius Max. II.


P. Cornelius Scipio.


L. Furius Medullinus. V.


Q. Servilius. III.


AFter the winning of Veij, this yeere had for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie, those above-named. Diodorus calleth P. and Ser. Cornelius both, Cossi: in the rest, saving that hee concealeth, their surnames, hee agreeth.


360


L. Furius Medullinus. VI.


C. Aemylius.


L. Valerius Poplicola.


Sp. Posthumius.


P. Cornelius II.


M. Furius Camillus.


LIvie nameth these in this yeere. Diodorus, M. Furius Aimilius, (...), but corruptly. Camillus now is the third time. Sigonius and Onuphrius thinke, that by P. Cornelius we must understand Scipio, and not Cossus. This yeere Camillus Tribune militarie, by his just dealing reduced the Faliscians to the obeisance of the people of Rome; in that hee sent backe unto them, that schoolmaster who betraied their children: as Livie and Plutarch write.

Valerius (not without some suspicion of error) writeth in his sixt booke, that Camillus did this beeing Consull: whereas Plutarch saith, hee was never Consull.


361


L. Lucretius Flavus.


Serv. Sulpitius Camerinus.


AFter fifteene yeeres (saith Livie) Coss. were created againe, L. Lucretius Flavus, and Serv. Sulpitius Camerinus. Diodorus and Cassiodorus passe over the surnames. The Sicilian registers doe shew, Flavus and Camerinus.


362


L. Valerius Potitus.


M. Manlius Capitolinus.


LVcius Valerius Potitus, and M. Manlius surnamed afterwards Capitolinus, are by Livie reported Consuls this yeere. Dionysius in his first booke maketh mention of these Consuls, naming them, L. Valerius Potitus, and T. Manlius Capitolinus. Cassiodorus delivereth them by the names of L. Valerius and M. Manlius. Diodorus, of L. Valerius and A. Manlius: but the Sicilian registers, of Potitus and Capitolinus.


363


L. Lucretius.


Serv. Sulpitius.


M. Aemilius.


L. Furius Medullinus VII.


Agrippa Furius.


C. Aemilius II.


BY occasion that the Coss. lay sick, thought good it was, to renew the government by meanes of an Interregencie: therefore after they had deposed the Consuls by an act of the Senat, six Tribunes militarie were created with Consular authoritie, by the Interregent: who upon the first day of Iulie began their magistracie, as Livie saith. Diodorus mentioneth but foure, namely, L. Lucretius, Serv. Sulpitius, C. Aemilius, and Lu. Furius. As for Sulpitius, Zonaras calleth him Rufus; which surname Onuphrius also hath put unto him.


364


Q. Fabius Ambustus.

The ij breethren of Q.

Fabius Ambustus.


Q. Sulpitius Longus.


Q. Servilius IIII.


Servil. Cor. Maluginensis.


THese are by T. Livius recorded for Tribb. militarie in Consuls authoritie: but Diodorus reckoneth the three Fabij, Q.K. and C. and the other three, besides Plutarch in Camillus, Gellius out of Verrius Flaccus, in his 5 booke and 17 chapter; Macrobius also in his first booke of Saturnals, make report of Quintus Sulpitius, a Tribune militarie.


365


L. Valerius Poplicola II.


L. Virginius.


P. Cornelius.


A. Manlius.


L. Aemilius.


L. Postumius.


ACcording to Livie, these were created Tribunes militarie after the winning of the citie: but by Diodorus, they were Pub. Cornelius, L. Virginius, Valerius, A. Manlius, and L. Posthumius. Of these Tribunes, Macrobius speaketh in his first booke of Saturnalia.


366


T. Quintius Cincinnatus.


Q. Servilius Fidenas V.


L. Iulius Iulus.


L. Aquilius Corvus.


L. Lucretius Tricipitinus.


Ser. Sulpitius Rufus.


THese Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie for this yeere, Livie thus declareth unto us. Diodorus hath these Tribunes, Titus Quintius, L. Servilius, L. Iulius Aquilus, L. Lucretius (...), Servius Sulpitius.


367


L. Papirius.


L. Aemilius II.


L. Menenius.


C. Sergius.


C. Cornelius.


L. Valerius Poplicola III.


THese, Livie reporteth for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie this yeere. But Diodorus hath L. Papirius, C. Cornelius, L. Menenius, C. Servilius, A. Valerius, and Q. Fabius. Howbeit there is wanting in Livie the name of the sixt Tribune, whom (out of Diodorus) Sigonius and Onuphrius have set to the rest, by the name of C. Cornelius. Diodorus also for Sergius hath Servilius, and Aemilius for Fabius.


368


M. Furius Camillus.


Ser. Cornelius Maluginensis.


Q. Servilius Fidenas VI.


L. Horatius Pulvillus.


L. Quintius Cincinnatus.


P. Valerius.


THe common-weale came to be governed againe by Camillus, a Tribune militarie in Consuls authoritie, and for colleagues were added unto him these 5 here named. But Diodorus saith there were 4 created, M. Cornelius, Q. Servilius, M. Furius, and L. Quintius. In this yeer, when the Dictatorship was offered unto Camillus, hee said there was no need thereof: and he, togither with the Tribb. his colleagues, vanquished the Volscians, Antiotes, and Tuscanes which rebelled.



369


A. Manlius.


L. Quintius Capitolinus.


T. Quintius Capitolinus.


P. Cornelius.


L. Papirius Cursor II.


C. Sergius II.


THese hath Livie: but Diodorus saith that foure onely were created, namely, L. Papirius, Q.T. and L. all Quinty. But of those six, A. Manlius having been Tribune militarie in the yeere 365, and who shall be a third time in the yeere 371, must now verily be the second time.


370


Ser. Corn. Maluginensis IV.


M. Furius Camillus V.


C. Papirius Crassus.


P. Valerius Potitus II.


Ser. Sulpitius Rufus II.


T. Quintius Cincinnatus II.


THese Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie, in this manner be delivered unto us by Livie: but Diodorus (as his maner is) putteth down four; Serv. Sulpitius, L. Papirius, Mar. Cornelius, and T. Quintius. In this yeere, M. Manlius attainted and condemned for aspiring to be K. was throwne downe headlong from the rocke Tarpeia: Liv. Plutar. and Valer.


371


L. Valerius IV.


A. Manlius III.


Ser. Sulpitius III.


L. Lucretius.


L. Aemilius.


M. Tribonius.


LIvie raungeth these in this yeere. Diodorus nameth four; L. Valerius, Crispus, (which is the name of Tribonius) Au. Manlius, and Serv. Sulpitius, Crispus, some call Flavus.


372


Sp. Papirius.


L. Papirius.


Ser. Cornelius IV.


Q. Servilius.


C. Sulpitius.


L Aemilius IV.


ACcording to Livie, these were created Tribunes military in Consuls authoritie. The surname of Cornelius (as wee saw before) was Maluginensis. Diodorus writeth four; Q. Servilius, Sp. Papirius, Cornelius, (...), but not truly.


373


M. Furius Camillus VI.


A. Posthumius Regillensis.


L. Postbumius Regillensis.


L. Furius.


L. Lucretius.


M. Fabius Ambustus.


LIvie nameth these as we have placed them: but Diodorus in this wise; M. and L. both Furij, A. Posthumius, L. Lucretius, M. Fabius, and L. Posthumius. Plutarch also nameth Camillus Tribune militarie this yeer; wherein he vanquished the Prenestines, the Volscians, and the Tusculans also, against whom war was proclaimed, because they had served in the field under the Prenestines.


374


L. Valerius V.


L. Valerius III.


C. Sergius III.


L. Menenius II.


P. Papirius.


Ser. Cornel. Maluginensis.


THese sixe are set downe by Livie: but Diodorus reckoneth eight, namely, L. and P. both Valerij, C. Terentius, L. Menenius, C. Sulpitius, T. Papirius, L. Aimilius, M. Fabius.


375


P. Manlius.


C. Manlius.


L. Iulius.


C. Sextilius.


M. Albinus.


L. Antistius.


AFter this, was the generall assembly holden for the election of militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie, wherein were as many created of the Commoners as of the Patritij; namely, P. and C. both Manlij, with L. Iulius, Patritians: and out of the Commons, C. Sextilius, M. Albinus, and L. Antistius. But Diodorus exhibiteth eight, and to these above rehearsed, he addeth C. Herenucius, and P. Trebonius. Sextilius also he calleth Sextius.


376


Sp. Furius.


Q. Servilius II.


C. Licinius.


P. Cloelius.


M. Horatius.


L. Geganius.


LIvie reporteth these for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie this yeere: but in Livie, for Lu. Menenius the third time, you must read C. Licinius, as Sigonius hath shewed in his Scholiae upon Livie: which Onuphrius also in his Kalender approoveth. But Diodorus speaketh of no more than foure; Q. Servilius, C. Licinius, L. Furius, P. Cloelius.


377


L. Aemilius.


P. Valerius IV.


C. Veturius.


Ser. Sulpitius.


L. Quintius Cincinnatus.


C. Quintius Cincinnatus.


THese Tribunes militarie, the Consuls (being forced by the might and strong hand of the great men of the citie) chose all Patritians, as Livie witnesseth. The same also are named by Diodorus, excepting only C. Quintius, who is called by him C. Cornelius. As for Serv. Sulpitius, hee was surnamed Praetextatus. Zonaras nameth him Rusus.



378. 379. 380. 381. 382.


C. Licinius Stolo.


L. Sextius.


Tribunes of the Commons five yeeres.
IN this yeere happened the fourth chaunge of the Roman government: for the administration of the weale publicke, fell from Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie, to the Tribunes of the Commons. The authors that procured this mutation, were (as Livie reporteth) C. Licinius Stolo and L. Sextius, Tribunes of the Commons, who in the former yeere having promulged three lawes in favour of the Commons and against the power of the Patritij, the first for redressing of debts; a second for a stent of lands and possessions; and the third, that there should bee no more elections of Tribb. militarie, and that one of the Coss. should necessarily be chosen a commoner: seeing they could not goe through with these laws, by reason of their owne fellowes oppositions (whome of purpose the nobles had made for themselves) fell into an anger, and would suffer no curule magistrates of state to be created, nor any election to be holden, but onely of Aediles and Tribunes, both of Commons. This desolate est^te and want of magistrates (whiles the Commons made the same Tribunes still, who with uncessant and invincible persistance never gave over to crosse the election of Tribunes militarie) continued in the cittie for the space of five yeeres, as Livie saith. This want of magistrates Diodorus calleth (...), and casteth it upon the former yeere. But Sext. Rusus, Eutropius, Cassiodorus, and Zonaras write, that they ruled the state not five yeeres, but foure onely. Sigonius and Onuphrius in his Kalender, follow Livie, and his Annales it seemeth that the Capitoline writers go by. Plinie also in the sixteen booke and foure and fortieth chapter, maketh mention of the yeere three hundred seventie nine from the foundation of the citie, in which yeere he saith that at Rome


383


L. Furius.


A. Manlius.


Ser. Sulpitius.


Ser. Cornelius.


P. Valerius.


C. Valerius.


WHen C. Licinius and L. Sextius the Tribunes gave over their opposition and the libertie of their negative voice, whereby the Interregent called and held an assembly for the election of magistrates, the abovenamed Tribunes militarie, were (as Livie saith) created for this yeere. Diodorus nameth them thus, L. Papirius, L. Menenius, Ser. Cornelius, and Ser. Sulpitius, who writeth also, that after them there was another Anarchie, and when that was overpast and gone, then were created A. Manlius, L. Furius, Serv. Sulpitius, and Serv. Cornelius. But in his storie, as well through his owne default, as the negligence of the writers that copied out the same, there is a confusion of yeerely magistrates.


384


Q. Servilius.


C. Veturius. II.


A. Cornelius.


M. Cornelius.


Q. Quintius.


M. Fabius.


THis yeere also, as Livie writeth, had these for Tribunes militarie in Consuls authoritie. But Diodorus hath Q. Servilius, C. Veturius, A. Cornelius, M. Cornelius, and Mar. Fabius: as for Quintius, Sigonius calleth him rather Cincinnatus than Capitolinus. The rest have their warrant out of the Capitoline fragments, wherein it is thus found Cossus ...... Maluginensis ..... Cincinnatus ...... Mar. Fabius Ambustus. This is that M. Fabius Ambustus, who had bestowed his two daughters in marriage, the one to C. Licinius Stolo, the other to Serv. Sulpitius Praetextatus, as Livie writeth.


385


L. Quintius.


Serv. Sulpitius.


L. Papirius.


Ser. Cornelius.


Sp. Servilius.


L. Veturius.


LIvie declareth these sixe for Tribunes militarie this yeere. Diodorus rehearseth but three, namely, T. Quintius, Servius Cornelius, and Servius Sulpitius. What surnames all these caried, and with what numeral notes (signifying how often they had borne the office) they are to bee marked, the Capitoline fragments doe shew; wherein they stand thus, Capitolinus .... Maluginensis. II. Praetextatus. IIII. Sp. Servilius Structus, L. Papirius Crassus, L. Veturius Crassus Cicurinus.


386


Two Dictators without any curule magistrats of State besides.


PResently in the verie beginning of the yeere, they proceeded to put it to the trial of a finall issue, what should become of the foresaid laws proposed by Licinius and Sextius. When the tribes were called to give their voices, and the publishers of the lawes were not hindered by the negatives of their Colleagues

comming betweene; the nobles began then, to quake for feare, and in all hast betooke them to their two last helpes and meanes of refuge, the soveraigne and absolute government, and the principall cittizen and greatest man of all others. Resolve they did to nominat a Dictator, and Marcus Furius Camillus was the man; who tooke unto him for Generall of the horsemen, L. Armilius. But when the cheefetaines and ringleaders of the Commons, dealt very bitterly and roughly against Camillus, he (as Livie writeth) resigned up his Dictatorship. Plutarch also testifieth the same: who likewise avoucheth the cause thereof, which Livie goeth about to disprove. But both Livie and Plutarch doe affirme, that in the rowme of Camillus thus giving over his place, there was a second Dictatour created. Livie saith it was P. Manlius. Plutarch suppresseth his name: but they agree both, that C. Licinius was the Generall of the horse. Howbeit, they meane not both, one and the selfesame man. For Livie saith and that truly, that it was he who had been Tribune militarie in Consuls authoritie before: But Plutarch nameth him, who was the authour of the sedition and of the new lawes: wherein hee faulteth. For the captaine of the foresaid sedition, was this yeere also made Tribune of the Commons the ninth time: but Tribune of the Commons and Generall of the horse at one time he could not be. And therfore Onuphrius thinketh him to have beene the sonne of P. Licinius Calvus militarie Tribune, and who had to his grandfather that Pub. Licinius, who of the Commons was the first Tribune militarie. Of this, see more in his Kalender.


387


A. Cornelius. II.


L. Veturius.


Iulus P. Manlius.


M. Cornelius.


M. Geganius.


P. Valerius. VI.


LIvie exhibiteth these Tribb. militarie before named for this yeer, whom Diodorus overpasseth. Their surnames, together with the notes signifying how often they had borne this honourable dignitie, are thus expressed in the Capitoline fragments. Cossus II ..... Maluginensis II ...... Macerinus. L. Veturius. Crassus Cicurinus II ..... P. Valerius Petitus Puplicola, VI. P. Manlius Capitolinus II.


388


L. Sextius.


L. Aimilius.


WHen L. Sextius and C. Licinius, Tribb. of the Com: now chosen the tenth time, were more and more eager and instant in the publishing of their lawes, in the end the authoritie both of Dictatour and Senate, was conquered by the strong hand of the Tribunes. For they prevailed, notwithstanding al the nobilitie was against it, that there should be holden a solemn assembly for election of Consuls: and that, (by vertue of their lawes which they carried cleere before them) the one of the Consuls should be a Commoner. By which meanes, L. Sextius was the first Consul created from out of the Commons. But when the nobles denied flatly to approve the same by their assent, insomuch as the Commons were at the point of insurrection and readie to leave the citie; the discord and dissention was at length taken up and appeased by the mediation of the Dictatour: and as the nobilitie was content to yeeld unto the communaltie a Consull, so the Commons graunted unto the nobles one Pretour or lord cheefe justice within the citie, and him to be created from out of the nobilitie. Graunted also unto them now first it was, that two Aediles Curule should bee chosen out of the Patritij. The Commons conferred the Consulship upon L. Sextius (by whose law it was first obtained) and for companion in governement hee had L. Aimylius Mamercus. Thus much Livie and Plutarch: who altogether with Cassiodorus put down for Consuls, L. Aemylius a Patritian, and L. Sextius a Commoner. The same, Diodorus nameth L^. Aemylius Mamercus, and Lu. Lateranus. Now this Lateranus is the surname of Sextius, as appeareth in a table of record in the Capitoll, wherein the Consuls are thus to bee seene, Mamercinus, and L. Sextius Sextinus Lateranus: as also in the Sicilian registers they are called Mamercinus and Lateranus. In the booke entituled De viris Illustribus of famous men, wee find written that it was not L. Sextius, but C. Licinius Stolo, who was the first Consull chosen out of the communaltie.


389


L. Genutius.


Q. Servilius.


DIodorus, Livie, and Cassiodorus shew unto us for Consuls, L. Genutius, and Q. Servilius: Of whome Orosius also and Eutropius make mention. According to the records of the Capitoll, the Cos. in this first Consulship, is thus written. Q. Servilius, son of Q. nephew of Quintus Ahala, together with L. Genutius, but in the second, the son of M. nephew of Cn. surnamed Amentinensis. In the Sicilian registers

they be written Genutius and Curtius, but corruptly as Sigonius thinketh.


290


C. Sulpitius Peticus.


C. Licimus Stolo.


THese bee the Consuls reported by Livie and Cassiodorus. Diodorus concealeth their surnames. Valerius Max. in his second booke and first chapter maketh mention of them, and so doth Plutarch in his problemes. But hee whom all other writers name Stolo, the Capitoline records nominate Calvus: as also the Sicilian, which deliver their surnames Paticus and Calvus.


391


L. Aemylius Mamercus. II.


Cn. Genutius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus declare these for Consuls: whom Diodorus in his sixteenth book nameth Cn. Genutius and L. Aemylius. In the Capitoll tables in this manner, they bee set downe@@ Mamercinus II. and Cn. Genutius sonne of M. and nephew of M. Amentinensis. But in the Sicilian registers, Mamercinus and (...).


392


Q. Servilius Ahala. II.


L. Genutius. II.


DIodorus nameth the Consuls of this yeere, Q. Servilius and Q. Genutius. The Sicilian registers, Ahala and Genutius. Livie and Cassiodorus, Q. Servilius Hala and L. Genutius. These are they who three yeers before were matched together in the same government.


393


C. Sulpitius.


C. Licinius Calvus.


THese are by Livie recorded Consuls this yeere. Cassiodorus writeth them thus, C. Sulpitius II. and C. Licinius. Diodorus in this wise, C. Sulpitius and C. Licinius. Sigonius supposeth they be the same, who three yeeres before were colleagues. The Sicilian registers give unto Licinius the surname, not of Calvus as before, but of Stolo: and Sulpitius they surname Peticus.


394


C. Poetilius Libo.


M. Fabius Ambustus.


LIvie and Cassiodorus write the Consuls for this yeere were, C. Poetelius Balbus: and M. Fabius Ambustus. But Diodorus, M. Fabius and C. (...), corruptly for (...). The Capitoline writers give them surnames divers from Livie: for they, call Libo, Visulus; but he, Balbus. And the Sicilian registers goe with those of the Capitoll.


395


M. Popilius Laenas.


Cn. Manlius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus name this yere Consuls in this sort: but Diodorus calleth them, M. Popilius Laenatus, and Cn. Manlius Imperiosus. This was the first man of the Popilij surnamed Laenas. The reason of which name Cicero rendreth in his booke Brutus, saying, M. Popilius being Consull, and at the same time offering sacrifice in his robe called Laena, for that hee was Flamin to Carmenta, upon newes brought unto him that the commons were up and risen in a commotion against the Nobles, came in that attire and habit as he was into the assembly; and what with his authoritie of countenance, and what with his eloquence of speech, appeased the sedition.


396


C. Fabius.


C. Plautius


LIvie and Cassiodorus have these above-named for the Consuls this yeere: but in Diodorus they are named M. Fabius and C. Plotius. In the Capitoline records@@ Ambustus and C. Plautius Proculus.


397


C. Martius.


Cn. Manlius.


DIodorus, Livie, and Cassiodorus name the Consuls of this yeere, C. Martius and Cn. Manlius. This Cn. Manlius was Consull the first time, two yeeres before. Cuspinians booke and the Greek records, have Rutilius and Capitolinus.


398


M. Fabius Ambustus. II.


M. Popilius Laenas II.


THis yeers Consuls are with these names entituled by Livie and Cassiodorus. Diodorus leaveth out their surnames and the numerall notes. Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, set them thus downe, Ambustus II. and Laenas.


399


C. Sulpitius Peticus. III.


M. Valerius Poplicola.


IN the foure hundred yeere from the foundation of the cittie, and the thirtie five after

that it was by the Gaules woon, the commons after eleven yeeres did for goe their hold of the Consulship, and upon an Interregencie, both Coss. of the Patritij entred into government, to wit, C. Sulpitius Paeticus. III. M. Valerius Publicola, as Livie saith. The same Consuls, Diodorus, Cassiodorus, and the Sicilian registers, do report. But why the account of time made by Livie, disagreeth from this reckoning, Sigonus and Onuphrius in his kalender doe give a reason.


400


M. Fabius Ambustus. III.


T. Quintius or M. Popilius.


IN this yeere also, according to Livie, both Coss. were Patritij, namely M. Fabius Ambustus the third time, with T. Quintius: although hee writeth, that in some Annales in stead of Titus Quintius, hee found Marcus Popilius Consull. With Livie accordeth Diodorus and Cassiodorus, Solinus also, who in his fortie one chapter out of Cornelius Nepos writeth, that Alexander was borne when M. Fabius Ambustus and T. Quintius Capitolinus were Consuls. Cuspinians booke, setteth forth Ambustus and Capitolinus. But these Consuls and those that follow, are in the Sicilian registers concealed.


401


C. Sulpitius Peticus. IIII.


M. Valerius Poplicola. III.


BOth Consuls created this yeere were Patritij, and namely those who are here set down, after Livie and Cassiodorus. Diodorus omitteth both their surnames, and also the numerall notes, and setteth after the former Consuls, M. Valerius and C. Sulpitius.


402


P. Valerius Poplicola.


C. Martius Rutilus.


TO L. Valerius Poplicola, was given in fellowship of governement this yeere, C. Martius Rutilus of the commons, as Livie saith. These Cassiodorus calleth P. Valerius and C. Martius Rutilus the second time. Diodorus nameth them M. Fabius and P. Valerius. The Sicilian registers intermingle them confusedly with those of the next yeere, matching Rutilus and Pennus together.


403

C. Sulpitius Peticus. @ T. or K. or C. Quintius Pennus.

THe Coss. for this yeer created, were C. Sulpitius Peticus, and T. Quintius Pennus. Some put to Quintius the name Caeso, others Caius. Livie and Cassiodorus nameth them thus, C. Sulpitius Peticus and T. Quintius Pennus: but Diodorus C. Sulpitius and C. Quintius.


404


M. Popilius Laenas.


L. Cornelius Scipio.


LIvie writeth, that for Consuls this yeere the commons yeelded M. Popilius Laenas, and the nobles L. Cornelius Scipio. Cassiodorus setteth them foorth under the name of M. Popilius Laenas the third time, and L. Cornelius Scipio. Diodorus nameth them, C. Cornelius and M. Popilius: and the Sicilian registers barely Scipio and Laenas.


405


L. Furius Camillus.


P. Claudius Crassus.


LVcius Furius Camillus the Dictatour, restored the nobles againe to their former possession of the Consulship: and beeing himselfe for that good demerit created Consul, with the great love and heartie affection of the nobles, nominated for his Colleague, Publius Claudius Crassus. Thus saith Livie. The same Consuls are set downe by Cassiodorus. But Diodorus nameth them Aemylius and T. Quintius. The Sicilian registers, Camillus and Crassus. Cicero in Cato maketh mention of these Consuls, saying that Plato came to Tatentum, when L. Camillus and P. Claudius were Consuls: Gellius likewise, 9 booke II chapter.


406


M. Valerius Corvus.


M. Popilius Laenas. IIII.


MArcus Manlius Torquatus being Dictator, declared for Consull with the exceeding favor of the people, M. Valerius Corvus (for that was his surname afterwards) in his absence, and being but three and twentie yeeres old. This Corvus had joined with him in the Consulship from out of the commons. M. Popilius Laenas the third time, as saith Livie and Cassiodorus. But Diodorus three yeeres after nominateth M. Valerius and M. Popilius. In the fragment of the Capitoll thus only it is found, M. Valerius, M.F. M.N. Corvus Consull. In the Sicilian registers Corvinus and Laenas.


407


T. Manlius Torquatus


C. Flautius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus nameth them for Consulls this yeere. Cuspinians kalender

and the Sicilian records, Torquatus and Venno. In a fragment of the Capitoll there is to be read the surname of Manlius, Imperiosus Torquatus.


408


M. Valerius Corvus II.


C. Poetelius.


THese are named Consuls by Livie and Cassiodorus: but Cuspinians Kalender and the registers of Sicilie, shew for Consuls, Corvinus and Libo. As for the name C. Poetelius, it is described by his Dictatourship, which (according to the Capitoll evidences) he bare in the yeere 440: for in a fragment (restifying his Consulship) there appeareth no more but one of his surnames, Visolus.


409


M. Fabius Dorso.


Ser. Sulpitius Camerinus.


THese were the Consuls created for this yeere, as Livie and Cassiodorus write. Diodorus also (although not in the right place) alledgeth M. Fabius and Ser. Sulpitius Consuls. The Sicilian registers, Dorso and Camerinus. Both these Consuls were Patritij, which Livie omitted.


410


C. Martius Rutilus. III.


T. Manlius Torquatus II.


LIvie and Cassiodorus avow these for Coss. this yeer. Diodorus likewise delivereth unto us, C. Martius and T. Manlius Torquatus. The Sicilian registers, Rutilus and Torquatus. Frontinus also in his second booke of Stratagems speaketh of them.


411


M. Valerius Corvus III.


A. Cornelius Cossus.


LIvie and Cassiodore both togither report, that these were chosen Coss. for this yeer. Diodorus, Cicero in his booke of Divination, and Frontinus, name them, M. Valerius and A. Cornelius. The Sicilian registers, Valerius and Cossus: both of them are Patritij. But hee that hath written of famous men, calleth them, Valerius Max. and Cornelius Cossus.


412


C. Martius Rutilus IV.


Q. Servilius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus declare Coss. for this yeer, C. Martius and Q. Servilius. Diodorus, Q. Servilius and Martius Rutilus. The Sicilian registers, Ahala and Rutilus. This is that Q. Servilius Ahala who was master of the horse in the 403 yeere.


413


C. Plautius II.


L. Aemilius Mamercinus.


THe Consuls that followed, were C. Plautius the second time, and L. Aemilius Mamercus, as witnesse Livie and Cassiodorus: but L. Aemilius and C. Plotius, as testifieth Diodorus: and as the Sicilian registers say, Venno and Mamercinus. Cuspinians kalender set foorth for this yeere, Venno the second time, and Mamercinus.


414


T. Manlius Torquatus III.


P. Decius Mus.


TItus Manlius Torquatus the third time, and Pub. Decius Mus, bare the Consulship this yeere, as Livie and Cassiodorus report. Diodorus nameth them, T. Manlius Torquatus and P. Decius. The Sicilian registers, Torquatus and Mus. Zonaras, Torquatus the third time, and Decius. Of the same Consuls Plinie speaketh in his 22 booke and 5 chap. Valerius also in his 1 booke and 5 chap. besides others.


415


T. Aemilius Mamercinus.


Q. Publilius Philo.


TItus Aemilius Mamercinus, and Q. Publilius Philo, are by Livie reckoned Coss. for this yeere. Diodorus passeth over their surnames. The Greeke records shew unto us, Mamercinus and Philo. As for Philo, he is described out of the tables of the Capitoll.


416


L. Furius Camillus.


C. Manius.


THus say Livie and Cassiodorus. Diodorus hath L. Furius and (...), but corruptly. The Sicilian registers, Camillus and Menius. The Capitoll monuments of triumphs, L. Furius Camillus, and C. Menius. Plinie in his 34 booke and 5. chap. maketh mention of Caius Maenius, Consull.


417


C. Sulpitius Longus.


P. Aelius Paetus.


LIvie and Cassiodorus write, that these Coss. followed. Diodorus putteth down C. Sulpitius, and L. Papirius. The Sicilian registers, have Longus and Paetus.


418


L. Papirius Crassus.


K. Diutius.


LVeius Papirius Crassus, and K. Diutius, were this yeeres Coss. as witnesse Livie, Cassiodorus,

and Diodorus also, but for leaving out the surname Crassus. In the Sicilian registers they are named, Crassus and Diutius. As touching these Consuls, Cicero in his epistle to Paetus, writeth thus; L. Papirius Crassus, foure yeeres after he was Dictatour, was made Consull with K. Diutius.


419


M. Valerius Corvus IIII.


M. Attilius Regulus.


THis yeere, when the Ausones that inhabited the citie Cales, took armes and combined with the Sidicines, Mar. Valerius Corvus, a right noble Generall, was created Consull the fourth time, having to his colleague (as Livie writeth) M. Attilius Regulus. Cassiodorus likewise declareth the same for Consuls; and so doth Diodorus, but that he leaveth out their surnames: which appeare extant in the Sicilian registers.


420


T. Veturius.


Sp. Posthumius.


THe Dictator held an assembly for the election of Consuls, wherein were created (according to Livie) these above-named. So say Cassiodorus also and Diodorus. Zonaras nameth them, Tiber. Calvinus, and Sp. Posthumius; and right well, as Sigonius thinketh: for Tiberius was the fore name of the Vetury. The Greeke records, and Cuspinians booke, have Albinus and Calvinus.


421


Interregents, all one yeere.


SIgonius and Onuphrius insert this one yeere without Consuls, besides the account of the yeeres, according to the Capitoll monuments, albeit they see neither in Livie nor in any other, mention thereof; and all to make up the totall summe collected by Varro. And that the said yeere should at this time especially be interposed, the tables of the Capitoline records doe shew. For whereas in them thus engraven it is, M. Valerius Corvus Consull the fourth time, in the yeere of the citie 419; and againe L. Armilius and C. Plautius, in the yeere 414: to the end that these records might agree one with another, of necessitie there must be put a yere betweene. For leave out that, then, both L. Aemilius the Consull should fall upon the yeere 414, and the totall summe of the yeer in Varro and the Capitoline tables be overthrown. That this odde yeere was now above all other times to be cast betweene, Gregorie Haloander (who left in writing a Chronologie of the Consuls) saw long before them: for he over-passed this yeere wholly, noted without Consuls. But Sigonius and Onuphrius are of opinion, that this yeere there was an Anarchie, and the commonweale without Consuls or other magistrates of state, by occasion of the pestilence, whereof Livie writeth.


422


A. Cornelius II.


Cn. Domitius.


AVlus Cornelius (the second time Cos. with Cn. Domitius) is by Livie and Cassiodorus set downe. Diodorus nameth them A. Cornelius and C. Domitius. The Sicilian registers, Calvinas and Cossus.


423


M. Claudius Marcellus.


C. Valerius.


AFter this, were created Consuls, M. Claudius Marcellus, and C. Valerius, as Livie and Cassiodorus report. In Diodorus also they be set downe by the name of C. Valerius, and Mar. Clodius. Livie saith, that he findeth in the Annales, the surnames of Valerius diversly put downe, namely, Flaccus and Potitus. Orosius calleth these Consuls, Claudius Marcellus, and Valerius Flaccus: the Sicilian registers, Potitus and Marcellus. Sigonius and Onuphrius retain the surnames, that it may seeme, how to the old surname Potitus of the House Valeria, this new surname of Flaccus is a later addition.


424


L. Papirius Crassus II.


L. Plautius Venno.


THese Consuls are by Livie and Cassiodorus recited this yeere. Diodorus concealeth their surnames. The Sicilian registers make them knowne by the names of Crassus and Venno.


425


L. Aemilius Mamercinus.


C. Plautius.


NExt to them (according to Livie and Cassiodorus) were L. Aemilius Mamercus, and C. Plautius created Consuls. Diodorus nominateth L. Papirius with L. Plotius. The Sicilian registers, Mamercinus and Decianus. How both these are to be described, their triumphs upon

record in the Capitoll do evidently shew. These Consuls entred upon their governement the first day of Iulie.


426


P. Plautius Proculus.


P. Cornelius Scapula.


LIvie and Cassiodorus put down [for Consuls] P. Plautius Proculus, and P. Cornelius Scapula. Diodorus, P. Cornelius and A. Posthumius. The Sicilian registers, Venno and Scipio. Onuphrius thinketh this Plautius ought to be forenamed not Publius but Caius: who in his Consulship which he bare afterwards with Appius Caecus, was surnamed Venox (as Frontinus supposeth) for finding certaine springs and vaines of water within the earth.


427


C. Plautius Proculus.


Q. Publilius Philo. II.


LIvie and Cassiodorus match together in the Consulship for this yeere, L. Cornelius Lentut^s, and Q. Publilius Philo. Diodorus, L. Cornelius and Quintus Publilius. The Sicilian registers Lentulus and Philo.


428


L. Papirius Mugillanus Cursor.


C. Poetelius.


CAius Poetelius and L. Papirius are by Livie nominated Consuls this yeere. C. Poetilius the third time, and L. Papirius Mugillanus, by Cassiodorus. Solinus maketh mention of these Consuls in his five and thirtith chapter. As for Papirius, Livie indeed surnameth him here Mugillanus, but hee saith that hee findeth him in other Annales by the name of Cursor. In the Greeke records they be, Libo and Cursor. Now as touching C. Petilius, he is to bee written with the numerall note II. and not III. as Sigonius and Onuphrius doe admonish. For it is not the same man who was Consull in the 393 yeere, but his sonne.


429


L. Furius Camillus. II.


Iunius Brutus Scaeva.


LIvie and Cassiodorus put downe for Consuls, Lu. Furius Camillus the second time, and Iunius Brutus Scaeva. Diodorus, L. Furius, and D. Iunius. The Sicilian registers, Camillus and Brutus.


430



LVcius Furius, unto whome the charge of Samnium fell by lot, fortuned by occasion of sickenesse to forgoe the warre there, and was commaunded to nominate for the managing of martiall affaires a Dictatour: whereupon he pronounced L. Papyrius Cursor, the bravest warriour in those daies; by whom Q. Fabius Rullianus was named great maister of the horse. Afterwards Cursor turned him out of that maistership of horse, because without his warrant hee had fought (although it were fortunately) against the Samnites when himselfe was out of the way and gone to Rome for to take the Auspices anew: and in his roume hee substituted L. Papirius Crassus. Thus write Livie, Eutropius, and Valerius, in the second booke.


431


C. Sulpitius Longus. II.


Q. Aemilius [L. Aulius] Cerretanus.


LVcius Papirius the Dictatour, before he left his magistracie, created Consuls, C. Sulpitius Longus. II. and Quin. Aemilius Cerretanus. Some Annales have Aulius. Thus much Livie. In like maner the Sicilian registers have Longus and Cerretanus. But Diodorus coruptly for Aulius hath Aelius.


432


Q. Fabius.


L. Fulvius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus deliver unto us for Consuls this yeere, Q. Fabius and L. Fulvius: whome the Capitoll records of the triumphs name Q. Fabius Maximus Rullianus, and L. Fulvius Corvus. Mervell it is therefore, that in the Sicilian registers they are put down, Cursor and Sylla.


433


T. Veturius Calvinus.


Sp. Posthumius.


THis yeere Livie and Cassiodorus set foorth for Consuls, T. Veturius Calvinus and Sp. Posthumius. Cicero in his third booke of Offices writeth, that they were twise Consuls. Zonaras calleth the one of them T. Calvinus, by a familiar fore-name unto that house and kinred of the Veturij. The Greeke records exhibite unto us Calvinus and Albinus. Of these Consuls as also of the Caudine peace, Cicero in his booke of old age; Plinie also in his booke of famous men, Gellius in his 17 booke and 21 chapter, Florus in his first booke and 16 chap. and Orosius in his third booke and 15 chapter, doe make mention.



434


L. Papyrius Cursor. II.


C. Publilius Philo.


LIvie and Cassiodorus shew for this yeeres Consuls, Q. Publilius Philo and L. Papyrius Cursor, the second time. The Sicilian registers; Cursor and Philo. But that this Philo should now bee third time Consull, his Consulships doe plainly shew.


435


L. Papyrius Cursor, or Mugillanus.


Q. Aulius Cerretanus. II.


LIvie saieth there is some doubt, whether L. Papyrius Cursor were this yeere created Consull the third time, with Q. Aemylius Cerretanus the second time: and for his good service in warre at Luceria, continued still in governement: or rather L. Papyrius Mugillanus, and so the surname was mistaken. Cassiodorus delivereth unto us L. Papirius and Q. Aulius Cerretanus. The Sicilian registers, Papirius and Cerretanus. The monument of his triumph in the Capitol, alloweth of Cursor and not Mugillanus. The author of that book which Cuspinian hath set forth, following other Annals, setteth downe Mugillanus.


436


M. Foslius Flaccinator.


L. Plantius Venno.


SEeing that for twelve yeeres next ensuing, we have the Capitoline tables whole and sound, the lesse trouble we need to be at in reforming and redressing the names of the magistrates. Both they, and also Livie with Cassiodorus represent unto us for this yeres Consuls, M. Feslius Flaccinator and L. Plantius Venno. Diodorus calleth them, L. Plotius and (...). The Sicilian registers Venno and Flaccus.


437


C. Iunius Bubulcus.


Q. Aemylius Barbula.


CAssiodorus putteth downe C. Iunius and Quintus Aemylius for Consuls. Livie, C. Iunius Bubulcus, and Quintus Aemylius Barbula. A stone in the Capitoll, Q. Aemylius Barbula, and C. Iunius Bubulcus Brutus.


438


Sp. Nautius.


M. Popilius.


NExt follow in order Sp. Nautius and M. Popilius Consuls, according to Livie and Cassiodorus. Rutilus and Lanas their surnames, are by Sigonius restored unto them: and the same also are to bee seene in the Sicilian bookes of record.


439


L. Papirius Cursor. IIIL.


Q. Publilius Philo. IIII.


THe Consuls names of this yere, through the default of the writers that copied foorth Livies bookes, are there lest out: namely L. Papirius Cursor the fourth time, and Q. Publilius Philo likewise the fourth time: as it is written in Cassiodorus, in the Capitoll tables, and in Cuspinians booke, wherin they are named Cursor and Philo Howbeit in the Sicilian registers they are called Cursor and Lanas.


440


M. Paetelius.


C. Sulpitius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus report for Consuls this yeere, C. Sulpitius and M. Paetelius, But Diodorus hath C. Sulpitius and (...) corruptly for (...). The Capitoline writers, have M. Paetelius Libo and C. Sulpitius Longus the third time. The Sicilian registers, Longus and (...), but there is a fault, as Sigonus truly thinketh.


441


L. Papirius Cursor.


V. C. Iunius Bubulcus.


DIodorus putteth downe for Consuls this yeere L. Papirius fift time, and C. Iunius. The Sicililian registers, Cursor and Bubulcus. But Livie and Cassiodorus, L. Papirius Cursor V. and C. Iunius Bubulcus II. Festus maketh mention also of these Coss. in his eighteenth booke.


442


M. Valerius.


C. Decius.


LIvie writeth that there followed Consuls M. Valerius Max. and P. Decius: but Cassiodorus saith M. Valerius and P. Decius. Frontinus in his booke of water conduites, speaketh of these Consuls; whom he writeth to have bin thirthie yeeres after the beginning of the Samnites warre. As for P. Decius, Livie afterwards calleth Mus. The Sicilian registers have Max. and Mus.



443


C. Iunius Bubulcus. III


III. Q. Aemylius Barbula. II.


VVEe find in Livie for Consuls this yeere, C. Innius Bubulcus the third time, and Q. Aemylius Barbula the second time: likewise in Cassiodorus. But Diodorus nameth them C. Iunius and Q. Aemylius. In the Sicilian registers, Bubulcus and Barbula. The same names are also in the Capitoll monuments, which be in Livie.


444


C. Martius Rutilus.


Q. Fabius.


CAtus Martius Rutilus and Q. Fabius be this yeeres Consuls in Livie. But in Cassiodorus, C. Martius Rutilus and Q. Fabius the second time. Diodorus hath C. Martius and Q. Fabius the second time. The Sicilian registers shew Rutus and Rutilus. The Capitoll monuments, Q. Fabius Max. Rutilianus the second time, and C. Martius, who afterwards in his second Censureship in the 498 yere, is surnamed Censorinus.


445


A yeere without Consuls.


L. Papirius Dictator. II.


VErrius Flaccus interposeth this yeere also without Consuls, wherein hee reporteth L. Papirius Dictator the second time, with C. Iunius Bubulcus Brutus the maister of the horse. This yeere, Diodorus, Livie, the Greeke records, Cuspinians booke and Cassiodorus do overleape. For Livie writeth that L. Papirius Cursor was nominated by the Consull, Dictatour, and by him C. Iunius Bubulcus named maister of the horse: upon occasion that C. Martius the Consull had no good fortune in his conduct of the warres in Samnium. This inserting of one yere Onuphrius hath approved, that the computation of the yeeres gathered by Varro might stand in force, which to the Capitoll tables putteth one yeere, whose judgement wee also are willing to follow.


446


Q. Fabius


P. Decius.


LIvie writeth that Fabius continued Consull this yeere also, for his singular good service in subduing and taming Hetruria: and that he had for his companion in government Decius. Cassiodorus acknowledgeth for Coss. Q. Fabius the third time, and P. Decius the second time. Diodorus, P. Decius and Q. Fabius. The Sicilian registers, Mus and Rullus. The C^pitoline tables, P. Decius Must II and Q. Fabius Max. Rullianus the third time.


447


App. Claudius.


L. Volumnius.


LIvie saith that immediatly there followed Consuls, App. Claudius and L. Volumnius. Cassiodorus and Diodorus, Appius and Violens. The Sicilian registers, App. Claudius Caecus, and L. Volumnius. The Capitoline monuments have Flamma and Violens. Now whether one of these Consuls surnames be Violens or Violensis, Onuphrius advertiseth us to consider. For the capitoll stone hath it alwaies written Violens. But the Greeke words have Appius and (...), as if the name were Violensis.


448


Q. Martius Tremulus.


P. Cornelius Arvina.


LIvie and Cassiodorus register for the Consuls of this yeere, Q. Martius Tremulus, with a colleague adjoined unto him. Diodorus saith Q. Martius and P. Cornelius. The Sicilian records, Tremulus and Arvina.


449


L. Posthumius.


T. Minutius.


LVeius Posthumius and T. Minutius are reported Consuls by Diodorus, Livie, and Cassiodorus. Cuspinians book sheweth, Migellus and Augurinus. These Coss. doth L. Piso put down for to succeed Q. Fabius and P. Decius, leaving out those two yeres wherein we have set downe (as Livie writeth) that Claudius with Volumnius, and Cornelius with Martius were Consuls. Whither his memorie failed him in digesting of the annales, or of purpose he supposed that those two couple of Consuls were not truly recorded, and therefore overleapt them, I know not. A fragment there is of the Capitoline stone, which sheweth for this yeere, Megallas to bee the surname of Posthumius, Tiberius the forename of Minutius and Mr of Fulvius. Now the surnames of Fulvius were Curvus and Petinus, as it appeareth written in his triumph.



450


P. Sempronius Sophus.


P. Sulpitius Saverrio.


THe Consuls next following were P. Sulpitius Saverrio, and P. Sempronius Sophus, according to Livie and Cassiodorus. In Diodorus they are written P. Sulpitius and P. Sempronius. In the Greeke registers, they stand Sempronius and Saverrio. Plinie writeth of these Consuls in his 33 booke: but Sempronius hee calleth Longus. Both of them are described thus by their triumphs, appearing uppon record in the Capitoll, for in their Consulship, there is no more to be seen but Sophus and Publius.


451


L. Genutius.


Ser. Cornclius


DIodorus, Livie and Cassiodorus, report for Consuls this yeere, L. Genutius, and Servius Cornelius. The Sicilian registers have Aventinensis and Lentulas. The Capitoline writers put unto Cornelius the surname of Lentulus.


452


M. Livius Denter.


M. Aemylius.


LIvie nameth for Consuls this yeere M. Livius and C. Aemylius. Cassiodorus, M. Livius and L. Aemylius. Diodorus, M. Livius and M. Aemylius. As for the forename to Aemylius, Sigonius and Onuphrius doe thinke that more credit is to bee given unto Diodorus, than others: especially, seeing that in Livie there is mention made the yeere following of M. Aemylius Paulus Generall of the horsemen, whome they all thinke to bee the same man that this Consull. M. Livius is written Denter in the Capitoll records, which surname Livie in another place addeth to the Livij. Cuspinians booke in like manner setteth downe Denter and Pantius as the surnames of these Consuls. The Sicilian registers, Denter and Aemylius.


453


Two Dictatours,


and no Consuls.


THis yeere also of two Dictatours without Consuls, Onuphrius inserteth in his kalender, howbeit directed thereto by the evidence of the Capitol fragments: to the end that the calculation of Varro might agree in all respects, which, if this yeere were over-slipped should be wholly overthrowne: although Diodore, Livie, and Cassiodore dissent there from, and leave out this yeere altogether. Whereof see Onuphrius more at large in his Kalender upon the yeere 453.


454


M. Valerius.


Q. Apuleius Pansa.


IMmediatly after M. Livius and M. Aemylius, Livie and Cassiodorus letting passe the yeere of two Dictatours without Consuls, bring in M. Valerius and Q. Apuleius Pansa for Consuls. The Greeke records shew Corvinus and Pansa. It seemeth that Livie by Marcus Valerius meaneth Maximus, for that hee saith that presently upon his Dictatourship he was made Consull. Now that Mar. Valerius Max., was Dictatour the yeere before, he writeth plainly.


455


M. Fulvius Paetus.


T. Manlius Torquatus.


LIvie and Cassiodorus declare for Consuls this yeere, M. Fulvius Paetus and T. Manlius Torquatus. The Sicilian registers have Paetinus and Torquatus. Livie saith that Q. Fabius refused the Consulship offered unto him without any suite of his. But T. Manlius the Consull was by lot appointed to levie warre against Hetruria, which tooke armes and prepared for warre against the truce accorded upon. Now was he scarce well entred into the enemies confines, but as hee exercised among men of armes, and chanced to turne about his horse upon a full carrier, hee was cast from his backe: whereupon (for the present) hee lay for dead, and within three daies after the said fall ended his life. Then all the Centuries in generall by their suffrages chose M. Valerius Consul, whom the Senate purposed to have made Dictatour. Thus much Livie. By M. Valerius hee meaneth Corvus, whom Cicero writeth in his booke of old age, and Valerius Max., in his seventh booke and fortie eight chapter, to have beene Cos. now the sixt time, and that between this and the first there were 46 yeres, although Plutarch in the life of C. Marius saith they were but 45 Howbeith all of them call him Corvinus and not Corvus.


456


L. Cornelius Scipio.


Cn. Fulvius.


CNeus Fulvius and L. Cornelius Scipio are recorded Consuls by Livie and Cassiodorus:

but Scipio and Centumalus, by Cuspinians book: Scipio and Maximus by the Greek records.


457


Q. Fabius Max. IV.


P. Decius Mus III.


LIvie and Cassiodorus alledged for Coss. this yeere, Q. Fabius Max. the fourth time, and P. Decius Mus, thrice. The same Consuls, Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records deliver unto us. The author that writeth of famous men, and Frontinus in his booke of Stratagemes, speake of P. Decius thrice Consull.


458


L. Volumnius.


Appius Claudius.


LVcius Volumnius a commoner, and Appius Claudius of noble blood, were created Coss. this yeere: even the same men who in their former Consulship were matched togither, as Livie and Cassiodorus write: but in the Sicilian registers they are found written, Claudius and Violens. Howbeit Cicero in his booke entituled Cato, reporteth, that betweene the two Consulships of App. Caecus were ten yeeres.


459


Q. Fabius V.


P. Decius IV.


LIvie and Cassiodorus both witnesse, that the Consuls next following, were Q. Fabius the 5 time, and P. Decius the 4 time, who had been companions togither alreadie in 2 Consulates and in one Censorship. The Sicilian registers have Rullus and Mus: of which Consuls Cicero speaketh very often; Valerius Max. likewise, Paterculus also, Plutarch, Frontinus in his first booke of Stratagems, the author of the booke of famous men, Eutropius, Orosius, and others: who all report, that this Consull P. Decius, following the example of his father, offered himselfe to die for the Roman legions, and by his death purchased a notable victorie to the people of Rome.


460


L. Postumius Megellus.


M. Atilius Regulus.


THe Consuls next following, were L. Postumius Megellus, and M. Atilius Regulus, as Livie and Cassiodorus write. In the Sicilian records, their surnames are Megellus and Regulus.


461


L. Papirius Cursor.


Sp. Carvilius.


AFter Livie and Cassiodorus, the Coss. this yeer, were L. Papirius Cursor, and Sp. Carvilius. After the Sicilian registers, Cursor and Maximus. A stone in the Capitoll maketh mention of Papirius the son of L. nephew of P. surnamed Cursor, whom Livie writeth to be the sonne of Papirius 5 times Consull. Of these Coss. Plinie of Verona maketh mention in his 7 book and 60 chap. Val. Max. likewise in his 7 booke and first chap. Velleius in his second book; and the same Livie in the yeere 456.


462


Q. Fabius Gurges Max.


Decius Iunius Brutus,

son of Scavalini.

THe yeere following had Consuls, Q. Fabius Gurges, and D. Iunius Brutus Scaeva, as witnesse Livie and Cassiodorus. Zonaras nameth them, Iunius Brutus and Q. Fabius Max. Cuspinians Kalender, Maximus and Scaeva. The Sicilian registers, Brutus and Maximus. Livie, Plinie in his 7 booke, the capitoll tables, and Zonaras, have delivered, that this Fabius was the son of Q. Max. Rullianus, who had been 5 times Cos. before. And here an end of the Consuls for the first ten bookes.


463


L. Posthunius.


C. Iunius.


SInce that after this Consulship, ten bookes of Livie next ensuing be lost, whome hitherto wee have had for the most sufficient witnesse of this storie, so as now we are in manner destitute and deprived of the best helps of Annals, namely, Diodorus, Dionysius, and Livie: from hence forward wee will use principally in digesting and reckoning the yeeres by the Consuls, the authoritie and testimonie of Cassiodorus, the Sicilian records, and Cuspinians booke: yet will wee not in the meane while reject what helpe soever shall be ministred unto us by others. For this yeer therfore Cassiodorus writeth, that L. Postumius and C. Iunius, were created Coss. whose surnames, Megellus, and Brutus Bubulcus, have not been left out so much as in Cuspinians kalender, not in the Sicilian records. Livie also maketh mention of them in his 28 booke, saying thus, Lu. Postumius Megellus the interregent, was created Consul with C. Bubulcus, by that very court and assembly which himselfe called and held.


464


P. Cornelius Rusinus.


M'. Curius Dentatus.


THe Coss. this yeere are recorded by Cassiodorus, Pub. Cornelius Rufinus, and M'. Curius

Den^atus: for whom in the Sicilian registers, appeare Maximus the third time, and Mus the sixt time. But of those forenamed Consuls, Cicero maketh mention in his booke, entituled Cato; Paterculus in his first booke, Valerius Max. in his sixt booke and 3 chap. Plinie also in his 7 booke and 50 chap. Now this M'. Curius was called Dentatus, as Plinie writeth in his 6 booke and 16 chap. for that hee came into the world with teeth.


465


M. Valerius.


Q. Caditius.


MArcus Valerius and Q. Caeditius were afterwards Consuls, as saith Cassiodorus. The old booke of Cuspinian putteth to them the surnames of Corvinus and Noctua: which in the Sicilian registers are overpassed. The Greek records shew unto us, Maximus and Mus: for Maximus was a surname also of the Valerij Corvini.


466


Q. Martius.


P. Cornelius.


CAssiodorus this yeere delivereth for Consuls, Q. Martius and P. Cornelius, Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, adde their surnames. Tremulus II. and Arvinus II. who had been Consuls togither once before.


467


M. Ma^cellus.


Sp. Nautius.


CAssiodorus avoucheth Consuls this yeere, M. Marcellus and Cn. Nautius. The Greeke records and Cuspinians booke, have Marcellus and Rutilus.


468


M. Valerius.


C. Aelius.


MArcus Valerius and C. Aelius, are raunged in this yeer for Consuls by Cassiodorus. Cuspinians book putteth forth, Maximus and Paetus: but the Greeke records, Potitus and Paetus. Now you must thinke, that both Maximus and Potitus, are the surnames of the Valerij.


469


C. Claudius.


M. Aemilius.


FOr this yeeres Consuls, Cassiodorus hath C. Claudius and M. Aimilius. The Greeke records and Cuspinians booke, Canina and Lepidus: whereof the former is the surname of Claudius, the latter of Aemilius.


470


C. Servilius.


L. Caecilius.


BY Cassiodorus, C. Servilius and L. Caecilius Metellus, are placed Consuls in this yeere: for whereas in some copies of Cassiodorus, in stead of Lu. Caecilius, is written Caelius, that is a fault; as Sigonius and Onuphrius have noted. To Servilius this Consull, the Greeke records adde the surname of Turca, whome they put down Consull with Dento, they would say Denter, as both Sigonius and Onuphrius suppose. For Denter is a surname also given to the Caecilij, as appeareth by Livie.


471


P. Cornelius Dolabella.


Cn. Domitius.


CAssiodorus inferreth P. Cornel, Dolabella, and Cn. Domitius for Consuls. Cuspinians Kalender hath Dolabella and Calvus. The Sicilian registers, Dolabella Maximus. And some thinke, that Maximus was the surname of Dolabella, which hee seemeth to have acquired by the honor that he had woon in the war against the Gaules.


472


C. Fabricius.


Q. Aemilius.


CAssiodorus bringeth in for Consuls, C. Fabricius and Q. Aemilius: but the Sicilian registers, Luscinus and Papus. Of them Cicero in his booke Laelius, maketh mention in this manner: Wee see that Papus Aemilius was familiarly acquainted with C. Luscinus; for so we have heard our fathers say, that they were two Consuls togither, and companions in the Censorship. Moreover, Valerius in his chap. where hee treateth of Povertie, maketh mention of C. Fabricius, and Q. Aemilius Papus. This Aemilius, Plutarch in his Parallels calleth corruptly by the name of Paulus.


473


L. Aumilius.


Q. Martius.


THere followed Consuls, as Cassiodorus sheweth, L. Aimilius and Q. Martius; unto whome, Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, give also their surnames, Barbula and Philippus: and the same also is evident by the records in the Capitoll of their triumphs.



474


P. Valerius.


T. Coruncanius.


P. Vb. Valerius and Tit. Coruncanius, are by Cassiodorus placed in this yeere for Coss. The Greeke records, Cuspinians booke, Florus, Orosius, and Eutropius, give to Valerius the surname of Laevinus. And Plutarch hath (...) for (...).


475


P. Sulpitius.


P. Decius.


NExt after those, Cassiodorus putteth down P. Sulpitius Consull with P. Decius. The Sicilian registers, have Savennio and Mus. Cicero in his 2 booke, entitled De Fin. and in his Tusculan disputations, saith, That this Pub. Decius was the son of that P. Decius who vowed himselfe to death in the Sami^ites and Gaules warre.


476


C. Fabricius.


Q. Aimilius.


CAssiodorus delivereth unto us for Consuls C. Fabricius and Q. Aimilius: whome Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, call Luscinus the second time, and Papus. That these were fellows togither once before in the Consulate, Cicero writeth in his book Laelius, Plutarch in Pyrrhus, Gellius 3 booke chap. 8. Eutropius, and Zonaras, make report of the same.


477


P. Cornelius.


C. Iunius.


PVb. Cornelius, and C. Iunius, are rehearsed for Consuls this yeer by Cassiodorus. Cuspinians booke hath Rufinus the second time, and Brutus. The Greeke records, Rufinus and Bubulcus. Zonaras hath R. finus and Iunius. Of P. R. finus twise Consull, Cic. in his 2 booke Of a perfect orator, Valer. Max. in his 3 booke and 4 chap. Gellius in his 4 booke and 8 chap. in his 17 booke likewise and 21 chap. and last of all, Frontinus in his booke of Stra^agemes, make mention.


478


Q. Fabius.


C. Genutius.


CAssiodorus reporteth Q. Fabius and C. Genutius Coss. The Sicilians registers have Gurges and Clepsina. Of these Consuls, Orosius maketh mention in this wise: When Fabius Gurges was the second time Consul with G. Genutius Clepsina, a grievous pestilence reigned both in the cittie, and also in the territorie about it.


479


M'. Curius.


L. Lentulus.


CAssiodorus and Eutropius deliver unto us for Consuls, M'. Curius and L. Lentulus. The Sicilian registers, Dentatus and Lentulus. This is the third Consulate of M'. Curius, which togither with Lentulus Consulship, is drawne out of the Capitoll records of triumph this yeere.


480


Serv. Cornelius.


M'. Curius.


CAssiodorus sheweth for this yeeres Consuls, Servius Cornelius and M'. Curius: Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, Merenda, and Dentatus the third time. This M'. Curius is now Consull the fourth time, for, thrice he was before. Concerning this Serv. Cornelius Merenda, Plinie relateth and writeth, that hee received a princely coroner of gold at the hands of L. Lentulus the Consull of the former yeere, for winning a town of the Samnites.


481


C. Fabricius.


C. Claudius.


CAssiodorus setteth downe, C. Fabricius and C. Claudius Consuls: the Sicilian records, Licinius and Canina: Cuspinians kalender, Licinius and Cinna. Eutropius, Fabius L^c^nius and C. Claudius Canin^. Valleius, Fabius Do so and Claud. Canina. Whereby it may be understood, that these Consuls were called, ^. Fabius Do so Licinius, and Caius Claudius Canina: for Dorso was an old name of the Fabij.


482


L. Papirius Cursor.


Sp. Carvilius.


NExt after them, Cassiodorus nominateth for Consuls, Sp. (...) and Lu. Papirius Cursor. The records both of Sicilie and Cuspinian, have Cursor and Maximus. Both these were now Consuls the second time, as appeareth by their triumphs upon record in the Capitoll. Frontinus speaketh of them in this booke Of water conduits, and Livie in his 24 booke.



483


C. Quintius.


L. Genutius.


IT is reported by Cassiodore, that C. Quintius and L. Genutius were Consuls. Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, set to their surnames, Claudius and Clepsina. Livie in his 7 booke speaketh of one Tit. Quintius lame of one legge, from whome haply this surname is drawne.


484


C. Genutius.


Cn. Cornelius.


REported there are for Consuls this yeere by Cassiodorus, C. Genutius and Cn. Cornelius; whose surnames were Clepsina and Blasio, as it appeareth in Cuspinians books. This Caius Genutius is the same, who before-time was Consull. As for C. Blasio, he is described by his Censorship standing upon record in the Capitoll. The Greeke records over-passe them both.


485

or after some,

P. Sempronius.

or after some,

App. Claudius.

or after some,

Q. Ogulpbius.

or after some,

Fabius Pictor.


AFter Cornelius and Genutius Consuls, Cassiodorus bringeth in Pub. Sempronius, and App. Claudius, and of purpose over-skippeth Q. Gulo and Fabius Pictor. Zonaras, Q. Gallus and C. Fabius. Of them speaketh Eutropius, saying; When Q. Gulo and Fabius Pictor were Consuls, the Picenates raised warre; and by the Consuls next following, to wit, P. Sempronius and App. Claudius, they were vanquished. Plinie also in his 33 booke and 3 chap. When Q. Fabius (quoth hee) was Consull, silver was coined and stamped for money, five yeeres before the [second] Punicke war. These Consuls, Velleius also reckoneth in his first booke. But Sigonius and Onuphrius advertise us, that the booke of Eutropius is verie faultie in one of these Consuls, and that in lieu of Quin. Gulo, it should be read Q. Ogulphius: for of this Gulo, there is no place besides, any mention: so as they would have, that it should be Q. Ogulvius, son of L. nephew of A. surnamed Gallus, who a little before was sent in embassage to Ptolomeus. And it falleth out passing well, that they should match Ogulvius a commoner, with Fabius a Patritian. Also Onuphrius testifieth, that in the most auncient hand written bookes of Eutropius, the name is found of Ogulvius. And, as both the Greeke records, and also Zonaras, togither, with the more auncient and perfect copies of Eutropius, agree to this his judgement: so Hubertus Goltzius likewise in his catalogue of Consuls, embraceth the same: and that which maketh most for the purpose, the old antiquities of coine witnesse as much. But in the meane while this is worth the observation, that often times in the most auncient peeces of money, the letter C. is written for G: as for example here, Ocul. Cal. for Ogul. Galba.


486


P. Sempronius.


App. Claudius.


SEeing that wee settle the Consulship of the former yeer, in Ogulvius and Fabius Pictor, and that upon the authoritie of Eutropius, the Greeke records, Cuspinian, Zonaras, Onuphrius, and others; wee will set downe for this yeeres Consuls, P. Sempronius and App. Claudius, whome Velleius in his first booke calleth, Sempronius Sophus, and Appius the sonne of Caecus. The Greeke records, Sempronius Rufus Sophus: and Cuspinians booke, Rufus. Moreover, this also Goltzius giveth us to understand, that the surname of this Sempronius is in old peeces of coin found written without an aspiration [Sopus;] which is no rare thing to be seene in such antiquities: for we read in others of them, Pilippus, Tampilus, Graccus, Pulcer, Triumpius, for Philippus, Tamphilus, Gracchus, Pulcher, Triumphus, and such like.


487


M. Attilius.


L. Iulius Libo.


EVtropius putteth downe for Consuls, Mar. Attilius and L. Iulius Libo. The Sicilian registers, Regulus and Libo. Cassiodorus, M. Attilius and L. Iulius. And both of them are taken forth of the records of capitoll triumphs.


488


D. Iunius.


N. Fabius.


CAssiodorus reporteth for Coss. this yeere, D. Iunius and N. Fabius: the Sicilian register, Pera and Pictor: the capitol records of triumphs, D. Iunius son of D. nephew of D. surnamed Pera, and N. Fabius son of C. nephew of M. surnamed Pictor. Vpon what occasion these Fabij tooke the surname of Pictor, Plinie sheweth in his 35 book chap. 4. Valer. Max. in his 4 booke and 3 chap. seemeth to note and signifie, that Fabius Gurges and N. Fabius Pictor, lived at one and the same time.



489


Q. Fabius Maximus.


L. Mamilius Vitulus.


THis yeere also Cassiodorus passeth over. The Greeke records shew, Maximus and Vitulus. Zonaras, Q. Fabius, and Aemilius (no doubt) for Mamilius, by some errour and fault of the copies. Cuspinian out of some old books delivereth unto us for Consuls, Q. Fab. Maximus and Lu. Mamilius. Onuphrius thinketh, that Q. Fab. Maximus Gurges was now thrice Consull.


490


Ap. Claudius.


M. Fulvius.


BEsides the capitoll monuments, Polybius in his first booke maketh mention of these Consuls. Gellius also, who calleth them thus, App. Claudius brother of Caecus surnamed Caudex, and Mar. Fulvius Flaccus. In like manner Livie, Paterculus, and Plinie in his booke of famous men: as also Appianus, Florus, Frontinus in his I booke of Stratagems, Eutropius, Orosius, and Cassiodorus.


491


M'. Valerius.


M'. Otacilius.


CAssiodorus and Eutropius shew unto us, that M'. Valerius and M'. Otacilius were Consuls. Zonaras nameth Valerius Max. and Otacilius Crassus. Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian records, Maximus Messala and Crassus. Of these Consuls, Verrius Flaccus, Polybius, Cassiodorus, Eutropius, and Macrobius out of Varro make report. As for Macrobius, he rendreth a reason, why M'. Valerius was in this government of his named Messala: and Plinie likewise, in his sixt booke and five and thirtie chapter.


492


L. Posthumius.


Q. Mamilius.


CAssiodorus and Polybius put downe for next Consuls, L. Postumius and Q. Mamilius. Zonaras nameth them, Postumius Albinus and Quintus Mamilius. The Sicilian registers, Albinus and Vitulus: but the capitoll monuments, Lucius Postumius sonne of Lucius, nephew of Licius, surnamed Megellus, and Quin. Mamilius sonne of Q. nephew of M. surnamed Vitulus.


493


L. Valerius.


T. Otacilius.


POlybius and Cassiodorus match togither in the Consulate for this yeere, L. Valerius and T. Otacilius: the surname of Valerius is Flaccus, and of Otacilius, Crassus, as it appeareth upon the capitoll and Sicilian records.


494


Cn. Cornelius.


C. Duilius.


CAssiodorus and Zonaras bring in for Coss. Cn. Cornelius and C. Duilius. In like manner also Polybius, but only that in lieu of (...) hee hath (...). The Sicilian registers shew Scipio and Duilius. Cn. Cornelius Scipio is surnamed also Asina, by the capitall writers, Orosius, Eutropius, and Valerius in his sixt book chap. 10: of which surname Macrobius writeth thus in his first booke of Saturnalia: The surname of Asina (qd. hee) was given to the Cornelij, for that the first of the House Cornelia having either bought land, or given his daughter in marriage, when (after the solemne manner) hee was required to put in good sureties for securitie, brought into the open market place a shee asse laden with money, and pawned down that presently in stead of pledges.


495

C. Aquilius son of
M. L. Cornelius son of L.

THere are nominated by Cassiodorus for Consuls, C. Aquilius and L. Cornelius. The Sicilian registers, Florus and Scipio. Zonaras, C. Florus and L. Scipio. Eutropius and Orosius, L. Cornelius Scipio, and C. Aquilius Florus. Polybius leaveth them out. The Capitoline monuments agree with the Annales of Eutropius and Orosius.


496


A. Atilius Calatinus.


Q. Sulpitius.


POlybius avoucheth for this yeeres Consuls, A. Atilius and C. Sulpitius. Cassiodorus, A. Atilius Calatinus, and C. Sulpitius. The Sicilian registers and Cuspinians Kalender; Calatinus and Paterculus. The capitoll monuments, A. Atilius Calatinus and C. Sulpitius Paterculus. Zonaras, Atilius Calatinus, and Caius Sulpitius. Of these Consuls, Polybius, Cicero, Valerius, Florus, Frontinus in his Stratagemes, Plinie the younger, Gellius, Eutropius, and Cassiodorus make mention. But concerning

the forename of Sulpitius Paterculus, the Capitoline tables disagree one from another; to wit, those that carrie the records of the triumphs, from those that shew the Consulships and other magistracies: for in these latter monuments hee is called Quintus, in the former Catus. Whereby Goltzius doth conjecture, that one man was not the author of both those records, namely, the Triumphall and the Consular.


497


Cn. Cornelius.


C. Atilius.


CAssiodorus sheweth unto us, Cn. Cornelius, and C. Atilius Serranus, for Consuls: but Polybius, C. Atilius. The Capitoll tables, C. Atilius Regulus. Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian registers, have Regulus and Blasio the second time. But how Atilius should come by his surname Serranus, Plinie sheweth in his 18 booke, saying; In these daies the fields were tilled by the very hands of L. Generals themselves, and a man verily would beleeve therby, that the ground joyed in a lauret ploughshare and a triumphant plowman. Him they found a sowing, unto him they presented those honorable dignities. and so tooke he his surname Serranus. As concerning B'asio, all authors wel-nere besides, approove the judgement of Cuspinian: but Goltzius supposeth, that hee was not the same man that was Consull before; and therefore hee writeth him the sonne of Cn. nephew of Lu. without putting to the numerall note II.


498


Q. Caeditius.


L. Manlius.


THe next Consuls that succeeded, were (by Cassiodorus his saying) Q. Caditius and L. Manlius. The Sicilian registers name them, Vulso and Caeditius. Zonaras, M. Regulus and L. Manlius. Eutropius, M. Atilius Regulus and L. Manlius Vulso: and Polybius, M. Atilius and L. Manlius. Insenus in his 41 book maketh mention of these Consuls. But ye must understand, that Q. Caeditius died whiles hee was in office, and M. Atilius was substituted in his roume, and made Consull the second time; as appeareth evidently by the Capitoll tables, wherein it standeth thus upon record, Lu. Manlius Vulso Longus: and in stead of Q. Caeditius, M. Atilius Regulus the second time: as also by Cuspinians booke, wherein is written, Longus and Regulus.


499


M. Aemilius Paulus.


Ser. Fulvius Nobilior.


POlybius sheweth for the Coss. this yeere, Serv. Fulvius, and M. Aimilius. Cuspinians Kalender, Nobilior and Paulus. The Sicilian registers, Paetinus and Paulus. Cassiodorus and Eutropius, togither with the Capitoline records, have Serv. Fulvius Nobilior, and M. Aimilius Paulus.


500


Cn. Cornelius.


A. Atilius.


CAssiodorus and Polybius report for this yeeres Consuls, Cn. Cornelius and A. Atilius. The Capitoll authors write, A. Atilius Calatinas the second time, and Cn. Cornelius Scipio Asina likewise a second time. As touching Cn. Cornelius Asina twice Consull, thus writeth Valerius in his sixt booke: Cneus Cornelius Scipio Asina, who being Consull, was taken prisoner by the Carthagimans at Liparae when he had by the law of armes lost whatsoever hee had, recovered all againe, and was made Consull the second time: so as, of a Consull he became a captive, and of a captive twise Consull.


501


Cn. Servilius.


C. Sempronius.


CAssiodorus and Polybius put downe for Consuls, Cn. Servilius and C. Sempronius. The Sicilian registers, Coepio and Blaesus. Zonaras, Servilius Coepio and C. Sempronius. Eutropius and Orosius, Cn. Servilius Coepio, and Sempronius Blaesus. Of the same Consuls, Sabinus in his 30 book maketh mention, as also a stone of the Capitoll.


502


C. Aurelius Cotta.


P. Servilius.


CAssiodorus bringeth in as Coss. C. Aurelius Cotta, and P. Gemines. The Sicilian registers, Cotta and Geminus: but those of the Capitoll, C. Aurelius Cotta, and P. Servilius Geminus. Zonaras, Pub. Servelius and C. Aurelius. Cicero in his booke, entituled Lucullus, writeth, that C. Cotta, togither with P. Servilius Geminus, was twise Consull. Frontinus also in his fourth booke of Stratagemes, and likewise Orosius, make mention of C. Cotta Consull in Sicilie.



503


L. Caecilius Metellus.


C. Furius.


POlybius setteth downe for Consuls, L. Caecilius Metellus, and Cn. Furius. The Sicilian registers, Metellus and Pacilus. Zonaras, Caecilius Metellus, and C. Furius. Cassiodorus, Lu. Caecilius and C. Furius. Eutropius, Osorius, and a capitoll stone, L. Caecilius Metellus, and Cn. Furius Pacilus. This is that Lu. Metellus, twise Consull and high priest, of whome Plinie writeth in his seventh booke and three and fortie chapter.


504


C. Atilius Regulus.


L. Manlius.


POlybius placeth for this yeeres Consuls, C. Atilius and Lu. Manlius. Cassiodorus, C. Atilius Regulus, and L. Manlius. Orosius and a capitoll stone, have C. Atilius Regulus, and L. Manlius Vulso, both Coss. the second time. Zonaras, C. Atilius the brother of Regulus, and L. Manlius. The Sicilian records, Regulus and Vulso.


505


P. Claudius.


L. Iunius.


CAssiodorus and Polybius inferre for Consuls the next yeere, Pub. Claudius and L. Iunius. Zonaras, L. Iunius and Cl. Pulcher. Florus and Suetonius in Tiberius, put to Claudius the surname of Pulcher; and Censorinus to Iunius of Pullus: which also are upon record in the Sicilian and capitoline tables. This P. Claudius, Cicero (in his bookes of Divination, and of the nature of gods) calleth the sonne of Appius Caecus: but Plinie (in his seventh booke and three and fortie chapter) nameth him his nephew of sonnes sonne. The capitoll writers take part with Cicero. Valerius Maximus in his first booke and fourth chapter, speaketh of the same Consuls.


506


P. Servilius.


C. Aurelius.


FOr Consuls this yeere, Cassiodorus putteeth downe P. Servilius and C. Aurelius. Cicero in his booke Lucullus, saith that these were twice Consuls. Which also is apparant by the Capitoll and Sicilian tables: in which their surnames are to be seene, Geminus II. and Cotta II.


507


L. Caecilius.


N. Fabius.


IT is recorded by Cassiodorus, that the Consuls of this yeere, were L. Caecilius and N. Fabius: but Zonaras nameth them, Caecilius Metellus, and Numerius Fabius. Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian registers, have them in this manner; Metellus II. and Buteo II. But the capitoline tables shew them thus, Lu. Caecilius Metellus II. N. Fabius Buteo II. Plinie also reporteth in his seventh booke, that Metellus was twice Consull.


508


M'. Fabius.


M'. Otacilius.


CAssiodorus setteth downe as Consuls, M'. Fabius and M. Otacilius. The Sicilian registers, Crassus and Licinius. Gellius in his tenth booke and sixt chapter, hath Fabius Licinius and Otacilius Crassus. The capitoll marble stones, M. Fabius Licinius, and M'. Otacilius Crassus. Besides Gellius in the place before alledged, Florus likewise in his 19 Breviarie upon Livius maketh mention of these Consuls; as also Suetonius in Tiberius.


509


M. Fabius.


C. Atilius.


CAssiodorus reckoneth M. Fabius, and Cains Atilius, Consuls for this yeere. The Sicilian tables, Buteo and Bulbus. But those of the capitoll, M. Fabius Buteo, and C. Atilius Bulbus. Of Fabius the Consuls shipwracke, Florus speaketh out of the nineteenth booke of Livie.


510


A. Manlius.


C. Sempronius.


FOr this yeeres Consuls, Cassiodorus setteth forth unto us, A. Manlius and C. Sempronius. The Sicilian records, Torquatus and Blaesus. Cuspinians booke hath Atticus and Blaesus. The capitoline tables shew Aul. Manlius Torquatus Atticus, and Casius Sempronius Blaesus II.


511


C. Fundanius.


C. Sulpitius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe, C. Fundanius, and C. Sulpitius for Consuls. The Sicilian writers,

writers, Fundulus and Gallus. The Capitoll monuments, Caius Fundanius Fundulus, and C. Sulpitius Gallus. None besides make mention of ^hem.


512


C. Lutatius Catulus.


A. Postumius.


CAssiodorus delivereth unto us for Consuls this yeere, C. Lutatius and Aul. Postumius. The Sicilian records, Catulus and Albinus. Eutropius, and the Capitoll marbles, C. Lutatius Catulus, and A. Postumius Albinus.


513


Q. Lutatius Cereo.


A. Manlius.


CAssiodorus, Eutropius, and Orosius, shew for Consuls this yeere, Q. Lutatius, and Aul. Manlius. The Sicilian records, Cereo and Torquatus. They of the Capitoll, Q. Lutatius Cereo, and Aul. Manlius Torquatus Atticus II. Indeed C. Lutatius Cereo, is named for an embassador by Livie in his 42 booke.


514


C. Claudius Centho.


M. Sempronius.


FOr this yeer there were Consuls, C. Claudius Centho, and M. Sempronius Tud^tanus, according to Cassiodorus and the capitoll writers. The Sicilian records testifie also the same surnames. Of these Consuls likewise, besides the capitoll Writers, Cicero speaketh in his Cato and Brutus, where hee calleth this yeere (according to the judgement of Atticus, wherto Varro also agreeth) the 514 yeere from the foundation of the cittie; as also in his first Tusculane question. So doth Gellius 17 booke 21 chap. and Cassiodorus.


515


C. Mamilius.


Q. Valerius.


NExt there followed in Consuls place, as witnesseth Cassiodorus, C. Mamilius and Q.Valerius: but according to the Sicilian registers, Turrinus and Falco: and after the capitoll records, C. Mamilius Turrinus, and Q. Valerius Falco. Besides Verrius Flaccus and Cassiodorus, Gellius also maketh mention of these Coss. in his 17 booke and 21 chap. So doth Cicero in Brutus and the Tusculane questions, in which yeere they say, that Ennius the poet was borne.


516


T. Sempronius.


P. Valerius.


FOr the yeere following, Cassiodorus hath Consuls, T. Sempronius and Pub. Valerius, Gracchus and Falco, in Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian records. Zonaras avoucheth, Sempronius Gracchus, and P. Valerius. The capitoll writers, have T. Sempronius Gracchus, and Pub. Valerius Falco. Orosius speaketh of these Consuls.


517


L. Cornelius.


Q. Fulvius.


NExt to them, Cassiodorus reporteth for Consuls, L. Cornelius and Q. Fulvius. Zonaras, L. Lentulus and Q. Flaccus. Eutropius, L. Cornelius Lentulus, and Q. Fulvius Flaccus. The capitoll registers give to Lentulus, the surname Candenus: and therefore in Cuspinians Kalender, they stand by the names of Candinus and Flaccus. As for the Sicilian registers, they leave them out cleane.


518


C. Licinius.


P. Cornelius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, C. Licinius and P. Cornelius. Zonaras, Pub. Lentulus and Licinius Varus. The capitoline writers, C. Licinius Varus, and P. Cornelius Lentulus Candinus. In like maner Censorinus; who reckoneth this for the 518 yeere after the cities foundation; following herein the computation of Varro, Cicero, and Plinie. Cuspinians Kalender and the Sicilian registers, name them Claudius and Varus.


519


T. Manlius Torquatus.


C. Atilius.


THis yeere had for Consuls, as Cassiodorus saith, T. Manlius Torquatus, and C. Atilius. The Sicilian records, shew Torquatus and Bulbus: but Eutropius, Orosius, and the capitoll tables shew, T. Manlius Torquatus, and C. Atilius Bulbus: unto Bulbus. The capitol records put to the numeral note II. When T. Manlius Torquatus and C. Atilius Bulbus the second time were Coss. according to Verrius Flaccus, Eutropius, Orosius, and Cassiodorus, and that there was peace throughout all the empire of Rome, the temple of Ianus was shut the second time, as Plutarch sheweth in Numa; as Livie also, Velleius, Eutropius, and Orosius, doe testifie.



520


L. Postumius.


Sp. Carvilius.


CAssiodorus nameth for Consuls this yeere L. Postumius and Sp. Carvilius. The Sicilian registers have Albinus and Ruga. Zonaras, Postumius Albinus, and Sp. Carvilius. The Capitoll writers have L. Posthumius Albinus, and Sp. Carvilius Maximus. That Ruga was a surname to the Carvilij, appeareth out of Gellius, who maketh mention of Sp. Carvilius Ruga, who at this time was the first that divorced his wife.


521


Q. Fabius.


M'. Pomponius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, Q. Fabius and M'. Pomponius. The Sicilian records Maximus and Matho. The Capitoline writers have Qu. Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, and M. Pomponius Matho. Zonaras hath Qu. Fabius Max. and Manius Pomponius. The surname of Maximus, this Fabius tooke of his grandfather, and was not himselfe the first of that name, whatsoever Polybius writeth in his third booke. Verrucosus he was called besides of a wert upon his lip, as Plutarch witnesseth, and he that wrote the treatise of Famous men.


522


M. Lepidus.


M. Poplicius.


MArcus Lepidus and M. Poplicius are reputed to be Consuls this yeere by Cassiodorus. The Sicilian registers have Lepidus and Malleolus. Zonaras hath M. Malleolus and M. Aemylius. The Capitoll tables shew M. Aemylius Lepidus and M. Poplicius.


523


C. Papirius.


M. Pomponius.


NExt after this were created Consuls, C. Papirius and M. Pomponius according to Cassiodorus, Zonaras, and Dionysius in his second booke. The Sicilian registers shew Maso and Matho. But the Capitol records have C. Papirius Maso and M. Pomponius Matho. Of C. Papirius, son of C. surnamed Maso, a Pontifie or bishop, Livie speaketh in the yeer 540.


524


M. Aemylius.


M. Iunius.


ZOnaras and Cassiodorus exhibite unto us for Consuls, M. Aemylius and M. Iunius. The Sicilian registers, Barbula and Pera. The Capitoll records, M. Aemylius Barbula and Mar. Iunius Pera.


525


L. Postumius.


Cn. Fulvius.


CAssiodorus setteth down L. Postumius and Cn. Fulvius as Consuls. The Sicilian records Albinus and Gentumalus. But those of the Capitoll, and Eutropius, present unto us L. Postumius Albinus and Cn. Fulvius Centumalus. Polybius nameth Cn. Fulvius and A. Postumius.


526


Q. Fabius. II.


Sp. Carvilius.


THere are by Cassiodorus nominated for Consuls this yeere, Qu. Fabius Maximus the second time, and Sp. Carvilius. The Sicilian registers Maximus and Ruga. The Capitol writers set also unto Carvilius Maximus the marke and numerall note of a double Consulship. Cicero in his booke entituled Cato, likewise in his second booke of Rhetoricall invention, maketh mention of these Consuls, and so doth Valerius in his chapter, discoursing of the kindnes and affectionate dutie of children to their parents.


527


P. Valerius.


M. Atilius.


THese are set downe by Cassiodorus for Coss. this yeer, P. Valerius and M. Atilius. The Sicilian registers, have Flaccus and Regulus. The Capitoll records represent P. Valerius Flaccus, and M. Atilius Regulus. Gellius writeth of them in his 4 booke and 3 chapter.


528


L. Apustius.


M. Valerius.


NExt after, Cassiodorus putteth L. Apustius and M. Valerius Consuls. The Sicilian tables Maximus and Apustius. The Capitoll monuments L. Apustius Fullo, and M. Valer. Messala.


529


C. Atilius.


L. Aimilius.


IMmediately followed Consuls, C. Atilius and L. Aimilius, as Cassiodorus and Polybius doe witnesse: whome the Capitoll writers call, C. Atilius Regulus, and L. Aimilius

Papus. The Sicilian registers, (...) Zonaras, Regulus and Aimilius. Of (...) Consuls also Orosius maketh mention: and Plinie in his third booke and twentie chapter, where untruly men read Paulus for Papus.


530


T. Manlius.


Q. Eulvius. II.


THe yeere following had Consuls T. Manlius and Q. F^^vi^s the second time, according to Cassiodorus and Polybius, and as Orosius saith, T. Manlius Torquatus and Q. Fulvius Flaccus. Cuspinians tables, together with the Capitoline, have Torquatus the second time, and Flaccus likewise the second time, shewing the surnames only of these Coss.


531


C. Flaminius.


P. Furius Philus.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Coss. C. Flaminius and P. Furius. So doth Polybius. Zonaras nameth them Flaminius and Furius. Plutarch likewise in Mare^llus. The Sicilian tables name them Flaminius and Philus. But the Capitoll records, C. Flaminius, and Pub. Furius Philus.


532


M. Marcellus.


Cn. Cornelius.


CAssiodorus nameth for the next Consuls, M. Marcellus and Cn. Cornelius. Polybius, M. Claudius and Cn. Cornelius. The Sicilian registers Scipio and Marcellus. Zonaras, Claudius Marcellus and Cn. Scipio. Eutropius, M. Claudius Marcellus, and Cn. Cornelius Scipio. The Capitoll tables M. Claudius Marcellus and Cn. Cornelius Scipio Calvus. This is that Marcellus, who was five times Consull: and this is that Scipio, who afterwards with his brother Scipio was slain in Spaine by Asdruball the Carthaginian.


533


P. Cornelius.


M. Minutius.


CAssiodorus sheweth for this yeeres Consuls, P. Cornelius and M. Minutius. So doth Zonaras. The Sicilian registers have Scipio and Rufus. Eutropius hath P. Cornelius and M. Minutius Rufus. Cuspinians booke Asina and Rufus. Sigonius and Onuphrius both, doe thinke that this Publius Cornelius Scipio Asina was his sonne, who in the first Punicke war was twise Consull. And verily Livie, in the yeere 543 maketh mention of P. Cornelius Asina, an honorable Senator, and who had been Consull.


534


L. Veturius.


C. Lutatius.


CAssiodorus and Zonaras exhibite unto us for Consuls, L. Veturius and C. Lutatius. The Sicilian registers Philo and Catulus. Cuspinians booke Philo and Scaevola.


535


M. Livius.


L. Aimilius.


THe Consuls next following were M. Livius and L. Aimilius, as Cassiodorus witnesseth. Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records shew Salinator and Phulus. Zonaras, M. Livius and Aimilius Paulus. Plinie maketh mention of these Consuls in the 29 booke and 1 chapter.


536


P. Cornelius Scipio.


T. Sempronius Longus.


CAssiodorus and Polybius put downe for Consuls P. Cornelius and T. Sempronius. Zonaras, Sempronius Longus and P. Scipio. The Sicilian records, Longus and Scipio. Livie, Eutropius, Probus, Orosius, and Paedianus, name them Pub. Cornelius Scipio, and T. Sempronius Longus. Whiles these were Consuls, the second Punicke warre arose, as writers have delivered unto us in their chronicles.


537


Cn. Servilius Geminus.


C. Flaminius.


THen followed Consuls, as Polybius, Cassiodorus, and Livie write, Cn. Servilius, together with C. Flaminius. But the two last named, as also the Sicilian registers, have given to Servilius the surname of Geminus. C. Fl^minius now second time Consull, with like pride as heretofore, entered into his magistracie in the Ides of March, not at Rome but at Ariminum. The same man, in neglect and contempt of the Auspicia or signes of birds, at what time as hee made head and went against Anniball comming into Italie, fought a battell at the lake Ihrasymenus, where his armie was wholly defeited and himselfe lost his life: into whose place M. Atilius Regulus, who had ben Consull before, was substituted. Thus much out of Livie and Polybius.



538


C. Terentius Varro.


L. Annilius Paulus.


NExt to them Polybius bringeth in L. Aimilius and C. Terentius for Consuls. The Sicilian registers, Paulus and Varro. Plutarch in Paulus, Terentius Varro, and Aemilius Paulus. Livie, Cassiodorus, and others, C. Terentius Varro, and Lucius Aemilius Paulus. Goltzius noteth, that the father of C. Terentius Varro, was one Aulus, a thing by others passed over.


539


L. Posthumius Albinus. III.


M. Claudius Marc^llus. II.


Q. Fabius Maximus. III.


T. Sempronius Gracchus.


LIvie reporteth that the Consuls elect for this yeere, when M. Iunius the Dictatour held the solemne assembly for the election, were Lucius Posthumius Albinus the third time, who as then ruled the province of Gaule, and T. Sempronius Gracchus, who had beene maister of the horsemen: and that Posthumius before that hee entred into government, was by Anniball in France environned and slaine, in whose steed M. Marcellus was subrogated Consull now the second time: who upon information given by the Augurs, that his creation was not good, resigned: and commonly the Nobles gave out and said, That the gods were not well pleased, that two commoners were then first chosen Consuls: wherupon in the roume of Marcellus, Quintus Fabius Maximus was chosen Consull the third time. Thus write Livie and Plutarch. And for this cause it is that Cassiodorus, Orosius, and Eutropius doe put downe for this yeeres Consuls, T. Sempronius and Q. Fabius.


540


Q. Fabius. IIII.


M. Claudius Marcellus. III.


LIvie, Plutarch, and Cassiodorus, set out for Consuls this yeere, Quintus Fabius Maximus the fourth time, and Marcus Claudius Marcellus the third time. Moreover, Cicero oftentimes and Frontinus in his second booke of stratagemes, make mention of these Consuls.


541


Q. Fabius Max. son of Verrucosus.


T. Sempronius Gracchus. II.


AGainst this yeere were both the Consuls created in their absence, namely, Q. Fab. Max. the son of Verrucosus, and T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time: as Livie testifieth and Cassiodorus, together with the Sicilian registers. This Fabius had beene. Pretour the former yeere: and Gracchus Consull two yeeres before. These Consuls Gellius nominateth out of Quadrigarius, the second booke and second chapter. Likewise Cicero and Valerius.


542


Appius Claudius Pulcher.


Q. Fulvius Flaccus. III.


THe Consuls created for this yeere by the Dictatour, were Quintus Fulvius Flaccus the third time, who then was maister of the horsemen, and Appius Claudius Pulcher, who in his pretourship was L. deputie in Sicilie, as Livie, Plutarch in Fabius, Cassiodorus, and Festus in his seventeenth booke doe witnesse.


543


C. Sulpitius Galba.


Cn. Fulvius Centumalus.


VPon the receit of certain letters, the Consuls agreed together, that Claudius should hold the election for magistrates and see it finished, whiles Fulvius remained still before Capua. Claudiuls created for Consuls, Cn. Fulvius Centumalus, and Publius Sulpitius sonne of Servius, and surnamed Galba, who before time had borne no state-office of the chaire. Thus writeth Livius. The same Consuls also Cassiodorus doth deliver. Orosius likewise and Festus in his seventeenth booke. The Sicilian records declare Galba and Centumalus. As for Serv. Sulpitius, he is named in his second Consulship, as it appeareth upon record in the Capitoll, the son of Ser. nephew of Publius surnamed Galba Maximus.


544


M. Valerius Laevinus. II.


M. Claudius Marcellus. IIII.


LIvie, Sextus Pompeius, Valerius Maximus, Plutarch, Florus, Eutropius, and Orosius,

doe present for Consuls this yeere, Marcus Claudius Marcellus and M. Valerius Laevinus. Now this is Marcellus his fourth Consulship, as Plutarch and Livie write: but Cassiodorus saieth, that hee was but the third time with M. Valerius Laevinus, leaving out that Consulship which he bare not through, because of the errour in his creation: and yet is it one of the five that hee is reported to have borne. Livie in the nine and twentieth and thirtieth bookes, writeth that Marcus Valerius was twice Consull. In like manner, the booke of Cuspinian hath for this yeer, Marcellus the fourth time, and Laevinus the second time. And therefore Onuphrius supposeth that his first Consulate was in the yeere five hundred foure and thirtie: and his second, now. Of him Polybius and Cicero make mention.


545


Q. Fabius Maximus. V.


Q. Fulvius Flaccus. IIII.


THe Consuls for this yeere created, were Quintus Fabius the fift time, and Quintus Fulvius Flaccus the fourth time, the same man who being Dictatour, held the assembly for that election; as Livie and Cassiodorus doe witnesse. The Sicilian records set forth Fabius and Flaccus. Whiles these were Consuls, Cicero in his Oration against Rullus, saieth that Capua was woon: and yet Livie hath reported it two yeeres before. Of these Consuls Valerius also, together with Plutarch, Eutropius, and Orosius have made mention.


546


M. Claudius Marcellus. V.


T. Quintius Crispinus.


IN the eleventh yeere of the Punicke warre, there entred into their Consulship, Marcus Marcellus the fift time (so yee reckon that Consulship which upon an error in the creation he kept not) and T. Quintius Crispinus. So saith Livie. Plutarch also nameth Marcellus the fift time and Crispinus. But Cassiodorus reckoneth Marcellus but the fourth time with Crispinus, passing over that faultie Consulate of his. Moreover these Consuls are mentioned by Cicero Valerius, Plinius the younger, Probus, Eutropius, and Orosius: who also report that they both were forelaid and intrapped in ambush by Anniball: in so much as Marcelius was presently slaine in the place, and Quintius fled sore wounded.


547


C. Claudius Nero.


M. Livius Salinator.


VVHen the LL. of the Senate cast about to see whome they should create Consuls, behold, the most eminent and singular man above all others, was C. Claudius Nero: unto whom was joined as companion in governement Marcus Livius, who many yeeres before, upon a Consulate that hee had borne, was by the judgement of the people condemned; and almost eight yeeres after his condemnation was by Marcus Marcellus, and Marcus Livius then Consuls, reduced into the cittie. In like manner, the Sicilian registers name for Consuls, Nero and Salinator. The capitoll records shew Caius Claudius Nero, with Marcus Livius Salinator.


548


Quintus Caecilius Metellus.


L. Veturius Philo.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, and the records of the capitoll, exhibit unto us for Consuls this yeere, Lucius Veturius Philo, and Quintus Caecilius Metellus. The Sicilian registers, Metellus and Philo. Over and besides, of these Consuls Cicero many a time and often, Valerius, Plutarch in Africanus, Appianus in Ibericus, Plinie in his 7 booke 43 chap. doe make mention.


549


P. Cornelius Scipio.


P. Licinius Crassus.


LVcius Veturius Philo held the assembly for creation of magistrates, wherein all the Centuries in generall, with exceeding great favour nominated Publius Scipio for Consull, and to him was joined in government, P. Licinius Crassus, the supreame Pontifie. Thus saith Livie. The Sicilian tables have Scipio with Crassus. The capitoll records shew

P. Cornelius Scipio, surnamed afterwards Africanus, with P^blius Licinius Crassus the rich. of whom Cassiodorus likewise and Cicero in Brutus doe speake.


550


M. Cornelius Cethegus.


P. Sempronius Tuditanus.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll records doe name for Consuls this yeere, P. Sempronius Tuditanus, and M. Cornelius Cethegus. The Sicilian registers, Cethegus and Tuditanus, of whom Cicero in Brutus, Plutarch, Eutropius and Cassiodorus do often times make mention. In this yeere P. Scipio Nasica, judged by the Senate the best man in the cittie, received dame Idaea.


551


Cn. Servilius Caepio.


C. Servilius.


LIvie and Cassiodorus together, with the Sicilian records and capitoll monuments, put unto us for Consuls, Cn. Servilius Caepio and C. Servilius. Of which twaine Caepio had beene Pretour in the yeere 548, and Servilius in 547. This yeere died Q. Fabius Max: and Anniball with a sad cheere and heavie heart departed out of Italie into Africke by commaundement of certaine delegate embassadours, in the seventeenth yeere of the second Punicke warre.


552


Tib. Claudius Nero.


M. Servilius Geminus.


MArcus Servilius Geminus, and Tib. Claudius Nero were Coss. his yere according to Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll records, in which Servilius standeth surnamed Pulex. Geminus. The Sicilian tables have Nero with Servilius. In these Consuls yeere, Annibal was in Africke by Scipio overthrowne, and a second peace made with the Carthaginians, as Polybius, Livie, Plutarch, Appian, and Eutropius do report.


553


Cn. Cornelius Lentulus.


P. Aelius Paetus.


AGainst this yeere were created Consuls, as Livie writeth, Cn. Cornelius Lentulus, and P. Aelius Paetus. So saith Cassiodorus also and Plinle in his eighteenth booke and eighteenth chapter. In a broken peece of marble in the Capitoll, were find Lentulus and P. Ailius: in the Sicilian registers, Lentulus and Paetus. These two were Pretours both in the yeere 550.


554


P. Sulpitius Galba.


C. Aurelius Cotta.


LIvie and Cassiodorus put downe for Consuls, P. Sulpitius Galba, and C. Aurelius Cotta. This P. Sulpitius in the yeere 542 was first Consull: and C. Cotta two yeeres before, Pretour. These same Consuls are to bee seene in the capitoll tables, but Galba and Cotta in the Sicilian.


555


L. Cornelius Lentulus.


P. Villius Tappulus.


THis yeere had for Consuls, L. Cornelius and P. Villius, as Cassiodorus writeth: but according to Livie and the capitoll monuments, Lentulus and Tappulus: after the Sicilian records, L. Cornelius Lentulus and P. Villius Tappulus. Of P. Villius Consull, Plutarch maketh mention in Quintius.


556


T. Quintius Flaminius.


Sex. Aelius Paetus.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, the capitoll records, together with Plutarch in Quintius, report unto us for Consuls this yere, T. Quintius Flaminius and Sext. Aelius Paetus. The Sicilian tables, Flaminius and Paetus. Plinie in his booke of famous men, saith (but not without some error) that this Flaminius was the sonne of that C. Flaminius who was slaine at Thrasymenus. Whereas in deed this man was descended of the noble Patritian house of the Quintij, the other of the familie of Flaminij, no better than commoners. Now this Sex. Aelius Paetus is the man of whom Cicero giveth this report out of the Poet Ennius:
This Sextus Aelius in records, Catus surnam'd yee see.A worthie wight for wisedome rare, a discreet man was hee.
And therefore in the capitol tables he is called Paetus Catus.



557


C. Cornelius Cethegus.


Q. Minutius Rufus


IN this yeere Caius Cornelius Cethegus, and Q. Minutius were Consuls, after Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitol marbles. Their surnames onely appeare in the Sicilian registers. And Cicero speaketh of them in Brutus.


558


L. Furius Purpureo.


M. Claudius Marcellus.


THis yere had for Consuls, L. Furius Purpureo, and M. Claudius Marcellus, according to Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitol records. The Sicilian annales deliver unto us Porphyreo and Marcellus.


559


M. Fortius Cato.


L. Valerius Flaccus.


MArcus Portius Cato and L. Valerius are ranged Consuls this yeere, by Verrius Flaccus, Cicero in many places, Livie, Plutarch, Plinie, Valerius, Probus, Eutropius, Orosius, and Cassiodorus.


560


P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus. II.


T. Sempronius Longinus.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, the monuments both of the capitoll and Sicilie, match Consuls together this yeere, P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus the second time, and T. Sempronius Longus. Of them Cicero maketh mention in the oration of Cornelius accused of felonie, as appeareth in Paedianus.


561


L. Cornelius Merula.


Q. Minutius Thermus.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll authors, write that the Consuls chosen to succeed in this yeere, were L. Cornelius Merula, and Q. Minutius Thermus. The said surnames are found in the Sicilian records. Probus speaketh of them in Anniball, and Frontius in his booke of stratagemes.


562


L. Quintius Flaminius.


Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus.


LVcius Quintius Flaminius, and Cn. Domitius Aerobarbus were this yeeres Consuls, as Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll records testifie. The Sicilian registers also shewe their surnames.


563


M. Acilius Glabrio.


P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica.


THe Consuls created for this yeere, were P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, and M. Acilius Glabrio, sonne of Cn. as testifie Livie, Cassiodorus, the capitoll records, Plutarch in Quintius, and Appian in his Syriack historie. In the Sicilian registers, named they are Glabrio and Nasica. In these Consuls yeere the same authours report, that the war against Antiochus king of Syria, and against the Aetolians, was proclaimed: which in the capitoll monuments, in Paterculus, and Macrobius, is called the Antiochian, but by Florus and Plinie the younger in Cato, the Syrian warre. This was the 562 yere from the citties foundation, as Macrobius writeth in his first booke of Saturnals.


564


L. Cornelius Scipio.


C. Laelius.


CAssiodorus, Livius, and the capitoll tables put downe for Consuls this yeere, L. Cornelius Scipio and C. Laelius. The Sicilian registers have Scipio and Laelius. The same men Gellius in his sixteenth booke and fourth chapter nameth C. Laelius sonne of C. and L. Scipio, sonne of P. To Laelius Cassiodore onely addeth the surname Africanus. This L. Scipio surnamed Asiaticus, was brother to Africanus.


565


C. Manlius Vulso.


M. Fulvius Nobilior.


CNeus Manlius Vulso, and M. Fulvius Nobilior, are nominated Consuls for this yeere by Livie, Cassiodore, and the tables both of the capitoll and Sicilie. Manlius was Pretor in the yeere 557 and Fulvius anno 560.


566


C. Livius Salinator.


M. Valerius Messala.


THe Consuls next following, were M. Valerius Messala, and C. Livius Salinator, as Livie, and Cassiodorus testifie, together with the Sicilian and capitoll tables.



567


M. Aimilius Lepidus.


C. Flaminius.


THe next Consuls, were M. Aimilius Lepidus and C. Flaminius, as witnes Livie, Cassiodorus, Zonaras, Strabo in his fift booke, the Sicilian and capitoll tables. Of them Valerius maketh mention in his sixth booke. This is that M. Lepidus who was the Arch-bishop, twise Consull, Censor, and President of the Senate sixe times chosen by the Censours. And this is that C. Flaminius, who afterward by Cato the Censor was displaced out of the Senate and disrobed.


568


Sp. Posthumius Albinus.


Q. Martius Philippus.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, Eutropius, and the capitoll tables report Consuls for this yeere, Sp. Posthumius Albinus, and Q. Martius Philippus. The Sicilian Registers name them barely, Albinus and Philippus. Valerius maketh mention of them in his sixt booke and third chapter. Likewise Plinie in his 33 book and tenth chapter.


569


App. Claudius Pulcher.


M. Sempronius Tuditanus.


FOr this yeeres Consuls were Appius Claudius Pulcher, and M. Sempronius Tuditanus, as Livie, Cassiodorus and the capitoll records do testifie. They stand in the Sicilian records by the names of Pulcher and Tuditanus.


570


P. Claudius Pulcher.


L. Porcius Cicinius.


THe Consuls that followed for this yeere, were L. Portius Licinius and P. Claudius Pulcher: witnesse Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll tables. Pulcher and Licinius they bee called in the Sicilian records.


571


Q. Fabius Labeo.


M. Claudius Marcellus.


AGainst this yeere were created Consuls, M. Claudius Marcellus and Q. Fabius Labeo, according to Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll marble stones. Their surnames bee found also in the Sicilian tables. Whiles these were Consuls, Atticus wrate that Annibal died, as Probus maketh report in Anniball.


572


L. Aemylius Paulus.


Cn. Boebius Tamphilus.


CNeus Boebius Tamphilus and L. Aemylius Paulus were created Consuls for this yeere, as Livie, Cassiodorus, the capitoll, yea and the Sicilian tables do testifie, although these last have regard only of their surnames. This L. Aemylius is the sonne of that L. Aemylius, who was slaine at Cannae, as Plutarch and Velleius doe witnesse.


573


P. Cornelius Cethegus.


M. Boebius Tamphilus.


PVblius Cornelius Cethegus and M. Boebius Tamphilus, succeeded Consuls this yeere, after Livie, Cassiodore and the capitol tables. Cethegus and Tamphilus they be called in the Sicilian records. Of P. Cornelius and M. Boebius Consuls, Plutarch made mention in Numa. Of P. Cornelius and M. Boebius Tamphilus Valerius speaketh in his first booke and first chapter. Of P. Cornelius Lentulus, and M. Boebius Tamphilus in II booke and first chapter. But Plinie in his 13 booke and 13 chapter calleth the one P. Cornelius Cethegus, son of Lucius: and the other M. Boebius son of Q. surnamed Tamphilus.


574


A. Posthumius Albinus.


C. Calpurnius Piso.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll monuments exhibit unto us for this yeeres Consuls, A. Posthumius Albinus, and C. Calpurnius Piso. The Sicilian tables, Albinus and Piso. Piso was Pretour in the yeere 567. And Albinus anno. 568. But when as a pestilence had reigned now three yeeres, so as it dispeopled the citie of Rome and all Italie, it hapned that C. Calpurnius died, not without suspition that he was murdered by Quaria Hostilia: in whose roume Q. Fulvius Flaccus his father in law or mothers husband, was declared Consull.


575


L. Manlius Acidinus.


Q. Fulvius Flaccus.


LIvie, Cassiodore, and the capitoll records shew for Consuls this yere, L. Manlius Acidinus and Q. Fulvius Flaccus. The Sicilian tables, Acidinus with Flaccus. Cicero maketh mention of Acidinus a Consull, in his second booke of a perfect oratour. Also observed it is

in the capitoll monuments, that these Consuls were german brethren: and the same hath Vellejus in his second booke reported. And thereby it commeth to passe, that in the capitoll tables L. Manlius Acidinus, is surnamed also Fulvianus after the manner of those that are adopted.


576


M. Iunius Brutus.


A. Manlius Vulso.


NExt Consuls created, were M. Iunius Brutus and A. Manlius Vulso: as Livie, Cassiodore, and the capitoll records doe testifie. Brutus and Vulso they bee named in the Sicilian monuments. This Brutus was Pretour in the yeere 562, and Vulso in 571.


577


C. Claudius Pulcher.


Tib. Sempronius Gracchus.


CAtus Claudius Pulcher and Tib. Sempronius Gracchus, are matched Consuls this yeere by Verrius Flaccus, Livie, and Cassiodorus. Of this Tib. Gracchus Cicero speaketh in his first booke of divination, and Frontinus in his first of stratagemes.


578


C. Cornelius Scipio Hispalus.


Q. Petilius Spurinus.


C. Valerius Laevinus.


LIvie, Cassiodore, and the capitoll records exhibit unto us for Consuls, Cn. Cornelius Scipio Hispalus, and Q. Petilius Spurinus. The Sicilian registers, Scipio and Petilius. But when as Scipio returning out of the mount Albanus, fell into a fit of Apoplexie, and so into a dead palsey, whereupon hee went to the bath at Cumes, where, by reason that his disease grew upon him, he departed this life; Q. Petilius the other Consull, created for his companion to enter presently upon the government, C. Valerius Laevinus. Thus saith Livie.


579


P. Mutius Scaevola.


M. Aimilius Lepidus. II.


ORosius putteth downe for Consuls Lepidus and Mutius, Cassiodorus and Obsequens, M. Lepidus and P. Mutius. The Sicilian tables, Lepidus and Scaevola. The capitoll monuments, P. Mutius Scaevola and M. Aemilius Lepidus, II. The election of the Consuls this yeere is lost in Livie. Cicero likewise writeth in his discourse of provinces; Valerius also in his sixt booke and sixt chapter, that this M. Aemylius Lepidus was twise Consul.


580


Sp. Posthumius Albinus.


Q. Mutius Scaevola.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls, Sp. Posthumius and Q. Mutius. The capitoll records, Sp. Posthumius Albinus Paulus, and Q. Mutius Scevola. Cuspinians book hath Paulus and Scaevola. Plinie maketh mention of these in his second booke and 31 chapter. The election of the Consuls this yeere is lost in Livie.


581


L. Posthumius Albinus.


M. Popilius Laenas.


THe Coss. for this yere created, were L. Posthumius Albinus and M. Popilius Laenas, as Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll monuments do testifie. Albinus and Laenas are put downe in the Sicilian records. Whiles these were Consuls, the feast Floralia was instituted first, as Ovid sheweth in his fift booke of his kalender.


582


C. Popilius Laenas


P. Aelius Ligur.


THis yeere had for Consuls, C. Popilius Laenas, and P. Aelius Ligur, as Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll records do testifie. The Sicilian registers name them Laenas and Aelius. To this day had no Coss. in one yere bin matched together, both commoners: and this was the first time, that both Consuls were created out of the commons, as is observed in the capitoll monuments. After this, you shall never find the Consuls both Patritij: commoners ye shall have them both twaine, many a time and often: but most of all, a Commoner and a Patrician, one with another.


583


P. Licinius Crassus.


C. Cassius Longinus.


THe Consuls next ensuing for this yeere, were P. Licinius Crassus and C. Cassius Longinus, as it appereth in Livie, Cassiodorus, Orosius, and the capitoll tables. For in the Sicilian records, they are named no otherwise than Crassus and Longus. Of the very same Consuls Plinie maketh mention in his seventh booke. Gellius also in his ninth booke and fourth chapter. Whiles these were Consuls, the people of Rome began warre against Perseus king of the

Macedonians, son of Philip: which Florus and Eutropius, together with Orosius, call the second Macedonian war: whereof Livie and Plutarch write more at large.


584


A. Hostilius Mancinus.


A. Atilius Serranus.


CAssiodorus setteth next after for Consuls, C. Hostilius Mancinus, and C. Atilius. The Sicilian registers, Mancinus and Serranus. The capitoll monuments, Au. Atilius Mancinus, and Au. Atilius Serranus. As well the election of these Consuls as their acts, are missing in the Annales of Livie.


585


Q. Martius Philippus. II.


Cn. Servilius Caepio.


LIvie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll tables match together in the Consulship of this yeere Q. Martius Philippus the second time, and Cn. Servilius Caepio. The Sicilian catalogue hath barely Philip and Caepio. Cicero in his bookes entituled Brutus and Cato, writeth that Ennius the Poet died in their Consulate.


586


L. Aemylius Paulus. II.


C. Licinius Crassus.


THe Consuls that next succeeded were Lu. Aemylius Paulus the second time (seventeene yeeres after his first Consulship) and Caius Li^^nius Crassus: witnesse Livie, Cassiodorus, and the capitoll monuments. In like manner they are named in the Sicilian registers Paulus and Crassus. As touching this second Consulate of L. Paulus, Plutarch, Velleius, Orosius, Eutropius, Florus, and Iustinus in his 33 booke doe write. Plutarch addeth thus much and saith, That Paulus was threescore yeeres of age, when he was chosen Consull the second time.


587


Q. Aelius Paetus.


M. Iunius.


LIvie bringeth in for Consuls next after, Qu. Aelius and M. Iunius. The Sicilian records Paetus and Pennus. Obsequens and Cassiodorus Q. Aelius Petus, and M. Iunius Pennus. Cicero likewise in Brutus speaketh of Mar. Iunius Pennus, Consull with Q. Aelius. Now from this yeere forward, we want the complet storie penned by Livie.


588


M. Marcellus.


C. Sulpitius.


LIvie and the capitoll monuments shew for this yeeres Consuls, M. Claudius Marcellus, and C. Sulpitius Gallus. Obsequens, and the title prefixed before the comedie Andria in Terence, exhibit Mar. Marcellus and C. Sulpitius. This is that Marcellus, who after he had beene thrice Consull, perished in the sea. Nephew he was of that Mar. Marcellus, who had been five times Consull, as Paedianus reporteth. Of these Consuls, Iustine, Plinie in his second book, and many other have made mention.


589


Cn. Octavius.


T. Manlius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens inserre Consuls this yeere, Cn. Octavius and T. Manlius. The Sicilian tables, Octavius and Torquatus. The capitoll stones, Cn. Octavius and T. Manlius Torquatus. Mention there is made of these Consuls in the title set before Hecyra in Terence. Cicero in his first booke of Finall ends, and likewise in many other places, speaketh of T. Torquatus. Consull with Cn. Octavius.


590


A. Manlius.


Q. Cassius.


CAssiodorus matcheth together Consuls in this yeere, A. Manlius and Q. Cassius. The Sicilian catalogue hath Torquatus and Longinus. The capito^ ^ecords, A. Manlius Torquatus and Qu. Cassius Longinus, who died in his Consulship. These also had been companions together in their Pretourship, anno 586, as Livie beareth witnesse.


591


Tib. Sempronius.


M'. Iuventius.


CAssiodorus saith, that the Consuls this yeer were T. Sempronius and M'. Iuventius. Obsequens nameth them, Tib. Gracchus, and M'. Iuventius. The capitoll monuments shew T. Sempronius Gracchus the second time, and M'. Iuventius Thalva. In the Sicilian registers, Dolabella and Thalva, but not well as it is to be doubted. Cicero, Valerius, and Plutarch have made mention of Tiberius Gracchus twice Consull. And that M'. Inventius died whiles he was Consull, Plinie in his seventh booke, and Valerius also doe report.


592


P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica.


C. Martius.


CIcero in his first and second booke of the nature of gods, Verrius Flaccus, Obsequens and

Cassiodorus, report for Consuls Pub. Cornelius Scipio Nasica and C. Martius Figulus. But for that there was an error committed in their creation, and there upon they resigned up their place, as the foresaid authours witnesse, together with Valerius, Plutarch, and Plinie: P. Cornelius Lentulus, and Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus, entred in their steed.


593


M. Messala.


C. Fannius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, M. Messala and C. Fannius. The Sicilian catalogue Messala and Strabo. The capitoll records, and the title before Phormio in Terence represent unto us, M. Valerius Messala, and Caius Fannius Strabo. Of these Consuls Suetonius maketh mention in his book of excellent Rhetoricians. Likewise Cicero in Brutus, Plinie in his ninth booke and fiftieth chapter, and Gellius in his second booke.


594


L. Anicius.


M. Cornelius Cethegus.


CAssiodorus and the title set before the Comedie Adelphi in Terence avouch for Coss. L. Anicuss and M. Cornelius. The Sicilian and capitoll records put surnames unto them, Callus and Cethegus. Of Anicius the Consull, Cicero speaketh in Brutus: and of Cethegus, the sixe and fortieth Epitome or breviarie of Florus. In their yeere, it is for certaine held, that L. Paulus who conquered Perseus, died.


595


Cn. Cornelius Dolabella.


M. Fulvius.


THe yeere next following had Consuls, as witnesseth Cassiodorus, Cn. Cornelius Dolabella and M. Fulvius. The Sicilian registers shew Dolobella and Fulvius. The capitoll monuments, Cn. Cornelius Dolobella and Mar. Fulvius Nobilior. The same is to be seene in the life of Terence the poet, for there it is written, that in their yeere he died.


596


M. Aemylius.


C. Popilius.


THe Consuls next succeeding, were Marcus Aemylius and C. Popilius, as Cassiodorus faith. The Sicilian catalogue sheweth Lepidus and Lenas. The capitoll records have M. Aemylius Lepidus and C. Popilius Laenas the second time. Of the same, Censorinus maketh mention on his chapter of distinction of ages.


597


Sex. Iulius.


L. Aurelius.


CAssiodorus reporteth, that the next Consuls were Sex. Iulius and L. Aurelius. The Sicilian and capitoll tables yeeld surnames unto them, Caesar to Iulius, and Orestes to Aurelius. Plinie writeth of them in his 33 booke.


598


L. Lentulus.


C. Martius.


OBsequens and Cassiodorus record for this yeeres Consuls L. Lentulus and C. Martius. The Sicilian catalogue Lentulus and Fugulus. The capitoll monuments, L. Cornelius Lentulus Lupus, and C. Martius Figulus the second time. Cicero in Brutus speaketh of them both. And as touching Figulus twise Consull, Valerius writeth in his chapter of Wrath.


599


P. Scipio Nasica.


M. Claudius.


PVblius Scipio and M. Claudius are by Cassiodorus set down for Coss. The Sicilian registers have Nasica and Marcelius. The capitoll records, P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica the second time, and M. Claudius Marcillus likewise the second time. Paedianus writeth, that this Marcellus was thrice Consull. And that Pub. Scipio Nasica, surnamed also Corculum, was twise Consull and Censor besides, Cicero writeth in his Brutus.


600


L. Postumius.


Q. Opimius.


THis yeere had Consuls, Lu. Postumius and Qu. Opimius, as Cassiodorus and Obsequens doe witnesse. The Sicilian tables shew Opimius and Albinus. But the capitoll records Q.Opimius, and Lu. Postumius Albinus. Mention there is made of this Qu. Opimius, Consull, by Cicero in his Brutus; also in the Epitome of the seven and fortieth booke. Moreover, that Postumius died in his magistracie, besides Verrius Flaccus, Obsequens also sheweth: in whose steed Manius Acilius Glabrio was chosen.



601


Q. Fulvius.


T. Annius.


THe Consuls next following, as Cassiodorus writeth, were Qu. Fulvius and T. Annius. In the capitoll fragments they are named Nobilior and T. Annius. In the Sicilian registers, Nobilior and Luscus. Cicero in his Brutus saith, that Q. Nobilior sonne of Marcus, and T. Annius Luscus were Consuls. The Greeke records and Cuspinians booke shew Nobilior and Luscus.


602


M. Marcellus.


L. Valerius.


THis yeere had for Consuls, M. Marcellus and L. Valerius as Cassiodorus witnesseth. The Sicilian catalogue representeth Marcellus and Flaccus. Obsequens exhibiteth unto us M. Claudius Marcellus and L. Valerius Flaccus. This Marcellus was thrice Consull, as Paedian saith upon the Oration for Scaurus, and Cicero in his booke of divination and destinio.


603


L. Licinius Lucullus.


A. Postumius Albinus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, L. Lucullus and Au. Postumius. The Sicilian tables, Lucullus and Albinus. The broken marbles of the capitoll, Lucullus and Au. Postumius sonne of Aulus. Orosius and the Epitome 48. shew L. Licinius Lucullus and A. Postumius Albinus. Cicero in his Brutus, and Lucullus both, maketh mention of the same.


604


T. Quintius.


M'. Acilius.


THis yeere had for Consuls, L. Quintius and M'. Acilius, as Cassiodorus testifieth, whom Plinie in his 7. booke and 36 chap. calleth Caius Quintius and M. Acilius. Cicero in his book Cato, and the 12 booke of his epistles to Atticus nameth T. Flaminius and M'. Acilius, and saith that they were created Consuls in the 19 yeere after the death of Ennius. The Sicilian tables have Flaminius and Balbus. The capitoll fragments, Flamminius and M. Acilius Balbus.


605


L. Martius.


M'. Manilius.


CAssiodorus avoucheth for the Consuls of this yeere, L. Martius and M'. Manilius: likewise wise the 49 Epitome. Cicero in Lucullus maketh mention of Censorinus and M'. Manilius: of Censorinus and Manilius in his twelfth booke of epistles to Articus. The same Consuls, Appianus in Libyea nameth L. Maritus Censorinus and M'. Manilius. In like sort Censorinus in his treatise of Nativitie of Birthday. The Sicilian tables have Censorinus and Manilius. The Capitoll fragments shew Censorinus and M'. Manilius, sonne of Publius, nephew of Pub. Whiles these were Consuls, there arose a third war betweene the State of Rome and the Carthaginians, as Florus in the 49 Epitome, besides Verrius Flaccus doe testifie: likewise Solinus, but that hee saith with Verrius Flaccus, that it was the yeere 64. Cicero also in his eleventh Philippicke, and lastly Eutropius, with Orosius.


606


Sp. Postumius.


L. Piso.


THen were Consuls created, Sp. Postumius and L. Piso, according to Cassiodorus and Obsequens. In the Capitoll fragments they are named Albinus Magnus, and Lu. Calpurnius, sonne of Caius, nephew of Caius, surnamed Piso Casonius. In Cuspinians kalender, Magnius and Caesonius, in the Sicilian catalogue Albius and Piso. As for Magnus and Albinus, they be the surnames of Postumius, like as Caesonius and Piso, of Calpurinius. In this yeere the people of Rome, entred into armes against Andriscus, otherwise tearmed Pseudo-philippus, which they call the third Macedonian warre, after Florus and Eutropius.


607


P. Africanus.


C. Livius.


OBsequens and Cassiodorus set soorth for Consuls this yeere P. Africanus and Caius Livius. In the Sicilian catalogue they are registred Scipio and Drusus: in the capitoll fragments Africanus AEmylianus, and C. Livius; the one sonne of M. Aemylianus, nephew of Marcus, the other surnamed Drusus. This Pub. Cornelius was the naturall sonne of that Paulus that vanquished Perseus king of the Macedonians, and adopted by P. Cornelius the sonne of Scipio Africanus. Whereupon he was called Pub. Cornelius, sonne of Publius, nephew of P. Scipio Africanus the younger, and AEmylianus, as Velleius and others doe witnesse.

His two last surnames are in the capitoll records, out of which, the complete name of M. Livius Drusus, with his addition, was framed. Of these Consuls Cicero speaketh after: likewise Valerius, Paterculus, Appian, Plutarch, Florus, both Plinies, Eutropius and Orosius.


608


C. Cornelius.


L. Mummius.


NExt Consuls following, were Cn. Cornelius and L. Mummius, as witnesseth Cassiodorus: and according to Orosius, Velieius, Censorinus, and Cicero in the thirteenth booke of epistles to Atricus, Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and L. Mummius they are named. In the Sicilian registers Lentulus and Mummius. In the fragments of the capitoll, Lentulus and L. Mummius, nephew of Lucius. Lu. Mummius in this magistracie acquired the surname of Achaicus, upon a victorie atchieved by him in Achaea, as Plutarch in Marius, and Velleius doe testifie.


609


Q. Fabius Maximus.


L. Hostilius.


CAssiodorus this yeere delivereth unto us for Consuls, Q. Fabbius Maximus, together with L. Hostilius. Cicero in Laelius, and Plinie in his five and thirtieth booke and fourth chapter, nameth them Qu. Maximus, brother of Scipio, and L. Mancinus. Of this Q. Fabius Maximus Aemylianus, Valerius writeth in his second booke and first chapter. This Q. Fabius was the sonne of P. Aemylius, adopted by Q. Fab. Max. the sonne of Verrucosus, as Appianus writeth in Hispanensis: and therfore in the fragments of a capitoll table there is to be seen the second surname Aemylianus. Plinie was deceived, who in his one and thirtieth booke and eleventh chapter calleth him. Qu. Allobrogicus, brother of Scipio, who was the sonne of this Fabius.


610


Ser. Galba.


L. Aurelius.


THis yeere had for Consuls, Ser. Galba and Lu. Aurelius, according to Cassiodorus: those, Valerius in his sixt booke nameth Serv, Sulpitius Galba, and Lu. Aurelius Cotta, whome the Sicilian catalogue sheweth under the bare names of Galba and Cotta. But the capitol fragments have Galba and L. Valerius Cotta. This is that Sulpitius Galba, who being Pretor, as Suetonius writeth, stirred up the war before against Viriatus, for hee was a vehement Oratour, of whom Cicero speaketh many times. And as for L. Cotta, he it was whom afterwards being accused by Africanus, Qu. Metellus Macedonicus defended. Cicero in Brutus, for Murena and against Verres, maketh mention of him. Likewise Frontinus of them both, in his first booke of water-conduits.


611


App. Claudius.


Q. Metellus.


CAssiodorus nameth for this yeeres Consuls Appius Claudius and Q. Metellus. Orosius, App. Claudius and Qu. Caecilius Metellus. The Sicilian registers have Claudius and Metellus. The capitoll fragments shew Pulober and Q. Caecilius Macedonians. Of the same, Frontinus speaketh in his booke of water-conduits, and Valerius in his seventh booke. Now this Metellus is he who being Pretour subdued the Macedonians and Achaeans, whereupon he was surnamed Macedonicus: whom Plinie 7 book sheweth to be the son of Lu. and nephew of Quin.


612


L. Metellus.


Q. Maximus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, Lu. Metellus and Q. Maximus. The Sicilian records Metellus and Maximus. Orosius, L. Caecilius Metellius and Q. Fabius Maximus Servilianus. In like manner the capitoll fragments Calvus and Servilianus. The Servilianus is the brother german of Quintus Servilius Capio, the Consull two yeeres after (as witnesseth Appian) and the adopted son of Q. Fabius Aemylianus; for they were both adopted by Q. Fabius Max. the son of Verrocosus, the one out of the house Aemylia, the other of Servilia, L. Metellus is the brother of Q. Metellus Macedonicus, as writeth Valerius in his treatise of Witnesses.


613


Cn. Capio.


Q. Pompeius.


CNeus Caepio and Q. Pompeius are recounted Consuls by Cassiodorus. Velletius in his second booke saith thus: Whether there were two or three houses of the Pompeies, the first of that name was Consull with ACn. Servilius. Of this Q. Pompeius, Cicero maketh mention oftentimes, writing that hee was of base and obscure parentage. Him Valerius in his chapter of witnesses

nameth Ausidus, but corruptly through the fault of the copiers, in steed of Au. F. i. the sonne of Aulus. In the same fort Appianus in Hispanensis nameth him Qu. Pompeius Aulus for A. Filius. Cicero in his Orations against Verres, and in that for Fonteius, Valerius also in his chapter of Witnesses, sheweth that there were two brethren named Cneus and Quintus, both Servilij Capiones.


614


Q. Caepio.


C. Laelius.


AFter this were Consuls made, Qu. Caepio and C. Laelius, my authours are Cassiodorus and Obsequens, together with the Sicilian tables, and Frontinus in his treatise of Waterconduits. This Laelius as Cicero in his eleventh Philippicke, and Velleius doe report, was the sonne of Laelius the Consull, anno 564, whom as Cicero in his second book of Duties and in Laelius, was the first that was surnamed Wise, whereof Plutarch in Gracchi yeeldeth a reason.


615


Cn. Piso.


M. Popilius.


CAssiodorus sheweth for this yeeres Consuls, Cn. Piso with M. Popilius. Appianus and the Epitomist have M. Popilius Laenas: but they be named M. Popilius Laenas and L. Calpurnius by Valerius in his first booke, writing thus, That Cornelius Hispalus, lord cheese justice for strangers, when M. Popilius Laenas and L. Caelpurnius were Consuls, by an edict commanded all the Chaldaean [Astrologers] to depart out of Rome and Italie within ten daies next ensuing.


616


P. Scipio.


D. Brutus.


PVblius Scipio and D. Brutus are named for this yeeres Coss. by Cassiodorus. Florus in his 55 Epitome; P. Cornelius Nasica (surnamed Serapion in mockerie by C. Curiatius a Trib. of the Com.) and D. Iunius Brutus Coss, levied and mustered soldiors, etc. This Scipio was sonne of that Nasica who was surnamed Corculius, and twise was he Consull and Censoralso, nephew to that Nasica, who by the Senate was deemed the best man in the citie, and father to him that warred upon Iugurtha, as Velleius saith. This Decius Brutus, Cicero in his Brutus calleth the sonne of Marcus, who bare the Consulship in the yeere five hundred ninetie seven, and in the capitoll tables is called Pennus. Moreover, of these Consuls Cicero speaketh very oft. Valerius also in his 3 booke, chap.7.5 book, chap. 3. 9.booke, chap. 15: Likewise Plinie in his 21 booke, and lastly Frontinus.


617


M. Aemylius.


C. Hostilius Mancinus.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens match together in the Consulship this yeere, M. Aemylius, and C. Hostilius Mancinus. The Sicilian registers Lepidus and Mancinus. Orosius and Appian, M. Aemylius Lepidus and C. Hostilius Mancinus. Of this Consull Mancinus there remaine yet some tokens to be seene in broken marbles of the capitoll. Cicero maketh mention oftentime of Lepidus, as well in other places as in Brutus. Likewise Valerius, Florus, Paterculus, and Plinie in his treatise of Famous men.


618


P. Furius.


Sex. Atillius Serranus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, P. Furius and Sex. Atilius Serronus. Cicero in his third booke of Duties, L. Furius and Sex. Atilius. Obsequens, L. Furius and Atilius Serranus. The Sicilian registers Philus and Serranus. Of this Furius, Cicero writeth thus in his Brutus; Lu. Furius Philus, was reputed for a man of very good language, and to have spoken more learnedly than others. In the capitol fragments there appeareth yet some shew of Serranus the Consull.


619


Ser. Fulvius.


C. Calpurnius.


THe next Consuls are set downe by Cassiodorus and Obsequens, Ser. Fulvius and Q. Calpurnius. The Sicilian catalogue hath Flaccus and Piso. Orosius nameth Servius Fulvius Flaccus and Qu. Calpurnius Piso. The capitoll fragments shew Piso: as for Fulvius Flaccus the Consull, mention there is made of him in the Epitome 36: Appian also in his Illyrica speak of him, and in Hispanensis of Calpurnius Piso.


620


P. Africanus.


C. Fulvius Flaccus.


THe yeere following had P. Africanus and C. Fulvius Flaccus for Coss. as it is written in

Cassiodorus and Obsequens. But Scipio and Flaccus, in the Sicilian catalogue. The same Flaccus the Capitoll fragments doe shew. Of this C. Fulvius, mention there is made also in the 56 Epitome: and of Africanus twice Consull, by Appian in Hispanensis, by Orosius, Florus, and Valerius in his eight booke.


621


P. Mucius.


L. Calpurnius.


THis yeere had Consuls, P. Mucius, and Lu. Calpurnius, as witnesseth Cassiodorus. The Sicilian registers shew Scaevola and Calpurnius. Valleius nameth P. Mucius Scaevola and L. Calpurnius. Of these Consuls Paedianus upon the Orations against Verres, maketh mention in these words: Scaevola a right learned man in the lawes was Consull with L. Piso, that yeere wherein Tab. Gracchus was killed. In the broken marbles of the capitoll he standeth by the name of L. Calpurnius Piso, surnamed also Frugi, and that truly. For Cicero in one Oration against Verres and in another for Fonteius writeth, that he was the first of the Pisones, called Frugi. This man, when he was Tribune or Provost of the Commons, made a law against the extortion of magistrates, when Martius and Manilius were Consuls: he wrote also the annaples of Rome, as Cicero testifieth in his booke Brutus.


622


P. Popilius.


P. Rupilius.


AGainst this yeere were Consuls created, as Cassiodorus writeth, P. Popilius and P. Rupilius: after the Sicilian records Laenus and Rupilius, Cicero maketh mention of them in his thirteenth booke of epistles to Atticus, and against Verres. Also in the capitoll fragments we read of P. Popillius, son of Caius, and P. Rupilius sonne of P. and nephew of Publius. Velleius in his second booke, nameth the Consuls Rupilius and Popilius. Cicero in Laelius speaketh of Rupilius and Laenas. And of P. Rupilius there is mention made in the epitome or breviarie 59.


623


P. Crassus.


L. Valerius.


CAssiodorus putteth down for Consuls this yeere, Pub. Crassus and Lu. Valerius. Crassus and Flaccus the Sicilian catalogue. L. Valerius Flaccus and Pub. Licinius Crassus, according to Cicero in his eleventh Philippicke against Antonie. Of this Consull Pub. Licinius Crassus, all they have spoken, who wrote of the warre of Aristonicus. This P. Crassus surnamed Dives, by Cicero in his bookes of a perfect Oratour, and in Brutus is called the brother of Scevola: Whereupon Velleius in his second booke nameth him Mutianus, betokening thereby that hee was adopted out of the house of Mutij into the familie of the Crassi. This man Gellius writeth in his first booke and three and twentieth chapter, to have beene of all others the richest man, the noblest personage, and the most eloquent Orator, the deepest lawyer, and the supreame bishop withall.


624


C. Claudius.


M. Perpenna.


APpius Claudius and M. Perpenna are matched in the Consulate together this yeere by Obsequens and Cassiodorus. Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, shew Lentulus and Perpenna. This Claudius haply was adopted into the familie of the Corneij. Moreover Cicero in his third booke of Lawes, and in the Oration for Plancius, calleth this man C. Claudius. This also is confirmed by an old table of stone commonly knowne, wherein is to bee seene this inscription, C. Claudio and M. Perpenna Coss. Which evidence Sigonius and Onuphrius following, named him C. Claudius and not Appius. Of this M. Perpenna as many as wrote the warre of Aristonicus, have made mention, and namely, Valerius in his 3 booke and 4 chap. Valleius, Strabo, Orosius, and Eutropius.


625


C. Sempronius.


M. Aquilius.


THis yeere had Consuls, M. Aquilius and C. Sempronius, as witnesseth Cassiodorus. But Aquilius and Tuditanus according to the Sicilian registers, C. Sempronius Tuditanus, and M. Aquilius, after Orosius. Cicero speaketh of them in his booke of the nature of gods, and to his brother Quintus. Paterculus also in his second booke. Strabo in his 14 booke. Appian in his first booke. And both of them are taken out of the triumph records in the capitoll.


626


Cn. Octavius.


T. Annius.


NExt followed as Consuls Cn. Octavius and T. Annius, as Cassiodorus testifieth and

none but he. For Cuspinians book and the Sicilian catalogue have Octavius and Rufus. Plutarch also writeth, that one T. Annius contended with Tib. Gracchus in a sedition. As for this Cn. Octavius, son he was to that Cneus who was Consull in the yeere five hundred eightie nine.


627


L. Cassius.


L. Cinna.


CAssiodorus nameth for this yeeres Consuls, L. Cassius and L. Cinna. The Sicilian records Longinus and Cinna. Cuspinians books set out Rulla, corruptly for Ravilla, and Cinna. This L. Cassius was his sonne who bare the Consulship in the yeer five hundred and ninetie, and he was afterwards Censor in the yeere 629 surnamed Ravilla by Frontius.


628


M. Aemylius.


L. Aurelius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens reckon for Coss. this yeere, Mar. Aemylius and Lu. Aurelius. The Sicilian catalogue sheweth Lepidus and Orestes. Censorinus hath M. Aemylius Lepidus, and L. Aurelius Orestes. Cicero in Brutus, Mar. Lepidus, and L. Orestes.


629


M. Plautius.


M. Fulvius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens avouch Consuls this yeere, M. Plautius and M. Fulvius. The Sicilian registers, Hypseus and Flaccus. Orosius and Frontinus in his treatise of Waterconduits, M. Plautius Hypseus and Mar. Fulvius Flaccus. Valerius also in his discourse of Pride maketh mention of them.


630


C. Cassius Longinus.


C. Sextius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens report, that the Consuls following were C. Cassius Longinus, and C. Sextius. The Sicilian catalogue sheweth Longinus and Calvinus. Velleius writeth, that the colonie Fabrateria was planted by Cassius and Calvinus. Cicero in Brutus speaketh of C. Sextius Calvinus. Eutropius declareth for Consuls, C. Cassius Longinus, and Sextus Domitius Calvinus, not without suspition of a fault or errour.


631


Q. Cacilius.


T. Quintius.


CAssiodorus nominateth for Consuls this yeere, Q. Cacilius and T. Quintius. The Sicilian records Metellus and Flaminius. Eutropius and Orosius, Q. Caecilius Metellus and Titus Quintius Flaminius. Cicero in his Oration pleading for his house, calleth them T. Flaminius and Q. Metellus. This Qu. Metellus was the eldest of the foure sons of Macedonicus, whome Plutarch in his treatise of the Romanes fortune, calleth Q. Metellus Balearicus, of the Baleares whom in this magistracie he conquered.


632


Cn. Domitius.


C. Fannius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens joine in fellowship of the Consulate this yeere, Cn. Domitius and C. Fannius. The Sicilian records, Aenobarbus and Fannius. Cicero writeth of them in his Brutus, and Plinie in his second booke and two and thirtieth chapter. Three moones (qd: he) appeared when Cn. Domitius and C. Fannius were Coss. which most men called the nightmares.


633

L. Opimius. Q. Maximus.

THis yeere had for Consuls, Lu. Opimius and Q. Maximus, as witnesseth Cassiodorus. The Sicilian catalogue sheweth Opimius and Maximus. But Obsequens, L. Opimius and Qu. Fabius Maximus. Plinie speaketh of them in his second booke, saying, About the sunne there appeared an arch or bow, when L. Opinius and Q. Fabius were Consuls. This Qu. Fabius Maximus is by Cicero in Brutus, Florus in his Epitome, Velleius in his 2 books, and Paedianus upon the Orations against Verres, rightly named the nephew of Paulus, and son of Fabius Aemylianus. And so may Strabo, Appian, and Plinie bee well reprooved, for making him and his father Aemylianus, all one. The same man, as Cicero and Plinie testifie, was surnamed Allobrogicus, upon a victorie over the Allobroges. Of this Lucius Opimius Consull, after whose name there was a wine called Opimianum, Plinie maketh mention in his foureteenth booke and fourth chap. Plutarch also in C. Gracchus, and Velleius in his second booke.



634


P. Manlius.


C. Papyrius.


CAssiodorus insereth for this yeeres Consuls, P. Manlius and C. Papyrius. The Sicilian records Manlius and Carbo. This is that Caisis Papyrius Carbo, who being a Tribune of the Commons when Claudius and Perpenna were Coss. was afterwards by C. Gracchus appointed for one of the Triumvirs to devide lands: who first tooke part with the Commons, but afterwards raunged with the nobilitie: of whom Cicero in many other places, and namely in his second booke of a perfect Oratour, maketh mention.


635


L. Cacilius.


L. Aurelius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens put downe for Consuls, Lucius Caecilius and Lu. Aurelius. The Sicilian catalogue, Metellus and Cotta. Plutarch in Marius speaketh of Caecilius Metellus and Cotta, Consuls. Which Marius he writeth to have borne the Tribuneship of the Commons, when these were Consuls, and to have cast Metellus the Consull into prison. This is that Cotta, in whose consulat roume Velleius reporteth, that C. Caesar Flamin of Iupiter, was created.


636


M. Cato.


Q. Martius.


THis yeere had for Consuls Mar. Cato and Q. Martius: witnesse Cassiodorus and Obsequens. Cato and Martius, according to the Sicilian registers. But Eutropius nameth them M. Porcius Cato and Q. Martius. Valerius speaketh of them in his first booke, and Plinie in his second booke and one and thirtieth chap. Gelleius also in his 13 booke and 19 chapter.


637


L. Lucilius.


Q. Mutius.


COnsuls next ensuring by Cassiodorus his saying, were L. Caecilius and Q. Mutius. After the Sicilian registers, Metellus and Scaevola, if ye go by Eutropius, L. Caecilius Metellus and Q. Mutius Scaevola. Now is this that L. Caecilius Metellus, who afterwards upon subduing the Dalmatians, was surnamed Dalmaticus, whom Plutarch in Coriolanus and in his booke of the Romane fortune, nameth Diadematus, for that a long time he bound up his forehead with a frontlet or wreath which they call a diademe, to hide an ulcer that hee had there. Hereupon, when Pompeius bound up his leg with a white band or garter, It makes no matter qd. Favonius, in what part of the bodie a man weareth the diademe: upbraiding and reproching him for his king like power, in tearming a small clout or peece of cloth by that name. This is that Q. Mutius Scaevola the Augur, of whom Cicero in his booke Laelius, and in the first booke of an Oratour maketh mention.


638


C. Licinius Geta.


Q. Maximus.


CAssiodorus coupleth together in societie of Consullship this yeere, C. Litinius and Qu. Maximus. The Sicilian registers name them Geta and Eburinus. Of this Q. Maximus Cicero speaketh in his Oration for Muraena. That this man was of the house of the Fabij, his surname Eburinus sheweth, of whome writeth Festus in this manner: Qu. Fabius was called Pullus Iovis, surnamed Eburivus, of whitenesse, for that his buttocke was blasted with lightening. Quintilian in his third Declamation reporteth, that this Fabius Eburinus had a sonne unchast of his bodie, whom he examined at home in his house, and thereupon put him to death. The same man Valerius calleth Qu. Fabius Servilianus. As for the name of this Licinius his father, obscure and unknowne heretofore, Goltzius out of an old antiquitie of coin hath restored it, wherin as he saith, was written plainely, C. Licinius Geta, son of Publius.


639


M. Metellus.


M. Scaurus.


THe Consuls next following by Cassiodorus his report, were Mar. Metellus and M. Scaurus. As for Metellus, the third sonne he was of Macedonicus. But as touching M. Scaurus, whome the writer of the booke entituled of Famous persons, calleth M. Aemylius, Scauras, thus writeth Paedianus; M. Scaurus (quoth hee) was a Patritian indeed and of noble bloud, but so, as the gentric of his house, for those discents before him lay obscure, for neither father, nor grandsire, by reason of their poore estate, and for want of putting forth themselves in the world, attained to dignitie

in weale publicke. Moreover, of him Cicero maketh mention oftentimes in his Oration for Murena and in Brutus. Valerius also in his fift book and eight chapter, and Plinie likewise in his second booke and sixe and thirtieth chapter.


640


M'. Acilius Balbus.


C. Cato.


CAssiodorus setteth down for Consuls this yeere, M. Atilius Balbus, and C. Cato. The Sicilian catalogue Balbus and Cato. Obsequens M. Acilius and C. Portius. Of the same Consuls Plinie speaketh in the 2 booke, chap. 29 and 58. Plutarch in Marius giveth to Acilius the forename Manius. This C. Cato is the brother of that M. Cato, who foure yeers before was Consull, nephew to M. Cato Censorinus, and Africanus sisters sonne as saith Velleius, Cicero against Verres, and in Brutus.


641


C. Caeilius.


Cn. Papyrius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens set downe for next Consulls, C. Caecilius and Cn. Papyrius. The Sicilian registers Metellus and Carbo. Eutropius, C. Caecilius Metellus, and Cn. Carbo. The same men Tacitus in his booke of the manners of Germanes reported to have borne the Consulship, anno 640 after the foundation of Rome: in which yeere, both he and Obsequens doe report, that the people of Rome began first to war with the Cimbrians and the Teutones. This C. Metellus was the fourth sonne of C. Metellus the sonne of Macedonicus: whom when he died, he left a man of Pretors calling, and in suit and election for to be Consull. This man gat a surname by way of reproch, as Cicero testifieth in his second booke of a perfect Oratour. Now surnamed was hee Capriarus, as Plutarch saith in the Life of the Romans.


642


M. Livius Drusus.


L. Piso.


CAssiodorus exhibiteth unto us for this yeers Consuls, M. Livius Drusus and L. Piso. The Sicilian catalogue Drusus and Piso. L. Piso surnamed Caesonius a man of Consular degree, was slaine after by the Tigurines, when Lu. Cassius was Consull, as Orosius testifieth.


643


P. Scipio.


L. Calpurnius Bestia.


CAssiodorus nameth this yeere for Consuls, P. Scipio and L. Calpurnius Bestia. The Sicilian records Nasica and Bestia. Obsequens, Pub. Scipio and L. Calpurnius. Salust, Eutropius, and Orosius, P. Scipio Nasica and L. Capurnius Bestia. Of these Consuls, P. Nasica Scipio and L. Bestia, Valerius likewise maketh report, lib. 1. cap. 6. Moreover, Cicero in his Brutus writeth, that P. Scipio the sonne of Pub. Scipio surnamed Serapion and fellow Consull to L. Bestia, died in his Consulship. Of this Bestia there is some mention to be seene in a capitoll fragment.


644


Sp. Postumius.


M. Minutius.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls, Sp. Postumius and M. Minutius. The Sicilian registers Albinus and Rufus. Salust, Sp. Albinus and Q. Minutius Rufus. Of M. Minustius, Velleius and the threescore and seventh Epitome make mention.


645


Q. Metellus.


M. Silanus.


CAssiodorus saith that the Consuls next following were Q. Metellus and M. Silanus. The Sicilian catalogue sheweth Metellus and Silanus. Paedianus and Eutropius, Qu. Caecilius Metellus Numidicus, and M. Iunius Silanus. Of them also Cicero speaketh in Brutus. This Metellus was surnamed Numidius for the conquest of Numidia, as witnesseth Velleius.


646


Ser. Galba.


M. Scaurus.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens deliver for the Consuls of this yeere, Servius Galba and M. Scaurus. The Sicilian evidences, Sulpitius and Scaurus. Cicero in the Oration for Rabirius, saith that Servius Galba was a man of Consular degree, when Marius was the sixt time Consull. Of M. Scaurus the Consull, Velleius and Tacitus make mention. This is that Mar. Aurelius Scaurus, who being afterwards in embassage was by the Cimbrians murdered, as appeareth in the threescore and seventh Epitome.



647


L. Cassius.


C. Marius.


CAssiodorus joineth in the Consulship this yeere, L. Cassius and C. Marius: Cuspinians booke and the Sicilian records, Longinus and Marius. Plinie also maketh mention of them in his tenth book and thirteenth chap. Cicero in his Oration for Plancius: Plutarch in Marius; and Cicero againe in his third booke of Duties, writeth, that C. Marius having taken the repulse twise for the office of Aedileship, was created Consull.


648


Q. Servilius Caepio.


C. Atilius.


OBsequens and Cassiodorus match Consuls together this yeere, Q. Servilius Caepio and C. Atilius Serranus. The Sicilian monuments Caepio and Servilius. In this yeere upon the third day of Ianuarie Mar. Tullus Cicero was borne, as Gellius in his fifteenth booke and eight and twentieth chapter hath left written. Much mention there is made of these Consuls in Cicero and other ancient writers.


649


P. Rusilius Rusus.


C. Manilius.


PVblius Rutilius Rufus and C. Manilius, are put downe by Obsequens and Cassiodorus for this yeeres Consuls. This P. Rutilius, Cicero in Brutus, calleth the sonne of Marcus. About the other Consull the Annales doe varie and disagree; some forename him C. others Cneus. Some name him M. Manlius, others Mallius or Manilius. But all this controversie is decided by an old antiquitie in stone at Puteoli: the inscription whereof testifieth that P. Ratilius and Cn. Mallius were Consuls; as also the evidence of the Sicilian registers, wherein written it is Rufus and Mallius. Of this Mallius, mention there is made in Ciceroes Orations for Plancius and Muraena: likewise in Valerius, Salust, Tacirus, Elorus, Eutropius and Orosius. That hee was not onely a base man and of low birth, but also without all vertue and wit, in the course of his life also vile and contemptible, Cicero writeth in his Oration for Plancius. Whereby it easily appeareth, that the Mallij were a kinred different from the Manlij. For of Cn. Manlius a Patritian, and that of a most noble house, Cicero would never have spoken in such tearmes.


650


C. Marius. II.


C. Flavius Fimbria.


THe next Consuls are set downe by Cassiodorus, C. Marius the second time, and C. Flavius Fibria: by Obsequens, C. Marius and C. Flavius. By the Sicilian registers Marius and Fimbria: by Paedianus upon the Oration for Cornelius, C. Marius the second time, and C. Fimbria; Item, C. Marius and Caius Flavius. Besides, Cicero, Velleius, Valerius, Plutarch, and others speake often of these Coss.


651


C. Marius. III.


L. Aurelius Orestes.


CAssiodorus reporteth for this yeeres Consuls, C. Marius the third time, and L. Aurelius Orestes. The Sicilian catalogue Marius and Orestes. Moreover, Marius even in his absence was elected Consull the third time, for feare of the Cimbrian warre which was differed, as Velleius, Eutropius, the Breviarie, and Cicero in his Oration concerning provinces, doe testifie.


652


C. Marius. IIII.


Q. Lutatius.


NExt after them are put downe for Consuls by Cassiodorus and Obsequent, C. Marius the fourth time, and Q. Lutalius. The Sicilian registers exhibite unto us Marius and Catulus. Plutarch and Eutropius, Caius Marius the fourth time, and Q. Lutatius Catulus. Of these Consuls, Cicero and Plinie oftentimes make mention.


653


C. Marius.


V. M'. Aquillius.


THen succeeded in the Consulship by the testimonie of Cassiodorus, C. Marius the fift time, and M'. Aquillius. Of this C. Marius five times now Consull, Plutarch and Florus give report. And Cicero in his second book of a perfect Oratour, nameth M'. Aquilius for the companion of C. Marius in his fift Consulship. Of whom Plutarch in Marius speaketh, and calleth him (...), as also Appian in Mithridatica. Now this Manius Aquillius a Consular man, is the same, who afterwards being an embassadour, was by king Mithridates taken prisoner, and most villanoustly tormented and mangled.



654


C. Marius VI.


L. Valerius Flaccus.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens shew unto us for this yeeres Consuls, C. Marius the sixt time, and Lu. Valerius Flaccus. The Sicilian records, Marius and Flaccus. This L. Flaccus (afterwards Censor) was President of the Senat, and master of the horsemen under Sylla Dictatour. Of these Consuls Cicero speaketh verie often, and namely in his Brutus, in his oration for Rabirius, against Catiline and Antonie; and also in the defence of Plancius. Plinie likewise in his second booke, Velleius, and Paedianus upon the oration against Piso. Moreover, Plutarch, and many authours besides. In this yeere (upon the twelfth day of Iuly, then called Quintilis, as Macrobius witnesseth) was C. Caesar borne, who afterwards was surnamed Dictatour.


655


M. Antonius.


A. Postumius.


REported it is by Cassiodorus and Obsequens, that M. Antonius and A. Postumius were Consuls this yeere. The Sicilian registers, shew Albinus and Antonius. In a fragment also of the capitoll marbles, mention there is of Au. Postumius. Cuspinians booke and the Greeke records, have Antonius and Albinus. Of these Consuls, Cicero speaketh in his oration to the citizens of Rome, after his returne out of exile. Likewise Plinie in his 8 booke and 7 chapter, where he noteth this the 655 yeere. Also Gellius in his 4 booke and 6 chap.


656


Q. Metellus.


T. Didius.


QVintus Metellus and T. Didius succeeded Consuls next in this yeere, as Cassiodorus and Obsequens doe write. And Paedianus upon the oration for Cornelius, nameth them: Curio (saith he) accused Q. Mettellus Nepos, son of Balearicus, and nephew of Macedonicus, who was Consull with P. Didius. Cicero speaketh of the same man in his oration after his returne.


657


Cn. Lentulus.


P. Crassus.


NOt onely Cassiodorus, but the Sicilian registers also, doe testifie, that Cn. Lentulus and P. Crassus were Consuls this yeere: and Obsequens nameth them, Cn. Cornelius and P. Licinius. Plinie writeth of them in his tenth booke and first chapter: also in his 33 booke and second chapter.


658


Cn. Domitius.


C. Cassius.


THis yeer had for Consuls, Cn. Domitius and C. Cassius, as Cassiodorus and Obsequens do witnesse. Cuspinians annals and the Greeke registers, shew Aenobarbus and Longius. A fragment of Verrius Flaccus his marbles, Aenobarbus and C. Cassius sonne of Lucius. Paedianus speaketh of them upon the oration for Cornelius.


659


L. Crassus.


Q. Scaevola.


LVcius Crassus and Q. Scaevola were Consuls next following, according to Cassiodorus and Obsequens. In a fragment of the capitoll records as touching Consuls, is to be seene Crassus and Mattius. In Censorinus, we find Lu. Licinius son of Lucius. C^c. in his Brutus writeth, that Crassus the oratour bare all dignities of magistracie, togither with Scaevola the highpriest, except the Tribunat of commons and the Censorship: also that whiles they two were Consuls, Q. Hortensius pleaded the first cause that ever he undertooke, at the barre. Paedianus upon the oration of Cicero for Cornelius, maketh mention of L. Licinius Crassus the Orator, and Q. Matius Scevola the arch-bishop, an oratour besides and a professed lawier, both Consuls, togither.


660


C. Caelius.


L. Domitius.


Cassiodorus and Obsequens declare for this yeeres Consuls, C. Caelius and ^. Domitius. The Sicilian registers, Caldus and Aenbarbu^. In a capitoll fragment, they are Caldus and Lu. Domitius sonne of Cn. As for Caldus, it is the surname of Caelius. For Velleius maketh mention of one Caelius Caldus, under Augustus. In like manner Cicero in his booke entituled, The suing for a Consulship, and in his oration for Muraena. Also Paedianus upon the Oration for Cornelius. Againe, Cicero in his Brutus, nameth them next before Herrennius.


661


C. Valerius Flaccus.


M. Herennius.


THere are matched by Cassiodorus and Obsequens for Consuls this yeere, C. Valerius

Flaccus and Mar. Herennius. The Sicilian records, Flaccus and Herennius. A broken stone of the capitoll, hath Flaccus and M. Herennius. Plinius in his 29 book and 3 chapter; Cicero also in his Oration for Muraena, and in Brutus, speaketh of them.


662


C. Claudius Pulcher.


M. Perpenna.


COnsuls this yeere, were C. Claudius Pulcher, and M. Perpenna, as witnesse Cassiodorus and Obsequens. Likewise in a capitoll broken monument, and in the Sicilian register, it is Pulcher and M. Perpenna. Cicero maketh mention of this Claudius as Pretor of Sicilie, in the fourth Oration against Verres: and as Aedile Curule, in his second book of Offices. So doth Plinie in his 8 booke.


663


L. Martius.


Sext. Iulius.


CAssiodorus and Obsequens name for Consuls this yeere, L. Martius and Sext. Iulius. The Sicilian records, Philip and Caesar. Eutropius and Orosius, Sex. Iulius Caesar, and L. Martius Philippus. A capitoll fragment, Philip and Sex. Iulius, son of Caius. Plinie speaketh of them in his 2 booke 8 chapter: also in the 33 booke and 3 chapter. In like maner Cic. many times, and Valerius.


664


L. Iulius Caesar.


P. Rutilius Lupus.


ACcording to Cassiodorus and Obsequens, the Consuls this yeere, were L. Iulius Caesar, and P. Rutilius Lupus. And so it is in Paedianus, Velleius, and the 73 Epitome: as also in other authors who have written of the Marsian warre. In a fragment of the capitoll, they are seene written, Caesar, and P. Rutilius son of Rusus. In the Sicilian records, Caesar and Lupus. Cicero in his booke of Divination, speaketh of them both: and in his oration for Plancius he writeth, that L. Caesar missing of an Aedileship, became a Consull.


665


L. Portius.


Cn. Pompeius.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls this yeere, L. Portius and Cn. Pompeius. Paedianus upon the Oration for Cornelius, surnameth Cn. Pompeius, Strabo; and L. Porcius, Cato. The capitoll fragment shew no more but Strabo and Cato. Appius hath made mention of these Consuls: so have Orosius and others that have penned the Marsian warre. This Cn. Pompeius was father to that Cn. Pompeius the Great: as Appianus witnesseth, and Paedian upon the oration against Piso.


666


L. Sylla.


Q. Pompeius.


CAssiodorus sheweth for this yeers Consuls, L. Sylla and Q. Pompeius: and the same is written in Obsequens, Velleius, Eutropius, Orosius, Appian, Plutarch, and others. The Sicilian records, have Sylla and Rutilus. Sylla, after his victorie in the civill war, would needs have himselfe surnamed Foelix: and therefore Paedian and the avouchers of the capitoll monuments, in reporting this consulate, write thus; L. Sulla, who afterwards was called Foelix. The same man in his second Consulship, (which appeareth upon record in the capitoll) is named the sonne of Lucius, and nephew of Publius. Moreover, of Q. Pompeius Rufus, Cicero maketh mention in his Brutus.


667


L. Cornelius Cinna.


Cn. Octavius.


REported there are by Cassiodorus and the Sicilian registers for Consuls this yeere, L. Cinna and Cn. Octavius. Appian, Velleius, and the rest, who have recorded the historie of this time, name them L. Cornelius Cinna, and Cn. Octavius. Plutarch writeth, that L. Cinna, being of the adverse faction to L. Sulla, was by him made Consull, upon condition, that he should not crosse nor stand against the proceeding of the said Lu. Sulla: and so soone as hee was entred into place of government, hee began to trouble and disquiet the present state of the common-weale, yea and intended an action against Sulla, by the meanes of Virginius a Tribune of the commons. Howbeit Sulla contemning Virginius, made an expedition against Mithridates.


668


L. Cinna II.


C. Marius VII.


AFter this, were Consuls, C. Marius the seventh time, and L. Cinna the second time, according to the records of Sicilie, Cassiodorus,

and those that wrate of the civill war. Plutarch saith, that Marius was the first man that was seven times Consull of Rome. Moreover, as it is to be read in Appian, and in the Breviaries, L. Cinna and C. Marius, without any lawfull assembly for Election, declared themselves Consuls against this yeere, and the very same day that they entred into their magistracie, Marius commaunded Sext. Licinius a Senatour, to be throwne downe from the rocke Tarpeia: who, after hee had committed many hainous crimes and outrages, ended his daies upon the Ides of Ianuarie: in whose roume was subordained, Lu. Valerius Flaccus, even hee (as men think) who before-time was colleague to Caius Marius in his sixt Consulship: of whome Cicero maketh mention in his oration for his sonne Flaccus.


669


L. Cinna III.


Cn. Papirius.


CAssiodorus witnesseth, that the Consuls succeeding in this yeere, were L. Cinna the third time, and Cn. Papirius. The Sicilian records, have Cinna and Carbo. In the 83 Breviarie it is written, that Lu. Cinna and Cn. Papirius Carbo, for two yeeres togither usurped the Consulate. Also in the booke entituled, Of famous persons, wee read that Cinna made himselfe Consull a second and third time. Of these Consuls Plutarch speaketh in Sulla, Appian in Mithridatica, and in the first booke of civill warres.


670


L. Cinna IV.


Cn. Papirius II.


NExt were Consuls, after Cassiodorus and the Epitomist, Lu. Cinna the fourth time, and Cn. Papirius the second time. Cicero in his Tusculane questions mentioneth Cinna foure times Consull: so doth Suetonius in Caesar. And of Cn. Papirius Carbo twice Consull, the capitoll tables doe yeeld testimonie. As for the Sicilian records, they put downe for Consull, (not without suspition of error) Carbo and Scribonius.


671


L. Scipio.


C. Norbanus.


BEsides the Sicilian tables, Cassiodorus, Obsequens, Appius, Eutropius, Florus, and Tacitus in his ninteenth book do witnesse, that Lucius Scipio, and Caius Norbanus were Consuls. In the capitoll fragments it is written, Lucius Cornelius sonne of Lucius, nephew of L. Scipio Asiaticus.


672


C. Marius.


Cn. Carbo III.


I Find in Cassiodorus, Appianus, Velleius, and others, the next Consuls to have been, C. Marius and Cn. Carbo the third time. This C. Marius was the brothers sonne of C. Marius seven times Consull, according to Appian: but Velleius, Paterculus, Plutarch, Eutropius, and others, say, that hee was the sonne of that C. Marius: and haply indeed hee was adopted by C. Marius. Certes in the capitoll tables, hee is called C. Marius, sonne of C. and nephew of Caius. Cicero speaketh of these Coss. against Rullus: Plinie also in his seventh booke, and they who have set downe in writing the civill warres of Sylla.


673


M'. Tullius.


Cn. Dolabella.


NExt to those, Cassiodorus bringeth in for Consuls, M'. Tull^us and Cn. Dolabella. The Sicilian records, have Decula and Dolabella. Appian also reporteth, that Sylia Dictatour, to the end that the state and commonweale might seeme to reteine some shew yet of her auncient dignitie, permitted M'. Tullius and Cornelius Dolabella to be created Consuls, whiles himselfe after the manner of K. sate aloft in a throne above them. Cicero in his oration against Rullus, and Gellius in his 15 booke and 33 chap. maketh mention of M'. Tullius and Cn. Cornelius Consuls. In a capitoll fragment, this M'. Tullius, sonne of M. nephew of A. is surnamed Decula.


674


L. Sulla II.


Q. Metellus.


CAssiodorus and the Sicilian registers, set downe for Consuls, Lu. Sylla the second time, and Q. Metellus. Appius saith moreover, that Sylla, Dictatour though hee was, yet stood content and willing to be declared Consull with Q. Metellus Pius, to the end that the common-weale might seeme to have some likenes yet of a free state. Of these Consuls, Cic. maketh mention in his Orations against Verres, and elsewhere. Gellius likewise in his 15 book and 28 chapter, togither with Cassiodorus.

This Merellas was surnamed Pius. Hee it is, who was by lot appointed to manage the warres in Spaine and against Sertorius; and sonne hee was to Numidicus.


675


P. Servilius.


App. Claudius.


THe next Consuls, were P. Servilius and Ap. Claudius, as witnesseth Cassiodorus. In the Sicilian tables, it appeareth that their surnames were, Vatia and Pulcher: of whome Appianus writeth thus; The people of Rome in obsequious manner to court Sylla the Dictator, requested of him that hee would continue Consull still another yeere: But Sylla would none of that: and tooke order, that Servilius Isauricus and Claudius Pulcher, should be declared Coss. In a fragment of the capitoll he is thus written; Pub. Servilius Vatia, called afterwards Isauricus: which surname he tooke of the Isaurians, a nation in Cilicia whome he subdued. My authors are, Paedianus upon the Orations of Cicero against Verres; Strabo in his 14 booke; Marcellinus likewise in his 14 booke, with others.


676


M. Lepidus.


Q. Catulus.


MAr. Lepidus and Q. Catulus, are by Cassiodorus named Consuls for this yeere. Plutarch reporteth, that when L. Sylla had given up his Dictatorship, and restored againe to the people of Rome the free libertie to dispose of consular dignities in their solemne assemblies for elections; M. Lepidus an enemie to Sylla, and an audacious person, was declared Consull before Catulus, and had the preheminence above him, by the earnest endeavour of Cn. Pompeius. Of these Consuls, Plinie maketh mention in his 36 booke, wherein he saith, that they governed in the yeere 676. Likewise Cic. in his Oration for Cornelius: Florus out of Livie: Valerius 2 booke 3 chap. and Eutropius.


677


M. Aemilius.


D. Brutus.


THis yeer had for Consuls, by the testimonie of Cassiodorus and Obsequens, M. Aemilius and D. Brutus. Macer, a Tribune of the commons, speaketh of them in Salust, complaining that the commons were by the nobles oppressed. In like sort, Cicero in Brutus, and in his second booke of Duties, as also Valerius in the 7 booke and 7 chap. This M. Aemilius was surnamed Lepidus and Livianus: for out of the familie of Livies he was adopted by Mamercus Lepidus, and therefore right well hee is called, sonne of Mamercus.


678


Cn. Octavius.


C. Curio.


VErrius Flaccus setteth downe for Consuls, Cn. Octavius sonne of M. nephew of C. and C. Scribonius Curio. The same doth Cicero report in Brutus. So doe Salust, Obsequens, Lactantius in his first booke, and Plinie in his second book and 35 chapter. Cic. in his Brutus, and Plinie in his 7 booke and 41 chapter, make report of three Caij Curions, all Orators, to wit, the father, the sonne, and the sonnes sonne or nephew.


679


L. Octavius.


C. Cotta.


CAssiodorus putteth down for Consuls this yeer, L. Octavius and C. Cotta. Obsequens, C. Aurelius and L. Octavius. Plinie in his second book and 35 chapter: Cicero likewise in his third and fifth Orations against Verres, maketh mention of L. Octavius, and C. Aurelius Consuls. Vpon the broken marbles of the capitoll, they stand to be seene, L. Octavius sonne of Cn. nephew of Cn. and C. Aurelius. This yeer the Sicilian registers over-skip. Paedianus writeth, that there were at this time three Cottaes breethren, and all of consular degree, namely, Caius, Marcus, and Lucius.


680


L. Licinius Lucullus.


M. Cotta.


FOr this yeeres Consuls, Cassiodorus registreth L. Lucullus, and M. Cotta. The Sicilian records, Lucullus and Cotta. Eutropius, Appianus in Mithridatica, and Plutarch in Lucullus, nameth them, L. Licinius Lucullus, and M'. Aurelius Cotta. Mention there is made of them by Cicero against Verres; and by Florus in the 93 and 94 Epitomes. This L. L^cullus had for his grandfather that Lucullus, who was Consull with A. Albinus, as Cicero and Plutarch doe testifie.


681


M. Lucullus.


C. Cassius.


THis yeere (by the testimonie of Cassiodorus) had for Consuls, Marcus Lucullus and

C. Cassius, but the Sicilian records, nominate Marcellus and Cassius: whom Cicero in an oration against Verres, nameth M. Terentius and C. Cassius: saying that the lawes Terentia and Cassia, were by them promulged. For, so farre forth as we may conjecture by the capitol fragments, M. Licinius Lucullus, was adopted by M. Terentius Varro, and therefore called M. Terentius Varro Lucullus. Cicero in Lucullus, and Plutarch, call Lucius Lucullus and M. Lucullus brethren, whom Eutropius nameth cousin germanes by two sisters. That the surname of Cassius was Varus, appeareth both by a conduit pipe or waterspout of lead found in Rome, and also for that Appian in his fourth booke, writeth that C. Cassius Varus, a man who had beene Consull, was condemned and outlawed by the Triumvirs.


682


L. Gellius.


Cn. Lentulus.


THe Consuls next following, by the report of Cassiodorus, were L. Gellius and Cn. Lentulus. In like sort Cicero maketh mention of them in his oration for Balbus, and else where. Plutarch also in Crassus, with Eutropius and Orosius. Cuspinians booke sheweth Poplicola and Lentulus. Now the surname of Lucius Gellius was Poplicola, as witnesseth Onuphrius.


683


Cn. Aufidius.


P. Lentulus.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls this yeere, Cn. Aufidius, and P. Lentulus. The Sicilian registers have Lentulus and Orestes. Eutropius, Cornelius Lentulus and Cn. Ausidius Orestes. This Cn. Ausidius Orestes, when hee went beside a tribuneship of the commons, was chosen Consull, as Cicero writeth in his oration for Plancius. This is that P. Lentulus surnamed Sura, who afterwards, beeing a man of Consular calling, and who had been twice Pretour, was hanged and strangled to death when Cicero was Consull, for that he had conspired with Catilin: whose grandfather was P. Lentulus Presedent of the Senate, as Cicero saieth, pleading for his house, and inveighing against Catilin: as also Paedianus.


684


M. Crassus.


Cn. Pompeius.


NExt to them were Coss. M. Crassus and Cn. Pompeius, according to Cassiodore, Plutarch, Appian, and the Sicilian records. Their surnames for certaine, were Dives and Magnus. All the old writers speake much of this their first Consulship. Plutarch reporteth that Licinius Crassus atteined to the Consulare dignitie, by the meanes of Pompeius the Consull. Besides, Cicero, Salust, Paedian writing upon the oration for Cornelius, and all other authours speake of these Consuls.


685


Q. Metellus.


Q. Hortensius.


THen followed Consuls, Q. Metellus and Q. Hortensius, as Cassiodore and the Sicilian catalogue doe testifie. Paedianus matcheth Q. Metelius Creticus with Q. Hortensius that great Oratour. Likewise Iosephus in his foureteenth booke of Iewish antiquities. Cicero in Brutus calleth this Q. Hortensius, the sonne of Lucius. Q. Metellus afterwards upon the conquest made of Crete surnamed Creticus, was the sonne of Lucius Dalmaticus, as may bee gathered out of Paedianus upon the Oration of Tullie [called Divinatio] against Verres.


686


L. Metellus.


Q. Marcius.


PAedianus writing upon Tullies Oration against Piso; Dio likewise and Cassiodorus, joine together in the Consulship this yeer, L. Caecilius Metellus, and Q. Marcius. the Greeke records, Marcius Rex, and Metellus. This Metellus, Dio writeth to have died in the very beginning of his magistracie: that hee also who was substituted in his roume, left this life before hee entred into the governement: and thereupon it was not thought good to subelect any more: and by that means Quintus Marcius bare that dignitie alone: and him Salust entituleth with the surname of Rex. This Lucius Metellus was brother to Quintus ^reticus, as Paedian witnesseth.



687


C. Piso.


M'. Glabrio.


THere succeeded Consuls, C. Piso and M'. Glabrio, witnesse Cassiodore and the Sicilian records. And in Dio they follow immediatly by the name of Manius Acilius and C. Piso. Cicero in his twelfth book of Epistles to Atticus, speaketh of C. Piso and M'. Acilius Glabrio, men of Consular place and calling. Paedian in his comentaries upon the oration for Cornelius maketh mention of C. Piso and the law Calpurna by him made, as touching inordinat and indirect suite after dignities of state. Moreover, of them Valerius in his fourth booke writeth.


688


M'. Lepidus.


L. Volcatius.


CAssiodore putteth down for Consuls, Manius Lepidus, and with him L. Torquatus, but untruly, The Greeke records have Volcatius Tullus. Dio Lu. Tullus, and Aimilius Lepidus. Salust in Catiline, L. Tullus and M'. Lepidus. Paedian upon the oration for Cornelius, M'. Lepidus and L. Volcatius. Cicero in his oration for Sulla hath L. Volcatius Tullus: so as it appeareth it should bee, M'. Aemilius Lepidus, and L. Volcatius Tullus.


689


L. Cotta.


L. Torquatus.


THe Consuls elect, were L. Autronius Paetus (as it appeareth upon a monument of a triumph in the capitoll, and not Antronius, as commonly it is read) and P. Cornelius Sulla: who being condemned for ambitious seeking after that office, and having therefore suffered condigne punishment, their accusers stept into their place of government, namely L. Aurelius sonne of Marcus, surnamed Cotta; and L. Manlius sonne of Lucius, surnamed also Torquatus: as testifie Salust, Dio, Paedian upon the oration for Cornelius, and that which hee made in his white robe: and lastly, Tranquillus in Caesar.


690


L. Caesar.


C. Figulus.


THe yeere next ensuing had for Consuls, by the testimonie of Cassiodore, Paedianus, and the Sicilian records, L. Caesar and C. Figulus, whome Dio calleth Lucius Caesar, and Lucius Martius son of Caius, surnamed Figulus. Cicero in his oration for Sulla, nameth them Lucius Iulius and C. Figulus: so doth Salust in Catilina. This L. Iulius Caesar is his sonne who was Consull in the Marsian warre.


691


M. Cicero.


C. Antonius.


THe Consuls this yeere, were M. Tullius son of M. surnamed Cicero, and C. Antonius son of M. as testifie Dio in his seven and thirtieth booke, Cassiodore, Salust in his Catilinarie oration, Velleius in his second booke, Ioseph in his Iewish antiquities 14 booke 8 chapter. Plinie in his eight booke and three and fiftieth chapter, Tranquillus in the life of Augustus, Appian, Eutropius, Paedian, and others.


692


D. Silanus.


L. Muraena.


THere followed Consuls next, D. Silanus, and L. Muraena, as Cassiodorus, Salust, and the Sicilian records do witnesse. Dio calleth them D. Iunius son of M. surnamed Silanus: and L. Licinius son of L. surnamed Muraena. Eutropius nameth them D. Iunius Silanus, and L. Licinius, sonne of that L. Muraena who in qualitie of Pro-pretour triumphed over Mithridates (as Cicero saith) pleading for Muraena himselfe, being accused and in trouble for unlawfull seeking to be Cos. In this assembly for election of Coss. L. Sergius Catilina suffered the second repulse: for anger whereof, in a melancholy hee brake out into a conspiracie, and practised against the state; and likewise Servius Sulpitius Rufus the lawyer, who afterwards accused Muraena for the crime aforesaid.


693


M. Pupius.


M. Valerius.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls this yeere, M. Pupius and M. Valerius. The Sicilian registers, Piso and Messala. Dio, M. Pupius, sonne of M. surnamed Piso: and M. Valerius son of M. surnamed Messala Niger. Of this Messala Niger, there is also mention made by Paedian upon the oration for Scaurus. Also of M. Messala and M. Piso, in Plinies seventh booke, and sixe and twentieth chapter, seven and thirtieth booke, cap. second, and the eight book, chap. sixe and twentie. And in Caesars first book of the

Gaules warre. Of M. Piso Paedian likewise speaketh writing upon the oration against Piso.


694


Q. Metellus.


Q. Afranius.


CAssiodorus and the Sicilian registers nominate for this yeeres Consuls, Q. Metellus and L. Afranius. The like doth Obsequens and Cicero in his first booke of Epistles to Atticus. Dio nameth them L. Afranius sonne of L. and Q. Caecilius, sonne of Q. surnamed Metellus Celer. Both of them were advaunced to the Consulate (as Dio witnesseth) by the means of Pompeius, for they had beene both twaine his lieutenants serving under him in Asia.


695


C. Caesar.


M. Bibulus,


CAssiodorus, Suetonius, together with the Sicilian tables and the Breviaries, do match together for Consuls this yeere, C. Caesar and M. Bibulus. Dio, C. Iulius sonne of Caius Caesar, and M. Calpurnius. Plutarch and Appian, C. Iulius Caesar, and Calpurnius Bibulus. Albeit Appian as also Eutropius and Orosius give Bibulus the forename, of Lucius. Of Caesar and Bibulus, Cicero speaketh in his first booke of Epistles, writing to Lentulus.


696


L. Piso.


A. Gabinius.


CAssiodorus and the Sicilian records shewe for Consuls this yeere, L. Piso and A. Gabinius. Dio, L. Calpurnius sonne of Lucius Piso: and A. Gabinius sonne of Aulus. Caesar, Cicero, Plutarch, and Cassiodorus, L. Piso, and A. Gabinius. Caesar writeth of them in his first booke of the Gaules warre, and Plutarch in the life of Cato the yonger. Cicero also in his oration against Piso, and for Sextius. This Piso the Consull, Cicero and Paedian surnamed Caesonius, for so his grandfather before him was called, as appeareth in the capitoll records for the yeere 606.


697


P. Lentulus.


Q. Metellus.


THe Consuls following for this yeere, were by Cassiodorus and the Sicilian records, P. Lentulus and Q. Metellus. By Dio, Pub. Cornelius sonne of Publius, Lentulus Spiniher: and Q. Caecilius sonne of Quintus Metelius Nepos. Of them speaketh Valerius in his ninth booke. Lentulus (qd. he) and Metellus companions in the Consulship were beheld and seen both upon the stage like plaiers: but the one of them tooke the surname of SpintherSecundatum. one of the second sort of actors: the other, but that he had gotten the name ofA russian Nepos alreadie for his lewd behaviour, should have beene called Pamphilus, after the name ofTertiarum. one of a third sort, whome for all the world hee resembled. Of the same men, Cicero in his first booke of Epistles, and in very many of his orations. Plinie also in his seventh booke and second chapter, Plutarch in the life of Cicero, and all other writers make much mention.


698


Cn. Lentulus.


L. Philippus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, Cn. Lentulus and L. Philippus. The Sicilian records, Marcellus and Philippus. Dio, Cn. Cornelius son of Publius, Lentulus Marcellus: and L. Martius sonne of Lucius Philippus. Of Lentulus and M. Marcellus Consuls, Cicero speaketh in his Epistles to Lentulus. Plutarch also in the life of Cato, maketh mention of Martius Philippus now Consull. This Cn. Lentulus was the son of that P. Lentulus, as Cicero saith in his Brutus. And surnamed hee was Marcellus, and not Claudius, that it might be knowne, of what familie of the Claudij he was descended.


696


Cn. Pompeius.


M. Crassus.


VVHen as by the obstinate persistance of ^. Cato Tribune of the commons, (who ever interposed his negative) there could be no ordinarie assembly holden for the creation of magistrates, the whole degree of the Senatours changed their weed in token of griefe: so as upon an Interregencie between, Cn. Pompeius was chosen Consull, and with him M. Crassus the second time, as Plutarch, Dio, and Appian do witnes. Lucius Domitius Aenobarbus, whom Cato and all good men accompanied and presented, was in the common place by violence throughly beaten, and Cato himselfe wounded. These Coss. Dio calleth Cn. Pompeius, son of Cneus Magnus the second time: and M. Licinius

sonne of P^blius, Crassus, the second time. Of them Paedianus, Eutropius, the Sicilian registers and others make mention.


700


Ap. Claudius.


L. Domitius.


DIo in his nine and thirtieth booke, for the yeere after the citties foundation 700, following the computation of Varro, avoucheth Consuls, Appius Claudius, son of Appius, Pulcher: and L. Domitius sonne of Cneus, Aenobarbus. Cassiodore and Obsequens, name them, Appius Claudius and L. Domitius, whom the Sicilian records call Pulcher and Aenobarbus: and Paedian upon the oration for Scaurus, L. Domitius Aenobarbus, and Appius Claudius Pulcher. Of this L. Domitius, sonne of Cneus, Aenobarbus, Caelius speaketh in the eight booke of Ciceroes Epistles.


701


Cn. Domitius.


M. Messala.


AGainst this yeere there stood in election and labored with much earnestnes and ambitious desire to be Consuls, Caius Memmius, Cn. Domitius. M. Messala and M. Scaurus, as Cicero writeth to his brother Quintus. But at the last, even in the seventh moneth of this yeere there were created by meanes of an Interregencie, M. Messala and Cn. Domitius. Neither had they bene chosen then; but that Q. Pompeius Rufus a Tribune of the commons, who still opposed himselfe to hinder and debarre all election, was by order from the Senate committed: and the Senate made countenaunce to do the like by the rest, as many as went about to crosse the said election. Thus much Dio. But Appian saith, that the common weale continued for eight months space in Anarchie without any soveraigne magistrates of state. Plutarch writeth, that in this so great extreamitie of daunger, Lucilius a Tribune of the commons, preferred a bill for the creating of Cneus Pompeius Dictatour, who should redresse all enormities and set upright the state againe: but Cato gainsaied it, and so nothing was effected. Dio saith moreover, that the Tribunes of the commones mooved for the chusing not of a Dictatour onely, but also of militarie Tribunes in Consuls authoritie: but through the earnest labour of Pompeius, Consuls were created, Messala and Calvinus, which surnames stand to bee seene upon the Sicilian records. Also in the capitoll monuments, written it is thus. Cn. Domitius Calvinus sonne of M. nephew of Marcus, ann. 708 and 717.


702


Cn. Pompeius.


Q. Metellus.


VVHen by reason of the contentions among so mighty competitours, the Consuls could not be created by the kalends of Ianuarie: there passed an Act of the Senate, according to the mind and advise of Bibulus, by vertue whereof Cn. Pompeius was by the Interregent Serv. Sulpitius created Consull the third time, upon the five and twentieth of Februarie, without a colleague first, and presently entred upon the government. But afterwards to avoid the envie that might arise thereupon, he tooke unto him as companion in the Consulship for the five last months of the yeer behind, Q. Caecilius Pius Metellus Scipio, his wives father. Thus writeth Paedian upon the oration of Cicero in defence of Milo: Plutarch likewise, Appianus and Dio. This Metellus Pius Scipio was also called P. Cornelius Scipio Nasica, sonne of Nasica Scipio, who beeing adopted by Q. Metellus Pius, is called by Caelius in the familiar Epistles of Cicero, Q. Caecilius sonne of Q. nephew of Q. Metellus Pius Scipio.


703


M. Marcellus.


Ser. Sulpitius.


AGainst this yeere were Consuls created, M. Marcellus, and Serv. Sulpitius, as Cassiodorus, Plutarch, and Appian witnesse. The Sicilian records call them Rufus and Marcellus. Dio nameth them Servius Sulpitius sonne of Q. surnamed Rufus, and M. Claudius sonne of M. surnamed also Marcellus. Of these Consuls Suetonius also maketh mention in Caesar: likewise Cicero in his Epistles, and the Epitome 118. This Marcellus was the cousin germane of that Marcellus who the yeere next following was Consull: and brother germane to him who two yeeres after bare the Consulship, as may bee collected out of Verrius Flaccus, Dio, and Suetonius.


704


L. Paulus.


C. Marcellus.


THere succeeded Consuls, L. Paulus and C. Marcellus: witnesse Cassiodore, Dio, Suetonius, Hirtius in his 8 book, togither with

the Sicilian records. The one of these is by Dio named L. Aemylius, sonne of Marcus, surnamed Paulus; the other by Cicero in his epistles, C. Claudius sonne of Caius, Marcellus. Dio writeth, that this man by some was reported to be(...) i. the brothers sonne, others (...) i. the brother of Mar. Marcellus, but Suetonius saith plainely hee was the brothers sonne.


705


L. Lentulus.


C. Marcellus.


CAssiodorus setteth down for Consuls this yeere, L. Lentulus and C. Marcellus, as also Appian, Plutarch, Hirtius, Florus, and Cicero in his epistles do testifie. Dio calleth these Consuls Lu. Cornelius, sonne of Publius, Lentulus: and C. Claudius sonne of Marcus, Marcellus. In the broken marbles of the Capitoll it is to bee seene thus. C. Claudius sonne of Marcus, nephew of Marcus, Metellus. This is that Lucius Lentulus Crus, who as Caelius testifieth in the former election tooke a repulse, and by Cicero is called in the Oration against Vatinius, Flamen Martialis.


706


C. Caesar.


P. Servilius.


VVHen Caius Caesar the Dictator held the solemne assembly for the election in the latter end of the former yeere, Consuls there were created Caius Iulius, sonne of Caius, Caesar; and Pub. Servilius, sonne of Publius, Isauricus. For now was the yeere come, when as Caesar by the lawes might bee chosen Consull: for so in the third booke of his owne Commentaries hee saith himselfe, and so Dio in his one and fortieth booke, Plutarch, Tranquillus, Appianus, and Cassiodorus doe testifie of him. But hee meaneth that law which expressely forbad and debarred, that no man might bee within tenne yeeres space chosen Consull twise. As for Publius Servilius, hee was the sonne of that Pub. Servilius that first tooke the surname Isauricus, who this yeere bare his Consulship at Rome, while Caesar warred in Macedonie.


707


Q. Eusius Calenus.


P. Vatinius.


DIo saith, that the people of Rome having intelligence that Pompeius was murdered, endevoured earnestly, that there might passe as honourable decrees for Caesar the conquerour as possibly might bee. And therefore they ordained, that hee might bee Consull five yeeres together, and Dictatour not for sixe moneths, as beforetime, but an whole yeere; and endued with the Tribunes authoritie for ever. Now Caesar, albeit hee was without Italie, immediately entered upon his Dictatourship, having sub-ordained under him for his Generall of the horse, Mar. Antonius, a man who yet had not beene Pretour. This appeareth by the Capitoll records, Dio, Plutarch, and Cicero in his second Philippica. But under what pretence and colour Caesar tooke upon him this Dictatourship and the rest following, Mar. Antonius sheweth in his Oration of Caesars praise in Dio: wherein hee saith that Caesar was created Dictator to make head against the enemies, and therefore the troubles and dissentions of warre was the cause of this creation. But certaine it is that Caesar became Dictatour for another cause, namely, that by the meanes of that soveraigne power, hee might draw unto himselfe alone the whole managing and governement of the State, which beforetime had beene administred by many persons. But Dio addeth moreover and saith, that in the beginning of this yeere there were neither Pretours nor Consuls elected. For Marcus Antonius Generall of the horse, arraied in his purple robes, with sixe Lictours, making way before him, resembled a certaine shew of the auncient libertie. But within a while after he departed forth of the cittie, and that which never was before done by any maister of the horse, hee left Lu. Caesar an aged man, Provost and governour of Rome. Howbeit in the end of the yeere, after the recoverie and conquest of Aegypt, when king Ptolomeus was slaine, and Pharnaces king of Pontus vanquished; Consuls were created, Qu. Fusius, sonne of Quintus, Calenus; and Pub. Vatinius, sonne of Publius. And these the Capitoll tables doe shew, and Cassiodorus also. Of Pub. Vatinius Consull, Macrobius in his second booke maketh mention.


708


C. Caesar.


M. Lepidus.


VErrius in his capitoll tables setteth forth Consuls of this yeere, onely without ever

a Dictatour. The stone record of Colatia, whereof Onuphrius speaketh heere, nameth C. Iulius Caesar the third time, and M. Aimilius Lepiaus. But Dio in his three and fortieth book, The next yeere following (quoth he) hee bare the Dictatourship and the Consulat both, the third time, and tooke unto him for his colleague in both magistracies, M. Aimilius Lepidus. Of the same mind seemeth Tranquillus to bee in Caesar, chap. seventie sixe. Likewise Hirtius in the fift booke. But Onuphrius supposeth that both Tranquillus and Dio, yea and Hirtius also were in an errour. For, with the capitoll records, Plutarch and Eutropius agree; who write that Caesar this yeere was Consull the third time with M. Lepidus, and Dictatour the second time.


709


C. Caesar.


Q. Maximus.


THey who cut the capitoll marbles, do shew unto us that Caesar this yeere was third time Dictator with M. Lepidus General of the horse. From whome Dio differeth; who doth report that this yeere, Caesar was Dictator the 4 time, and Lepidus second time maister of the horsemen: also that Lepidus fellow Consull with Caesar, declared himselfe against all law, Generall of the horse. Thus much of the Dictatour. But as touching the Consuls this yeere, there is to be seene written in the Index or table of Dio, that the same yere Caesar bare his fourth Dictatourship, and likewise his fourth Consulat without colleague. In that historie also it appeareth, that Caesar presently entred upon his fourth Consulate, but bare it not throughout the whole yeere: and that so soone as he was returned to Rome out of Spain, he resigned and substituted in his place for the rest of the yeere, Q.Fabius Max. and Cn. Trebonius. With Dio, the evidences agree that are written in the capitoll fragments: wherein it appeareth that Caesar was the fourth time Consull, and that without a colleague; as Sigonius maketh interpretation. For Cuspinians kalender together with the Sicilian registers, doe shew that Caesar was Consull now alone the fourth time. In like maner, Appian and Plutarch make mention of Caesar, who being Consull elect now the fourth time, led an armie into Spaine. As for Q. F^bius, Suetonius calleth him a three month-Consull. Dio saith moreover, that Caesar upon the death of Q.Fabius the Consull, declared the very last day of the yeere, C. Cannius to bee the Consull for those few houres that were behind. Whereof Cicero in his seventh booke of Epistles, writing to Curius, Macrobius in his second booke of Saturnalia, Tacitus in his eighteenth booke, Plinie in his seventh, and Suetonius in Caesar do make report.


710


C. Caesar.


M. Antonius.


DIo setteth downe for this yere, Caesar Dictator the fift time, together with M. Aemylius Lep^dus maister of the horsemen. But the capitoll tables avouch him Dictatour now the fourth time. Dio and Appian write that hee created himselfe Consull together with M. Antonius. Likewise Cassiodorus and the Sicilian registers give record, that Caesar was this yeere Consull the fift time, together with M. Antonius. And Macrobius in his first booke speaketh of them. Moreover, written it is in the Capitoll and Colotian tables, that C. Caesar was Consull the fift time, with M. Antonius son of M: and that in the roum of Caesar there was chosen P. Cornelius son of Publius. And this was P. Cornelius Dolabella, whom Caesar himselfe (if hee had lived) meant to have substituted in his owne rowm. Plutarch writeth, that Caesar Cos. now the fift time, tooke unto him for his companion in government M. Antonius. And when as he would have subordeined Dolabella in his owne stead, Antonie gainesaid it in an oration: and afterwards, when Caesar a second time would have had Dolabella to be declared Consul, and still Antonie crossed and withstood it, Caesar gave over his enterprise. But after Caesar was murdered, Antonie (as Dio writeth) fearing some insurrection and commotion if he should have rejected Dolabella, tooke him into the fellowship of government. Appian saith, that immediately after Caesar was killed, Dolabella entred into the magistracie. So saieth Velleius also. And this verily was the yere, in which the conspiracie was contrived against Caesar, whereof the chieftaines were M. and Decimus both Bruti, C. Trebonius and C. Cassius: and upon the fifteenth day of March, when hee sat in counsell together with the Senate in the court of Pompeie, he was stabbed, and received in his bodie three and twentie wounds: which done, the murderers who had wrought the feat seized the capitoll. And C. Octavius his nephew or sisters sonne, whome Caesar had made in his will his halfe-heire, and adopted to beare his owne name, came out of Epitus, whither Caesar had

sent him before, minding to make warre upon the Parthians, and after all luckie and happie proceedings, took upon him the name of Caesar, according to his last will and testament.


711


C. Pansa.


A. Hirtius.


DIo, Cassiodorus, and the rest, nominate Consuls for this yeere, C. Vibius Pansa Capronianus, and A. Hirtius, sonne of Aulus. Cuspinians booke sheweth Cretonianus and Hirtius. Whereby it may be understood, that Cretonianus was the surname of Pansa, but peradventure written for Capronianus. In the Colotian table they are named C. Vib^us, sonne of Caius, and Au. Hirtius sonne of Hirtius. This Hirtius was one of their sonnes who were outlawed by Sulla, and whome Caesar (as Dio reporteth) advaunced to honourable dignities. Both these, and the Consuls of the yeere following, were by Caesar elected and destined thereto, before hee was slaine. Dio, Appian, and others report, that of these two Consuls, Hirtius in the time of the civile warre, in a battell before Modenna against Antonius was slain; and Pansa some daies after, upon a hurt received in the same fight, died at Bononia. In the rowme of Pansa, C. Octavius was sub-elected Consull, the nineteenth of August in the same yeere, and hee in steed of Hirtius, tooke unto him for his colleague Q.Pedius.


712


M. Lepidus.


L. Plancus.


CAssiodorus and the Sicilian records put downe for Consuls, M. Lepidus and L. Plantus. Dio, M. Aemylius Lepidus the second time, and Lu. Munatius, sonne of Lucius, surnamed Plancus. Of these Consuls Suetonius speaketh in Tiberius, saying, That Tiberius was borne after the battell of Philippi, when Mar. Aemylius Lepidus was the second time Consull with Munatius Plancus. Now had there been before appointed Consuls against this yeere by Caesar, D. Brutus and Lu. Plancus. But by reason that Brutus the yeere before was by the law Pedia condemned and after killed, and so the three Triumvirs usurped the rule of the commonweale; agreed it was, that M. Lepidus one of the Triumvirs who beforetime also had been Consull with Caesar in his third Consulship, should together with Plancus, (who also taking part and siding with Antonie, had revolted from the Commonweale) administer the Consulate. Moreover, this Brutus was by Plutarch, Appian, Dio, and Zonaras, called also Albinus; I suppose, for that out of the race of the Bruti he was adopted and incorporat into the house of the Albini. In this yeere, during the civile war, Brutus and Cassius were slaine in battell before Philippi, as Dio, Plutarch, Appian, and others write.


713


P. Servilius. II.


L. Antonius.


THe Colotian tables, Dio, and Cassiodorus match Consuls together for this yeer, Lu. Antonius son of Marcus, surnamed Pietas, and P. Servilius, son of Publius, Isauricus, the second time. Of these Consuls, Suetonius writeth in Tiberius. This P. Servilius was first Consul with Caesar in his second Consulat; whose father Isauricus died a little before, as Dio and Eusebius report. As for L. Antonius, named hee is by Dio Pietas, for that being Consull, he together with Fulvia the wife of his brother Marcus, managed the affaires of state with that mind, as if his whole care had ben for his brother the Triumvir, in regard of which brotherly and affectionat kindnesse, he chalenged the surname of Pietas.


714


Cn. Domitius.


C. Asinius.


A Colotian table, Dio, and Cassiodorus join in the Consulate of this yeere, Cneus Domitius sonne of Marcus, Calvinus, the second time; and C. Asinius, sonne of Cneus, Pollio. Of these, Iosephus speaketh in his foureteenth book of the Iewes antiquities and three and twentie chapter. Toward the end of this yeere, Dio writeth that these Consuls gave up their place, and that other Consuls were substituted for those few daies that were to come; and one of them was L. Cornelius Balbus Gaditanius. And therfore in the Colotian table these subordained Consuls stand under these names, L. Cornelius, son of Lucius, and P. Canidius, sonne of Lucius. Of Pub. Cornelius Balbus Consull, Plinie writeth in his seventh booke and three and fortieth chapter, and Velleius in his second booke.


715


L. Censorinus.


L. Calvisius.


CAssiodorus inferreth for the next Consuls, Lucius Censorinus and Caius Calvisius. The

Sicilian records have Censorinus and Sabinus. Dio, L. Martius and C. Sabinus. C. Calvisius son of Caius, is named by Dio in the catalogue or table, Sabinus, although it bee red there commonly, but amisse, Asinius.


716


Ap. Claudius.


C. Norbanus.


COnsuls that follow, were App. Claudius and C. Norbanus, as Cassiodorus saith. But as the Sicilian registers purport, Censorinus and Sabinus: as Dio writeth, Claudius sonne of Caius, Pulcher; and C. Norbanus, son of Caius, Flaccus. As touching Taedius Aser the Consull elect, and substituted in the rowme of another, who before hee entred into government, being terrified with the minatorie threats of C. Caesar, threw himselfe down headlong, and so brake his necke, see T^^nquillus in Augustus.


717


M. Agrippa.


L. Canimus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, M. Agrippa and Lu. Caninius. The Sicilian registers Agrippa and Gallus. Dio, M.Vips^nius, sonne of Lucius, Agrippa: and L. Caninius sonne of Lucius, Gallus. Iosephus in his fifteenth boke of Antiquities, avoucheth Consuls, Mar. Agripp^ and C. Canidius Gallus. Nepos also in the lite of Atricus, calleth Vipsanius, Agrippa. In the capitoll marbles and in other old monuments of Rome his gentile name is passed over, and namely in the forefront of the temple called Pantheon, where is engraven M. Agrippa sonne of Lucius, Consull the third time. Tacitus also in his first booke mentioneth this Agrippa.


718


L. Gellius.


M. Cocceius.


CAssiodorus nameth for Consuls this yeere, L. Gellius and M. Cocceius. The Sicilian records shew Publicola and Nerva: Dio hath Lu. Gellius sonne of Lucius Poplicola, and M. Cocceius Nerva. Out of the capitoll fragments it appeareth, that L. Gallius was sonne of Lucius, and nephew of Lucius. By the report of Dio, this Lu. Gellius was brother to M. Valerius Messala. For it is the same man who was pardoned before by Mar. Brutus: whereby it may bee understood, that Poplicola was his surname by way of adoption: for they were not the Gellij but the Valerij, that carried the surname of Publicolae. The same fragments doe shew, that the said Gellius left his place, and that another was put in his rowme. And haply it was L. Munatius, sonne of Lucius, nephew of Lucius, Plancus: whome Plinie in his thirteenth booke and third chapter, saith to have been twise Consull: but in what yeere he was the second time, a man cannot find, unlesse it were in this.


719


Sext. Pompeius.


L. Cornisicius.


CAssiodorus and the Sicilian records testifie, that this yeeres Consuls were Sex. Pompeius and L. Cornisicius. Dio, L. Cornisicius son of Lucius, and Sextus Pompeius sonne of Sextus. This yeere Sex. Pompeius, sonne of Cneus, was slaine.


720


M. Antoni^us.


L. Scribonius Libo.


CAssiodorus putteth down for Consuls, Lu. Scribonius and Lu. Atratinus. The Sicilian catalogue Antonius and Libo. Dio, M. Antonius sonne of Marcus the second time, and L. Scribonius, sonne of Lucius, Libo. The same Dio saith moreover, that M. Antonius the Triumvir, presently upon the very Kalends of Ianuarie gave over the magistracie, and substituted in his own steed Lu. Sempronius Atratinus: and therefore many there be that affirm how it was not Antonius but Atratinus that was Consull this yeere with Libo. That Consuls also were sub-elected to beare out one part of the yeere, it is to bee found in some authours that have set forth the Municipall Annales. And verily Dio maketh mention of Paulus Aemylius Consull, for one part of the yeere, and that hee built a stately porch or gallerie at his owne charges, and dedicated it in his Consulship.


721


C. Casar.


L. Volcatius.


CAssiodorus exhibiteth unto us for Consuls, C. Caesar and L. Volcatius, Dio, Caesar the second time, and L. Volcatius sonne of Lucius, Tullus. They who composed and digested the Sicilian registers, very unfitly set down Caesar and Cicero for this yeres Consuls. Of this Consulship of Caesar, Suetonius and Dio speake, saying that hee held it very few houres, as Antonius also before time. In steed of Caesar was Lu. Antonius subrogated, and many other for

one part or other of the yeere, who in the book entituled, Old inscriptions, are reckoned in this manner:
Emperour Caesar. II.L. Volcatius.Kal. Ianuarij.L. Antonius.Kal. Maij.L. Flavius.Kal. Iulij.M. Atilius. C. Fonteius.Kal. Sept.L. Vinutius.Kal. Octob.L. Laenonius.
Of L. Flavius made Consull by M. Antonius, and deposed, Dio likewise maketh mention.


722


Cn. Domitius.


C. Sosius.


CAssiodorus nominateth for Consuls this yeere, Cn. Domitius and C. Sosius. The Sicilian records, Aenobarbus and Sosius. Dio, Cneus Domitius, sonne of Cneus, nephew of Cneus, Aenobarbus; and C. Sosius son of C. nephew of Caius. Nepos writeth, that Atticus died, when Cn. Domitius and C. Sosius were Consuls.


723


C. Caesar. II.


M. Messala.


CAssiodorus avoucheth Consuls this yeere, C. Caesar the second time, and M. Messala. The Sicilian registers, Octavianus and Corvinus. Dio, Caesar the third time, and M. Valerius, sonne of Marcus, surnamed Messala Corvinus, and that right truly. For Cassiodorus maketh no reckoning of that consulship of Caesar which hee bare with Pedius, because hee was subordained in the place of another. But Dio and Appian doe witnesse, that Caesar and Antonie were matched together this yeere, both of them in their second Consulship, at what time as upon peace made with Sextus Pompeius, they were appointed Consuls before hand for eight yeers next ensuing: howbeit, in the first yeer the people turned Antonie out of his Consulship, and proclaimed warre against him and Cleopatra, and so in his place was Mar. Messala declared Consull. As touching the Consuls this yeere subordained, thus wee find written in the auncient inscriptions.
Emperour Caesar. IIII.M. Valerius.Kalend. Maij.M. Titius.Kal. Octobris.Cn. Pompeius.


724


C. Caesar. III.


M. Crassus.


CAssiodorus nameth for this yeers Consuls, C. Caesar the third time, and M. Crassus. The Sicilian records Octavinus and Crassus. Dio, Caesar the fourth time, and M. Licinius, sonne of Marcus, Crassus. Hee addeth moreover and saith, Caesar in the middest of that water crossed the seas out of Macedonie into Italie, wherein he was the fourth time Consull with M. Crassus. Orosius likewise noteth, that Caesar called Emperour, was Consull the fourth time with M. Livius Crassus. Of other Consuls substituted after M. Licinius, this we find in the old inscriptions.
Emperour Caesar IV.M. Licinius.Kal. Iul.C. Antistius.Idib. Septembr.M. Tullius.Kal. Novembr.L. Saenius.
Of M. Tullius Consull with Augustus, Dio maketh mention in his storie of this yeers acts. Plinie also in his 22 booke and 6 chap. and Plutarch in Cicero. By Velleius and Tacitus it appeareth that Antistius had for addition the surname of Vetus, and Saenius of Saevinus.


725


C. Caesar. IIII.


Sex. Apuleius.


IN Cassiodorus the Consuls bee C. Caesar the fourth time, and Sext. Apulcius. In Dio, Caesar the fift time, and Sext. Apuleius son of Sext. In the Sicilian records, Octavianus and Apuleius: in the Antique inscriptions, Emperour Caesar the fift time, and Sext. Apuleius. Dio saith this was the yeere 725 from the foundation of the citie. Of Caesar five times Consull, there is to be seene an old epigramme or inscription in this manner.
Senatus Populusque Romanus,
Imp. Caes. Divi Iulij Fil. Cos. Quint.
Cos. Desig. Sext. Imp. Sept.
Resp. conservata.
That is,
The Senate and people of Rome. By Emperour Caesar, sonne of Iulius of famous memorie, Consull five times, elect Consull the sixt time, and emperour the seventh, the Commonwealth saved.



726


C. Caesar V.


M. Agrippa. II.


CAssiodorus declareth for Consuls this yeer, Caesar the fift time, and M. Agrippa the second time. Orosius and the Sicilian records, Caesar the sixt time, and Agrippa the second time. Dio, Caesar the sixt time, and M. Vipsanius Agrippa the third time: but it is to bee read the second time, as Sigonius advertiseth, so as the next yeere it should bee written the third time. And this plainely appeareth by the superscription of that temple (which he erected and named Pantheon) in this form, M.AGRIPPASON OF L. THIRD TIME COS. BUILT IT. For Dio saith that this temple was finished two yeers after that hee was Consull with Caesar the seventh time Consull, in which yeere himselfe bare his third Consulship, and not the fourth. For otherwise in the front of the said temple, hee would have written, CONSUL THE FOURTH TIME.


727


C. Caesar. VI.


M. Agrippa. III.


CAssiodorus saith, that the next Consuls were Caesar the sixt time, and Mar. Agrippa the third time. But Dio, Caesar the seventh time, and Agrippa the fourth time. But what is to bee thought of them both, is evident by that which hath been said before. In the Sicilian registers verily it is written, Octavianus the seventh time, and Agrippa the third time.


728


C. Augustus Caesar. VII.


T. Statilius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls Caesar Augustus the seventh time, and T. Statilius. The Sicilian monuments, Octavianus the eight time, and Taurus. Dio, Caesar Augustus the eight time, and Statilius Taurus the second time. For hee had been Consull first, for a part of the yeere, anno 727, and now is the second time: of whom Suetonius writeth thus in Nero; Nero tooke to wife Statilia Messalina, daughter (in the fourth descent) of Taurus, one who had beene twise Consull, and also triumphant: hee writeth also, that Augustus entered upon his eight and ninth Consulate at Tarracon.


729


C. Caesar Augustus. VIII.


M. Silinus.


CAssiodorus sheweth for Consuls next, Caesar Augustus the eight time, and M. Silanus. Dio and the Sicilian records, Augustus the ninth time, and M. Silanus. A fragment of the capitoll, Emperour Caesar Augustus the ninth time, and M. Iunius Silanus. This yeere Augustus Caesar was called Emperour the eight time, and shut up the temple of Ianus the fourth time now that ever it was shut: which hee had set open before in regard of certaine warres, as Dio reporteth.


730


C. Caesar Augustus.IX.


C. Norbanus.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for this yeeres Consuls, Caesar Augustus the ninth time, and C. Norbanus. The Sicilian registers, Augustus the tenth time, and Flaccus. Dio, and a fragment of the capitoll marble, Augustus the tenth time, and C. Norbanus Flaccus. This Norbanus seemeth to be the son of C. Norbanus the Consull, anno 716. for he had not the numeral note testifying a second Consulship.


731


C. Caesar Augustus. X.


Cn. Piso.


CAssiodorus setteth downe for Consuls, Caesar Augustus the tenth time, and Cneus Piso. The Sicilian records Augustus the eleventh time, and Piso. And Dio, Augustus the eleventh ime, with Cn. Calpurnius, sonne of Cneus, Piso. By a fragment of the capitol stone it appeareth the Augustus entered the Consulship the eleventh time, together with Aulus Terrentius Varro Muraena: also that Muraena died in his magistracie, in whose steed was elected Cn. Calpurnius Piso; and Augustus went out of his government. Of which matter Dio thus writeth; Augustus went to the Albane hill, and there resigned up the Consulship. For whereas both hee himselfe and many others, ever since the time that the C. W. was set in frame and established, had borne the yeerely magistrates, he thought that from thence forwards hee was to forbeare the same, to the end, that the honourable dignitie of Consuls should bee open to as many as might bee. And this did he without the citie, because hee would not bee hindered and letted in the action; and therewith substituted in

his place Lucius Sestius, a man that of all others most affected and loved Brutus; who also wrate of his praises and commendable parts.


732


M. Marcellus.


L. Arruntius.


THis yeere had for Consuls, as saieth Cassiodorus, M. Marcellus and L. Arruntius: as Dio, M. Claudius son of Marcus, Marcellus; and Aeserninus son of Lucius. In the Capitoll stone these Consuls are thus set downe, L. Arruntius sonne of L. nephew of L. and M. Claudius son of Marcus, nephew of M. Whereby it is given to understand, that in the Sicilian records the Consuls are not well put downe to be Octavianus the twelfth time, and Arruntius. In this yere, the conspiracie of Fannius Caepio and Varro Muraena against Augustus was discovered: and the temple of thundering Iupiter was dedicated, witnesse Dio.


733


M. Lollius.


Q. Lepidus.


THe Colotian stone and Cassiodorus shew for this yeere Consuls, Q. Aemilius Lepidus and M. Lollius. Dio writeth, when Augustus was in Sicilie, and the people of Rome at the assembly for Consuls election, there arose a sedition and commotion. For M. Lollius onely entred upon the government, by reson that the other place was reserved and kept for Augustus: but when he made refusall, Q. Lepidus was created. Of these Consuls Horace in his first booke of Epistles writeth thus:
Me quarter undenos sciat implevise Decembres,Colleg am Lepidum quo dixit Lollius anno.
Know he, that 40 winters old and foure, I was that yeere,At Rome when Consull Lallius, chose Lepidus his feere.


734


M. Appulcius.


P. Silius.


AFter Cassiodorus, the Consuls that followed for this yeere, were M. Appuleius and P. Silius. But in Dio, M. Appuleius sonne of Sexius, and Publius Silius sonne of Publius, Nerva. In the Sicilian records, Appuleius and Nerva.


735


C. Sentius.


Q. Lucretius.


THe Colotian stone, Eusebius in his treatise of Times, Dio and Cassiodorus set foorth as Consuls this yeere, Caius Sentius, sonne of Caius, Saturninus; and Quintus Lucretius sonne of Quintus, Vispillo. Of this yeeres Consuls thus writeth Dio. Caius Sentius was declared Consull: but for that there was to bee given him a companion, and Augustus refused the second place of Consulship reserved for him, there arose a sedition, until Augustus pronounced Consull Quintus Lucretius one of the embassadours, whom the Senate had sent unto him about the appeasing of the foresaid sedition; notwithstanding he was a man in times past proscribed and outlawed. The same writeth Velleius in the second booke. In the broken Colotian stone it is to bee read, that the Consull elected in steed of Sentius Saturninus, was Mar. Vinucius sonne of Marcus. Velleius, uno Vinucius adjoineth as Colleague, Agrippa. In this yeere, after the first tenne yeeres were expired, for which space Augustus together with Agrippa at the first received the Censorian authoritie and dignitie, hee was created a second time by the people over-feere of mens behaviour for the tearme of five yeeres; and resumed the Censours power for the same time, and the Consulare authoritie for ever. So as, at all times and in all places, hee might have twelve lictours goe before him with their bundels of rods, and bee allowed to take his place and sit with the Consuls.


736


Cn. Lentulus.


P. Lentulus.


PVblius Cornelius sonne of Publius, Lentulus Marcellinus: and Cn. Cornelius son of Lucius, are set downe for Consuls by the Colotian stone table; by Dio also and Cassiodorus. In this yeere Marcus Agrippa by the motion and authoritie of the Emperour Caesar Augustus, obteined of the Senate and people of Rome the Tribunitian power for five yeeres.



737


C. Furnius.


C. Silanus.


THere succeeded Consuls next, according to Cassiodorus, C. Furnius and C. Silanius. After Dio, C. Furnius sonne of C: and C. Iunius sonne of Caius, Silanus. But in the Colotian fragment, C. Furnius sonne of Caius, and C. Iunius. Whiles C. Furnius and C. Iulius Silanus were Consuls, the solemn plaies called Seculares were now the fift time set out by Augustus, as Censorinus and Dio affirme.


738


L. Domitius. P. Scipio.


CAssiodore nameth for Consuls, Lucius Domitius and P. Scipio. The Sicilian records, AEnobarbus and Cornelius. Dio, L. Domitius son of Lucius, nephew of Lucius, Aenobarbus: and P. Cornelius son of P. nephew of Publius, Scipio: In like manner the Colotian table, wherein it standeth, that for P. Cornelius there was substituted L. Ta. i. Tarius: of whom Plinie in his eighteenth booke and seventh chapter writeth thus, L. Tarius Rufus, a man most base for his parentage, deserved a Consulate under Augustus Caesar of happie memorie, onely for his militarie service. In this Consuls yeere, was the Quinquennale solemnitie perform ed, as writeth Dio, in memoriall of the empire of Augustus: and Agrippa one of the Quindecemvirs, had the ordering and setting out thereof.


739


M. Drusus. L. Piso.


THe Consuls next following, were M. Drusus and L. Piso, as Cassiodorus saith. The Sicilian registers name them Libo and Piso. Dio, M. Livius sonne of Lucius, Drusus Libo; and L. Calpurnius sonne of Lucius Piso, M. Drusus sonne of Marcus. L. * * * * * * according to the Colotian fragment.


740


Cn. Lentulus M. Crassus.


THis yeere next following had for Consuls, after Cassiodorus, and the Sicilian monuments, Cn. Lentulus and M. Crassus: whom Dio calleth M. Licinius sonne of Marcus, Crassus; and Cn. Cornelius, sonne of Cneus Lentulus. The Colotian fragment, sheweth, Marcus Licinius sonne of Marcus.


741


T. Nero. P. Quintilius.


TIberius Nero, and P. Quintilius were Consuls this yeere, as Cassiodorus reporteth. They are named Nero and Varus in the Sicilian Catalogue. And Dio calleth them Titus Claudius sonne of Tiberius, Nero: and P. Quintilius, son of Sextus, Varus. The Colotian fragment, Tiberius Claudius sonne of T. Suetonius writeth, that Tiberius bare his first Consulship but a few daies. For this is that Tiberius Nero, Augustus Caesar's wives sonne, who after the death of Augustus, attained to the empire, having bene first by him adopted.


742


M. Messala. P. Sulpitius.


CAssiodorus putteth downe for Consuls, Messala and P. Sulpitius. The Sicilian records, Messala and Quirinus. Dio, M. Valerius, sonne of Marcus, Messala Barbatus: and P. Sulpitius sonne of Publius, Quirinus: of whom Suetonius in Claudius and Tacitus in his second booke write. Moreover, this is that Sulpitius Quritius, who by Iosephus in the seventeenth booke of antiquities and first chapter, is said to have borne the consulare dignitie and was lieutenant in Syria; At which time, our Lord Iesus Christ the redeemer and Savior of mankind, was borne: of whom Saint Luke maketh mention saying: This was the first enrolment or taxation which was made by Quirinus President and governor of Syria. After these Consuls, others were substituted in their place, as the Colotian stone sheweth, wherein it is thus read:
M. Valerius. M. F.C. Volgius. C. F.Suff. C. Caninius.
Likewise in Cuspinian his kalender, these Consuls are written with their surnames:
Messala, Quirinus.Rebilus, Saturninus.Maximus, Tubero.
By which it appeareth that Rebulus and Saturninus were the surnames of Caninius and

Volgius. By a fragment of the capitoll marble, it is evident, that the surnames of Valerius was Aemylianus; of Volgius, Rufus; and Rebulus of Caninius: and that as Rufus was put in the place of Valerius, so Rebulus in stead of Rufus. There remaineth also the memoriall of Rebulus and Saturninus in the Sicilian records. In this yere, Dio reporteth, that Augustus was a second time made over-seer for mens maners and demeanours five yeeres more: and that hee resumed still the same authoritie by times, as also the empire, and therein Agrippa died.


743


P. Fabius.


Q. Aelius.


CAssiodorus exhibiteth for this yeeres Consuls, Paulus Fabius and Q. Aelius. Dion, Paulus Fabius, sonne of Quintus Maximus and Tubero. Of Q. Aelius Tubero, and P. Fabius Maximus Consuls, Frontius speaketh of in his book of water conduits: and Plinie in his eight booke and seventh chapter, where hee writeth that the Theatre of Marcellus was dedicated when Quintus Tubero and Fabius Max. were Consuls.


744


Iulus Antonius.


Q. Fabius.


CAssiodorus nameth for Consuls this yere, Iulius Antonius Africanus and Q. Fabius. Dio, Iul. Antonius Africanus, and Q. Fabius sonne of Quintus Maximus. The Sicilian catalogue and kalender of Cuspinian, shew Africanus and Maximus. Dio nameth Iulus, the sonne of Antonius. Vnto him Horace writeth in this manner:
Pindarum quisquis studet aemulaeiIule, ceratis op: Daedalea,Nititur pennis, etc.
With wings devis'd by DaedalusAnd glew'd with wax, they flie:Who strive (o Iule) with PindarusTo match his poetrie.
And after,
Tendit (Antoni) quoties in altosNubium tractus.
--o Antoni, so oftAs he doth mount the clouds aloft.


745


Drusus Nero.


Titus Quintius.


THere succeeded Coss. according to Cassiodorus, Drusus Nero, and T. Quintius: but after Dio, Nero Claudius, sonne of Tiberius, Drusus; and T. Quintius, sonne of Titus Crispinus. Drusus and Crispinus, by Cuspinians kalender and the Sicilian registers. This Drusus brother of Tiberius Nero, was Augustus Caesars wives sonne: who being Consull, died in Germanie, and both he and his children had the surname of Germanicus, as Dio writeth: which addition the Senat gave him first of that province, as Eutropius saith. With the death of this Drusus endeth Livies histories: for thus it is written in the last Epitome, etc. Looke in the said Breviarie.





TO THE READER.
I doubt not but many of them who shall take delight and pleasure in reading the Romane storie abovewritten, will presently grwo into a liking of the very place, which hath affourded so worthy persons and rare examples. The love whereof hath moved many a man to undertake a voiyage to Rome, onely to see the river Tyberis, those seven hils, and the monuments remaining of that famous citie. The journie they have found, for way long and tedious; for expense of money heavie and chargeable; for hazard of religion, conscience and good manners, exceeding dangerous: so farre degenerate are the inhabitants now from that auncient people, so devoute, so vertuous and vncorrupt, in old time. To satisfie the readers in this behalfe, and to avoid the perill of that travaile, I thought it not amisse to bring Rome (as it were) home to them, even to represent unto their eye the topographie thereof, that is to say, the description of the paces, with the memorable edifices, or rather the ruines of those antique buildings, mentioned in the storie aforesaid. And for as much as Bartholmew Marlian hath herein taken paines, and made a treatise therof, worthy in his conceit to be dedicated unto that noble Prince of famous memorie, Francis the French king, the first (I take it) of that name: and for that those learned men, who last set Livie forth in print, have thought good to adjoine thereto, as a necessarie dependant, the foresaid treatise; I for my part, having struggled with the difficulties of the Alpes and in some sort overcome the^; crossed Rhosne and the Po; passed over the hils Olympus and Aemus, and scrawled throgh the rough streights of Thermopylae and Tempe, seeme now I would not in my returne to stick at the pleasant mounts, Palatine, Capitol, Aventine, etc. with the plains and vallies between, or the river Tybre and Mars field underneath the^, beautified especially with such stately temples, triumphant arches, glorious pallaces, Theatres, Cirques, Columnes, and
Colosses; wonders of the world. And albeit I found Marlian far unlike himself, and the book that goeth in his name much corrupt in the print, yet by conference with other authors, I have reformed the faults, and endevoured that our English edition might in some measure be answerable to the Latine.



A SVMMARIE COLLECTED BY IOHN BARTHOLMEW MARLIANVS, A GENTLEMAN OF MILLAINE, TOVCHING THE TOPOGRAPHIE OF ROME IN ANCIENT TIME.

THE FIRST BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The Situation of the Cittie.
BEfore we enterprise to shew the edifices and buildings of the cittie of Rome, somwhat would be premised of the site thereof. Begin therefore we will at the very habitation of the immortall gods; with the invocation of whome, the Poets are woont in every hard and difficult worke, to lay their first ground and make their entrance.
The Capitoll hill, where it is broadest, exceedeth not 800 foot: in length it lyeth out toward the Northwest 1500. It hath a point or wing on either side in fashion of a semicircle, and in compasse containeth well-neere seven Stadia. furlongs.
From this mount as it runneth out in length, the Palatine hill is divided by a valley of the same breadth, or somewhat more; making a square with 4 angles of unequal sides, conteining 1200 paces. For, the one of 600 foot boundeth upon the Capitoline hill: a second of 700 foot, bendeth to the Northeast: the third, being almost twice as long, looketh toward the Southeast and the mount Coelius: the fourth, which of all others is biggest, and comprehendeth the lists or shew-place called Circus maximus, directly regardeth the Aventine. On the second side thereof there is one plaine, reaching from the head and top of the Forum Rom. to the utmost skirt of the hill Quirinalis, which bendeth toward the Suburra, and taketh up in breadth 500 foot: but it lyeth out in length almost a mile from both fronts, betweene the Capitoll, the Forum Nervae, and the mount Coelius: in like maner from the said mount Coelius and Palatine, Suburra and the Esquiliae, as farre as to the Church of Saint Marcelline. A second plaine there is, under the other point and top of the Capitoll, neere the Theatre of Marcellus, which stretcheth out 500 foot from the mount it selfe, as farre as to the Tyber; and anon over-against the valley, from the crooked reach and course of the river, and the nouke. whereby the Aventine is divided from the Palatine, it spreadeth broader: but afterwards betweene the said hills it groweth narrow, untill yee come to Coeliolus and the very gate Capena, where the Aventine is parted from Coeliolus onely by the breadt of the street or high way. The length of this plain is likewise a mile, having on the right hand, Tyber and the Aventine; on the left, the Capitoline mount, the Palatine, and Coelius.
Then followeth the mount Coelius (separate from the Palatine by a plaine) resembling a pyramidall forme of a spire, so as the Base thereof conteineth 500 foot neere to the Amphitheatre. Divided also from the same it is by the street Appia, fast by the grand Cirque, which reaching to the gate Capena, leaveth on the left hand a valley 600 foot broad, betweene Coelius and Coeliolus, lying out in length 4 Stadia, and within a while to the walls which joyne close to the mount Coelius, as farre as to the gate Asinaria. This hill then from thence lyeth along the citie wall for 4 Stadia, toward the Northeast. From hence the walls meet affront for the space of two Stadia, even to the gate Naevia: from whence as they turne to the Northeast, it is parted from the Esquiliae by the street Labicana: and anon shewing it selfe affront neere Saint Marcellines, it beareth forward as farre as to the Amphitheatre. Thus keeping no certeine forme, it taketh in circuit about 2500 paces. Moreover, the Coeliolus is enclosed within the said valley, the street Appia, and all along Northeast and Southeast, with the cittie walls; and hath in compasse well-neere a mile.
The Aventine seemeth to containe two hilles; the broader part whereof toward the Tyber, and in like manner in length from Tyber along the walles, and anon neere the gate Hostiensis, is divided and cut with a crooked street-way which leadeth to the angle of the grand Cirque, and

the mount Coelius: leaving the other part thereof, divided on the right hand from the mount Coelius by the street Appia, untill you come to the gate Capena. It had in compasse 18 Stadia, as Dionysius also testifieth; and on the Southeast; a most spatious and large plaine of 4 unequall sides: toward the South containing almost sixe Stadia, VVestward five, somewhat lesse Eastward, but toward the Tyber not above foure.
The Esquiliae on the South part is divided with the street Labicana; on the Northwest, with the valley lying betweene Coelius, Palatinus, and it selfe; on the North, the Suburra; and from the Viminall hill, the street called Patricius parteth it, untill a man come to the bath of Diocletian. In circuit it containeth about foure miles, and hath no certaine forme; in so much as Varro (not without good reason) thinketh it two hills, and cutteth it into many parts.
The Viminall hill on the VVest side regardeth the Quirinall, having about a furlong space the plaine Suburralying betweene: on the North it hath the valley Quirinalis. Betweene the same hills there lyeth as it were 4 jugera in breadth, but about a quarter of a mile in length. And anon it joyneth to the Quirinall and Esquiliae along the wall of the cittie, by a continuall row of many arches, whereby these mountains are made even. The compasse thereof taketh up two miles and an halfe; the forme thereof is longwise, and the breadth not in every part alike, but variable.
The Quirinall mount on the left hand, directly from the tower called [Militiarum] for the space of 4 Stadia, over-looketh the levell plot of the citie which lyeth VVestward: but on the right hand (as cleerely appeareth by that which we have said) it is opposite to the Viminalis: on the third side Northward, for the space of six Stadia, it lieth to the hill called [Hortulorum]. It hath a valley lying betweene, in breadth foure jugera, reaching neere to the gate Salaria: and in the whole compasse it taketh almost three miles.
Next to it is the little hill Hortulorum, although it standeth without the old pomaerie of the citie: for the space of 3 Stadia it beareth over the valley Martia, lying betweene it and Tyber. It carieth in length along the wall of the citie, from the gate Flumentana to Collina, a full mile more than any other sides. The circumference thereof, is much about 18 Stadia.
There remaineth now the mount Ianiculus, on the other side of Tyber: the one halfe thereof and not above, is conteined within the walls: from the Vatican Plaine, for the space of three Stadia, whereas it stretcheth toward the South, it adjoyneth to the river: the other part thereof is enclosed within the walls, for the compasse of five Stadia.
Moreover, above the Vatican plaine, there is a little hill of the same name, which putteth foorth two points like hornes; the one toward Ianiculum, the other Northward, much like a bow full bent: the convexitie or outward compasse whereof containeth a mile.
Now will we run over the plaine and base plot of the cittie: which beginning at the Capitoll hill neere the gate Flaminia, at this day on the Northeast side (or rather the North) comprehendeth a Diameter or race almost of 8 Stadia, environed with the hills Quirinalis and Hortulorum: but on the VVest side, the Tyber runneth by it, where along the bankes thereof it beareth a greater space. Moreover, by a streight and direct line being drawne for two Stadia from the hill Hortulorum, and namely where it over-looketh the Pierce of Domitian called Naumachia: along the banke of Tyberis, over-against the Pile Hadriani, it maketh a quadrangle of foure uneven sides, containing within it more than three miles: without which square is left the valley Martia, namely as much as lieth between the hill Hortulorum, the wall of the citie, and Tyberis: so as the bredth draweth narrower still unto the gate Flaminia.
There resteth yet the Transty berme region, which togither with the Ianiculum, taketh in compasse about 3 miles. This will be more easily observed and marked by the very channell of Tyberis; which entring into the citie, keepeth his course directly on the right hand of the gate Flaminia through the vale Martia, and soone after by little and little turneth from the North, VVestward, and representeth the forme of a semicircle, in the convexitie whereof is the Vatican, and within the concavitie, the Mars field. Moreover, beneath the Moles or pile [Hadriani] returning to his former course, as farre as to the utmost foot of the Aventine, winding somewhat crooked into the South, not farre from the gate Portuensis it runneth forth of the citie.
Thus much concerning the situation and forme of Rome, and the plot wherein it standeth, which at this day is so farre changed, that hardly a man may find any token or memoriall of it, as it was in old time.


CHAP. II. Of the founders of the citie of Rome, the KK. and inhabitants thereof.
THe region (on which Rome was after built) VVest of Tyber, a hundred and fortie furlongs distant from the sea, the Sicilians (by constant report) first inhabited. Afterwards, the Aborigines leaving Arcadia, by the conduct of Oenotrius the sonne of Lycaeon, came into the said quarters: and being growne into a liking of the place for the fertilitie thereof, they expelled

the Sicilians, and held it for their owne use. In processe of time the Pelasgians, a people of Greece, together with the Thessalians, who came to aid the Aborigenes against the nations their neighbor borderers, remained also in these parts (with the good will and contentment of the said Aborigines) untill the Trojane warre: but they all retained the name of the Aborigines, which prerogative they held because they were the first, that by armes conquered that siegnorie and kingdome. Long time after, Saturne being chased out of Crete by Iupiter his son, fled into Italie: where he taught Iuanus the K. of the Aborigines the skil of planting vineyards, with the use therof, and likewise the handling of the sickle: in regard of which good turne, hee was freely feoffed by Iaunus in part of his realme, yea, and after the decease of Ianus enjoied the kingdome alone. After this, the Arcadians, who forlooke the citie Palantium (as wearie of their owne native countrey) and by the leading of Evander, seeking some other place of habitation, arrived at the place where now Rome standeth; received of Faunus the king of the Aborigines, a portion of ground; built a fort upon a little hill not farre from Tyber, and named it Palantium, in remembrance of their native citie which they had abandoned. After all this, the Pelop^nesians, Phanetians, and Epians, by reason that Elis their native countrey was wasted before by Hercules, wer by him brought away into Italie, and they planted themselves upon the mount Saturnine. These men lived a long time according to their owne lawes and customes, until they being vanquished and subdued by the Aborigines, were incorporated by them into one Communaltie. Then raigned Latinus the sonne of Faunus, until such time as AEneas the sonne of Anthises, after the overthrow and finall ruine of Ilium, after many adventures and much varietie of fortune, which he had endured together with the Trojanes his companions, came by the instinct of the destinies to K. Latinus. VVhose daughter Lavinia hee tooke to wife, and so was by Latinus admitted into the societie and fellowship with him of the kingdome. VVhen the Aborigines and the Trojans were thus linked and joined together, hee called both nations by the name of Latines. Then was Aeneas warred upon by Turnus; for that he had married Lavinia, who was espoused and affianced to him before. But Aeneas wan the victorie, and in single combat slew Turnus. At that time also Latinus died, and left his sonne in law Aeneas heir to the crowne. Certaine yeeres after, was Aeneas killed by Mezentius king of the Tuscanes; and Ascanius his sonne succeeded in the kingdome. He built the townes Lavinium and Alba: and when hee departed this life, made over the crowne to his brother Sylvius. After him followed kings, Aeneas Sylvius, Latinus Sylvius, Alba, Atys, Capys, Capetus, Tyberinus, Agrippa, Romulus, Aventinus, Procas and Amulius. This Amulius usurped the kingdome by fraud, which in right of eldership was due to his brother Numitor. And for feare least there might arise from his brothers of-spring, some one to make claime and recover the roiall seat, and thereby himselve be thrust out of his place; the consecrated Rhea the daughter of Numitor to Vesta, for to bee a professed Nun. Shee being thus made a votarie, and devoted to perpetuall virginitie, happened to be with child by Mars, and was delivered of two botes, twins, namely Romulus and Remus. Amulius advertised hereon, commaunded both the babes to bee cast foorth to perish. Found they were by Faustulus a shepheard upon the banke of the river Tyber, and by his wife Faustulae fostered and brought up among other shepheards. Remus being grown to mans estate, was taken by certain theeves and robbers, and brought to K. Amulius his great-unckle. Accused he was, for that hee used to raise booties and drive away whole droves of Numitor his cattell. VVhereupon delivered hee was to Numitor for to bee punished according to his discretion. But Remus after much discourse of speeches to and fro, was by certaine tokens found and knowne to be Numitor his daughters son. And at the very time came Romulus also with Faustulus in place, purposing to rescue Remus his brother. Soon they entered into a conspiracie, and at unwares surprised and murdered Amulius: and so restored their grandsire Numitor. In the second yeere of Numitor his reign, Romulus and Remus built the citie of Rome, in the very place where they had been laid forth to perish, which was the 432 yeer after the winning of Troy, and the twelfth day before the calends of May. Afterwards in a tray that arose betweene Romulus and Remus striving for the soveraignetie, Remus came by his death, and then Romulus gave name both to the cittie and citizens also of Rome.


CHAP. III. The forme and bignesse of the citie of Romulus.
ROmulus set out the citie fouresquare, as Plutarch witnesseth: whereupon of some it is called Quadrata. Others affirme that the forme and compasse thereof is uncertaine, and by reason of Antiquitie unknowne at this day. The hill Palatinus was by Romulus first fortified, because therein he was brought up: at the foot whereof began the Pomoerium. Afterwards the Capitoll and the Romane Forum were laid to it.
The citie began to be marked and bounded out from the beast-market; from whence in certaine places were stones pitched and set between, along the bottome of the mount Palatine, as far as to the altar of Consus: and so within a while to the old Curiae: then, to the chappell of the Lares and the Roman Forum the bounds were extended, until a place was assigned for the wals, and a spatious plot to build the cittie upon.
Titus Tatius began the wall from the rocke Carmentalis, and brought it to the way, which is not farre from Tyber. From thence, Southward unto the farthest part of the grand cirque: and so Northeast ward hee raunged it into the Forum of Nerva, and in the end joined it to one of the points of the Capitoll hill, and within it compassed both the Capitoll itselfe, and also the Palatine. And finally to enlarge the citie, hee set to it the hils Quirinalis and Coelius.


CHAP. IIII. The gates of Romulus his citie.
ROmulus when he died, left the citie of Rome with three gates, namely Carmentalis, Romana, and Pandana. Others adde a fourth thereto, to wit, Ianualis.
Carmentalis took the name of Carmentis the mother of Evander, whose chappell Carmentale stood before the gate. This gate stood under the Capitoll on the right hand, betweene the cliffe Tarpeius and the Tyber, over-against the church now of S. Katherine, toward the shew place Flaminius. This was afterwards named Scelerata, for that without this gate, in the temple of Lanus, the act of Senate passed, for the sending of the three hundred Fab\^y to Cremera: who went foorth at this gate, and were slaine every one at Cremera.
Romana was so called of Romulus: built it was where now the gardens are belonging to the new church of S. Marie, not farre from the angle of the mount Palatine, in the bottome of the cliffe of Victoria. Some affirme, that this gate was afterwards called Mugonia, of the loowing of kine and oxen: others name it Trigonia of three corners that it had.
Pandana was so cleped, because it stood open for things to bee brought through it into the cittie. The same was called Libera or Romulida. The place for it they assigned where the gate Saturnia stood, bearing the name of the old citie, so called and after destroied.
Ianualis carried the name of the temple of Ianus, which is not far off. It stood sometime at the very foot of the hill Viminalis.


CHAP. V. The varietie of the compasse and walls of the citie.
VVHen the Romans one while made warre upon their neighbor nations of Italie, and otherwhiles defended themselves against their violence, it hapned for the most part that they got the upper hand, and ever as they vanquished any and subdued them under their subjection, in the end made them cittizens of Rome: by which occasion, the cittie built by Romulus, was not sufficient to receive so great a multitude. Tullus therefore after his conquest of the Sabines and Albanes, laid to the citie the mountain Coelius and the Esquiliae, and so enlarged it. Afterwards, when Politorium was woon, and a number of the inhabitants translated to Rome; Ancus made a second enlargement of the citie, and granted these new commers the mount Aventine to inhabite. The old Romanes therfore dwelt in Palatine; the Sabines in Capitolium; the Albanes in Coelius; and this new-come multitude in Aventine. But after the Latines also were received into the citie, they joined Ianiculus also to the citie by a wodden bridge made over the Tyber; and cast a trench called Fossa Quiritium, about the low and levell places of the citie. So the Trans-tyberine quarter was united to the citie, and made it more spatious and stately: last of all, Servius Tullius by adjoining the hils Viminalis and Quirinalis to the five abovenamed, amplified the cittie. And whereas before it was mounded about with rubbish, and the same rudely laid, Tarquin the prowd was the first that enclosed it with a wall of good ashler stone. And the very same walls which stand at this day, were by the posteritie that followed, repaired and reedified upon the old foundations. But the cittie in old time, when as it flourished in greatest glorie, extended farre more in bounds and compasse. For in Flinies time the circuit therof within the wall contained about 20 miles. But in these daies hardly 12. And the whole compasse of the citie, with the suburbes and buildings about and without the walls (which although they spreadfar, were comprehended yet under the name of citie) in the said Plinies time, was 50 miles.


CHAP. VI. The Pomoerie of the citie
THat void space of ground within and without the walls, which might not lawfully bee either plowed or inhabited, is called Pomaerie. And sometime it is put for the circuit of the whole citie. This Pomoerie was often times set out farther, and altered by the Roman emperours. But none had power graunted so to doe, save only they that either conquered somewhat to the Romane dominion, or endowed the citie with some singular and especiall benefit; as the emperor Claudius and many more. And like as the Romanes had no certain limits of their empire, so no set bounds confined either the citie or the Pomoerie.



CHAP. VII. The gates of old Rome, which at this day are not to be seene: those also that are now extant.
EVen as the bounds of the citie and Pomaerium were many times altered, so the gates also; some were left within the citie, by occasion that the walls were farther set out and lost their names: others in time were so old, that they fell downe; and albeit their name remaine, yet the place where they stood is not knowne. Some againe were made new, and tooke either new names; or else kept their old: others changed the place, and held their old name: and finally, there were some that had two names; and others, more. And these in manner were all the names of the gates:
Flumentana, or Flaminia.Numentana, or Viminalis.Esquilina, or Taurina.Capena, or Appia.Tergemina, or Hostiensis.Ratumena, or Vientana.Quirinalis, Agonensis, or Collina.Ianualis, or Sabiusa, leading into the Sabines countrey.Noevia, or Labicana.Coelimontana, or Asinaria.Portuensis, or Navalis.Triumphalis, or Vaticana.
Carmentalis, Magonia, Pandana, QuerquetuIana, Raduscula, Saginalis, Saucualis, Collatina, Interaggeres, Tiburtina, Gabiusa, Latina, Aurelia, Catularia, Laurentia, Fontinalis, Lavernalis, Ferentina, Minutia, Salutaris, Mutia, Piacularis, Prenestina, Libitinesis, Valeria, and Tarpeia.
Flumentana, tooke name of the river Tyberis; for it stood at the first upon the banke of that river, not far from the bridge of Xystus, in the end of the Broad street, and at the head of the way or street Flaminia: but afterwards, translated it was to the place where now it standeth. In time following, it was called Flaminia, of the causey of Flaminius: at this day it is named, The peoples gate, and is situate in the hill Hortulorum.
Collatina, bare the name of Collatia, a towne not farre from Rome: now it is Pinciana, of one Pincius a Senator, whose name it keepeth. This also standeth in the hill Hortulorum: between it and Flumentana is a mile space.
Quirinalis tooke name of the chappell of Quirinus: or because in old time the way lay through it, for them that went to the hill Quirinalis. It seemeth to be called Agonensis, quasi (...), i. without a corner; afterwards, Collina: and at the last, Salaria; for that by it, salt was caried into the citie. This name it holdeth still, and standeth 6 Stadia from Collatina.
Viminalis is from Quirinalis distant 5 Stadia; so eleped as they say, of a wood of osiers, which (as it is supposed) sometime grew thereby: or else, of a chappell of Iup. Vunineus: This also men called Figulensis, of the potters workes made without it: but now they name it the gate of S. Agues, and Numentana.
Interaggeres standeth in the Plaine Viminalis, betweene the gate Viminalis and Esquilina: it had the denomination of Tarquinius his mures and bankes, among which it was built.
Tiburtina, stood between Esquilina and Numentana, so as it was 12 Stadia distant from Esquilina, upon the plaine of Esquiliae, in the verie place where the conduit is of the Marie water.
Esquilina, tooke that name of the hill Esquiliae: the same in auncient time was called Taurina, of a bulls head there found: for many a day after was the said bulles head seene painted in the inner front of the said gate. At this day, S. Laurence gate.
Noevia drew the name of certaine Nemoribus. groves or woods neere adjoyning. In times past Labicana, and now Major. An arch there was so called, and erected in the same place by the old Romanes.
Coelimontana, standing from Naevia 8 Stadia, seemeth by affinitie of name to be so called of the hill Coelius, in the edge wherof it standeth: and Asinaria it was called, of the Asses which were woont to be sent out to Naples, by that gate. At this time they call it S. Iohns gate.
Gabiosa, built close to the mount Coelius, Southeast: which seemeth by all likelihood to take the name of the cittie Gabij, which it directly regardeth. It carried the name also Metrodium, of measuring, and is situate from Coelimontana, as it were 5 Stadia.
Latina is 5 Stadia likewise from Gabiusa, seated not farre from the church of S. Iohn Baptist: so called, for that men goe forth of it into Latium.
Capena is so named of the Capenates, a Latine nation, against which it lyeth. This also is called still Camoena, of a grove and chappell of the Muses, built just before the same gate. Appia likewise, of the high-way Appia; which Appius the Censor paved, and so it bare his name. They call it also Triumphalis, for that in triumph the pompe is that way carried with state. Of some it is named Fontinalis, for the plentie of springs there. At this day S. Sebastians gate.
Tergemina tooke that name of an old gate so called, at which the 3 twinnes Horatij went forth against their enemies, and gave the first name to it. Some shew remaineth yet of this gate to be seen, neere the Salinae.
Hostiensis, was in auncient daies so called, for that it led to the citie Hostia: now S. Paules gate: situate it is from Capena weel-neere 8 Stadia.
Portuensis is a gate beyond the Tyber, within halfe a Stadium of the said river; so called, for that it leadeth to the haven of Hostia. Now a daies men call it, Poria ripae, i. The banke gate.
Aurelia, looketh toward Ianiculum; distant from the former almost 7 Stadia. In this age they call it S. Pancrace gate.
Aaelia, was built by Aelius Hadrianus, of whome it tooke that name.
Septimiana, bare the name of Septimius the Emperour: and because it standeth under Ianiculum, is at this day called, Subtus Ianum. Some affirme, that this is Fontinalis, because out of the mount called Aureus, there issue fountaines: for to the said hill this gate standeth close. From it to Aurelia are 5 Stadia; and to the river Tyber 7 jugera or acres.
Thus much for the gates of the citie of Rome, and their names.
The wall in old time had upon it 360 turrets. Some of these are decaied and gone; others repaired, and many this long time are ready to fall.
NOw is it time, and the course of the Storie doth require, that leaving the towres and walls, wee enter into the cittie, and shew the beginning and the place of those edifices, which within the walls, either upon the hills or the plaine plot of the citie, were built by men in old time. First therefore begin we will at the worthiest earthly habitation of all their gods, to wit, the Capitoll.



THE SECOND BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The sundrie names of the Capitoll.
THe Capitoll was by the old Romanes called Mount Saturnius, either of a cittie named Saturnia, which under the very hill was built in that place where now Rome standeth: or because Saturne in times past dwelt in that hill: or els (as some think) for that the mount it selfe had Saturne for the tutelar god and protector therof. But afterwards it was named the mount Tarpeius, of the virgin Tarpeia, of whom Livie writeth. Last of all, Tarquinius Prisius going in hand to build upon that hill a temple to Iupiter, when he digged for to lay the foundation, chaunced to find in the botome of the trench a mans head; wherupon they called it Capitolium. And the Augurs being sought unto and demaunded, VVhat the finding of that head might signifie? answered, That this castle should be the See of the empire and the head of the whole world. This hill they divide into the castle and the Capitol. The castle they built Northward, as a stronger and more fortified place: butthe Capitoll, toward Tyberis, a place naturally defended.



CHAP. II. Who first laid the foundation of the Capitoll: who finished it: how often it was burnt, and by whome reedified.
IN the Sabine warre, Tarquinius Priscus vowed to build the Capitoll temple: but after the war was ended, so soone as he had laid the ground-worke, he died. After him, Tarquinius Superbus finished the building, of 4 square stone: and defraied the charges thereof out of the pillage of Pomaetia, a towne that he woon. VVhen he for his tyrannie was banished Rome, Horatius Pulvillus the Consull, dedicated the said Capitoll to Iupiter. It stood upright and sound for the space of 415 yeeres, untill the Marian warres, and then (in the Consulship of Scipio and Narbo) it was consumed with fire. Sylla reedified it, and Q. Catulus consecrated it: and so it continued untill the Vitellian war. During which troubles, it was a seco^nd time burnt, at what time it stood with the dores shut, undefended, and not rifled. Vespasian built it againe; and in his life, a third time it was destroyed by fire: and togither with the Capitoll, Vespasian also himselfe died. Afterwards, Domitian rebuilded it in more magnificent and stately manner than it had been ever before, and disbursed therin above 12000 talents. Of the Capitoll turrets and pinacles, the statues and images smitten with thunderbolts and blasted oftentimes with lightning, divers writers have made mention.



CHAP. III. The temple of Iup. Feretrius, of Inp. Opt. Max. of Iuno, and Minerva.
THe Capitoll, Cicero calleth The house and habitation of the gods, because it conteined the chappels, statues, and images in manner of all the gods: but the first of all other in Rome was that of Iupiter Feretrius, vowed by Romulus in the warre against the Cenenians. After which war ended, and he returned to Rome with victorie, hee reared a temple in the very pitch and top of the capitoll hill. But Iupiter was by Romulus named Feretrius, as some would have it; for that Iupiter assisted him in striking the enemie, in that verie place where he vowed the temple. Or els, because the Romanes used in making of peace, to sweare by his scepter and the flint. The roufe of this church fallen downe for verie age and through neglect of the Romanes, Augustus repaired. This temple first built by Romulus, was afterwards enlarged by Ancus Martius.
But the temple of Iup. Opt. Max. of all other was the greatest and most renowmed. This also was called Capitolinum; and Tarquinius Priscus vowed it. After him, Tarquinius Superbus expended in the foundation thereof 40000 pound weight of silver: but before that he finished it, he was deprived of his kingdome for his tyrannie, and left the worke unperfit to be accomplished by the Romanes. Built it was upon the hanging of the Capitoline hill toward Tyberis, as hath been shewed before. For the forme, the greatnesse and beautie of this temple, read Dionysius and sundrie other authors, who have written of the Romane acts and of Rome it selfe. Vpon the top or lanterne thereof, stood Summanus the god, made of potters earth, whose head was smitten with lightning and fell into Tyberis. It had within it besides, a sanctuarie or secret chappell, which no Lay person might enter into. VVithin the said cell or chappell, were two coronets of gold: the one of them the Gaules consecrated to Iup. Opt. Maximus: the other, the Carthaginians sent to Rome in the honour of Iupiter, in token of joy for their victorie over the Samnites. Moreover, in the said temple were other three chappels, to wit, one of Iup. Opt. Max. in the mids; a second of Minerva on the right hand; and a third of Iuno on the left. And because men in old time attributed unto Minerva the invention of numbers, a law was set downe in writing, That the chiefe and highest Pretour for the time being, should drive a spike or great naile neere unto her image, whereby the computation of the yeeres might be knowen. This so rich and costly edifice, was burnt all at once in the Vitellian warre. Now at this day the place wheras as it stood, is prophane: howbeit there remaine yet to be seene, some tokens therof, and the foundations; but all deformed and broken peecemeale.


CHAP. IIII. The temples of Saturne, Iupiter Tonans, Iupiter Custos, of Fortune, of Vejovis, Mercie, Iuno Moneta, and of Ianus. The sepulchre of Orestes, the common Treasurie, the house of Manlius, and chappell of Carmenta.
SInce that we have described the temple of Iupiter K. of the gods, in what place it was situate, and by whome built; meet it is to make report also of other gods in order, who had their houses in the Capitoll: and first of Saturne, Iupiters father.
Saturne in old time had an altar erected unto him in the verie way as ye goe out of the Forum up to the Capitoll, as some thinke. There be, that would have this temple or altar of Saturne, built by the companions of Hercules: others againe say, that Tatius reared it. But of this varietie in opinion of VVriters, this may be the reason, because some affirme, that there were two temples consecrated to Saturne, but reared in divers places and at severall times: one at the rocke of Carmenta, even before the Capitoline cliffe (wherein the bones also of Orestes brought from Aricia were bestowed:) the other in that very place, where now standeth the chappell of S. Saviour: where yet at this day there is a turret to be seene, which they call, the tower in Aerarium: for there first was the common treasure house of Rome. In the temple of Saturne, dedicated by Catulus Luctatius, there stood Ianus with foure faces; signifyingthe foure times of the yeere: of whome the first moneth Ianuarie tooke name.
The temple of Iupiter Tonans, Augustus Caesar first built, on the Capitoline cliffe or side of the hill, Southeast; upon this occasion: It happened, that in the Cantabrian expedition, as hee was carried by night in a litter, the lightning slightly glaunced thereupon, and killed the servant that was the guide; and therefore he both vowed this temple, and also finished it to the honour of Thundring Iupiter. A temple also to Fortune was built not farre from it.
The temple of Vejovis, stood betweene the castle and the Capitoll, in that part where now the chappels are to be seene of Conservatores. In old time they called this Idoll-devill, Vejovis, because he was deprived of all power to helpe and doe good. To him they sacrificed a shee goat: because hee

held arrowes in his hand, most men thought he was Apollo.
Asylum, that is to say, the temple of Mercie stood likewise upon the Capitoll hill, neer a shadowie grove, in the very valley amid the Capitoll and the castle. Called it is the temple Intermontium, betweene two oke rowes. This, Romulus erected; that what offender soever thither fled, he should be priviledged as in a sanctuarie. But Tyberius afterwards, supposing that this place ministred occasion of mischiefe, deprived it of that libertie. This Asylum, by report, the posteritie of Hercules first erected.
The temple (as also the mint-house) of Iuno Moneta, was built upon that plot of ground, where somtime stood the house of M. Manlius. This chappell, some report that L. Furius vowed; others, that L. Cicereius the Pretor; and Ovid, that Camillus. Now was Iuno called Moneta, of giving warning; for that from the verie place where afterwards the temple was set, there was a voice heard of Iuno, admonishing them of the future overthrow by the Senones. In this place now standeth a Senators house of Rome.
The temple of Ianus keeper of the Capitoline castle, stood in that place, where at this day is the goale and prison for malefactors and fellons, toward the Southwest, over-against the Forum Romanum. This Ianus upon the Capitoll, Romulus and Tatius devised to have two faces, representing therby the two nations. Others would have him to be pourtraied a faced, for his cunning and providence: for he was the first that invented the [roiall] crown; also boats; the skill of navigation; brasen coine, and many other things. Ianus tooke that name ab cundo, of going, for that he turneth about the heaven and all things els. For which cause he is also named Vertumnus: In old time they beleeved there was but one Ianus; but the posteritie in later age, have imagined more.
The temple of Iupiter Custos, Domitian (after hee was invested in the empire) built: and placed his owne image in the lap and bosome of that god. It stood where at this day the Salinae or saltpits are, neere the temple of Ianus.


CHAP. V. The temples of gods which have no certaine place now, in the Capitoll.
AMong those gods, whose determinate place assigned to them in the Capitoll, is not knowne where it was, the first was Terminus, as to whom in all the world throughout, there is no proper place appointed. Now this Terminus was a rude and formlesse stone. Vnto him Tatius first vowed a temple: and some say, that Numa dedicated it. How ever it be; no doubt, verie ancient it was, as easily may be collected by that which followeth. But why, that in the Capitoll was of men in old time reputed for a god, this was the cause: VVhen Tarquinius Superbus determined to build a temple to Iupiter, he consulted with the Augures about the place, because he would begin nothing without the approbation of the birds. They shewed unto him the mount Tarpeius: but this place was alreadie taken up with other gods, whose chappels there, were consecrated and hallowed. These therfore were by certaine sacrifices to be conjured out from thence, for to give way unto Iupiter, and to be translated into some other quarter. All the gods willingly yeelded their places up to Iupiter as their K. only Tominus refused to be displaced; and so remained there still. VVhen he had finished the temple, that fore-part of the roufe which regardeth the said stone, was left naked and open for that god, as who neither ought nor could be enclosed. The augures therfore being sought unto and demaunded, For what reason Terminus alone abode still with Iupiter, when all the other gods were gone? made answer, that therby was signified, that togither with religion, their empire also was eternall. To this god they sacrificed not but in open aire and publikely abroad, as being the god and keeper of bounds. Saint Augustine witnesseth, that Mars also and Iuventus togither with Terminus, would not agree to give place unto Iupiter: for that the dominion of Rome should not be bounded out, ne yet decay with age and continuance of time.
To Mars and Venus Erycina, Attilius and Q. Fab. Max. being Duumvirs, dedicated chappels upon the Capitoll, severed asunder by one vault or cisterne.
To queene Iuno, Cn. Flaminius in the Ligurian warre, vowed a temple.
To Ops, Tatius the K. consecrated a temple; for that shee is called the earth, and is the mother of all things; as bringing forth all, and receiving all again. The same Ops is called Maia, Fauna, and Bona Dea. This temple was blasted with fire from heaven, as Livie testifieth.
To Mars revenger, Augustus Caesar erected a temple upon the Capitoll, within the hill Saturnius.
To Faith, on the same hill, Attilius Collatinus dedicated another.
To Health, Concord, Libertie, and Victorie, they built temples: and many there were within the cittie erected to Concord.
To Fortuna Primigenia and Obsequens, Tullus dedicated a temple.
To Venus-bald, they set up also a temple in the Capitoll, in memoriall and everlasting praise of the Romane dames, for willingly parting with the haire from their heads, toward the making of engins

that during the Gaules warre, were devised and made against the enemies.
Tarquinius Superbus built a temple to Iupiter Sponsor, and Sp. Posthumius dedicated it. Likewise to Iupiter The baket. Pislor, the old Romanes consecrated a temple in the Capitoll.


CHAP. VI. Of the statues which either in old time were, or now remaine in the Capitoll.
OF statues in old time were sundrie sorts, and the same made of divers matter: some of marble, some of brasse, some of silver, and others of gold. Many of these were set up in the capitoll to the immortall gods for divers causes, and namely, for their benefits bestowed upon mankind; which along time were honoured and worshipped. To noble men likewise and such as had deserved well of the common-weale, the usuall manner was in old time to set up statues and images in the temples, to provoke others by their example to doe the like.
To Iupiter in the Capitoll, Sp. Carvilius erected a statue in his temple, after he had vanquished the Samnites, taking the proportion and forme thereof by the patterne of Iupiter Latiarius his image. Florus maketh mention, that this statue was smitten with lightning. He also set up another to Thundering Iupiter.
The old Romanes set up in the temple of Iup. Opt. Max. statues to Victorie and Faith, 'to either of them one.
For Nemesis also, was an image erected in the Capitoll, for that this goddesse punisheth proud and faithlesse persons. Shee is named also Rhanmusia of Rhamnus a village in Attica, where she was worshipped: and Adraste, of Adrastus who was the first that built a temple in the honour of her.
Vnto Hercules, for his notable and famous actes, they erected many statues in the Capitoll: and namely, Pub. Sulpitius and Pub. Sempronius one; and Q. Fabius Max. another, which he brought from the Tarentines by him subdued.
The images of good Event, and good Fortune (the workmanship both of Praxiteles) were within the Capitoll.
The image of Apollo with a diademe, and his Colossus thirtie cubits high: in the making whereof were bestowed 140 talents, Lucullus translated out of Apollonia in Pontus, into the Capitoll.
An image there was of Ianus likewise in the capitoll, holding in his right hand the number of 300, and in his left of 65, to signifie the daies of the yeere.
Two golden statues of Castor and Pollux, were by the Emperour Claudius of famous memorie, dedicated in the temple of Iupiter.
The counterfeits resembling the rivers, Nilus and Tygris, halfe naked, were set up in the forefront of the temples of Conservatores: the one carie upon the shoulders, Sphynx; the other a Tygre; two wild beasts: both of them hold in their right hand Cornucopia, which signifieth plentie.
The personage of Hercules pourtraied naked, of brasse and double guilt, without beard, holding in his right hand a club, and in the left the golden apples of the Hesperides, was found neere the Greeke schoole and the beast-market, in the ruines of Ara maxima.
There be certaine portraitures also of the Parthian and Dacian triumphs, enclosed within walls, which were taken out of the church now called S. Martinae.


CHAP. VII. Statues of famous and noble men set up in the Capitoll.
TO Scipio they erected in the capitoll, a statue Cum chiamide and crepundiis: but for [crepundiis] read [crepidis] out of Cicero pro Rabirio: signifying the Greekish and Asian habit: for the Romane statues were Togat^. wearing a soldiors cassock and slippers or pantofles, in regard of his victorie over Antiochus, for an everlasting memoriall of his worthie deeds.
To Sylla there was also a statue erected in the Capitoll, in habit of a footman.
For Aemylius Lepidus, when he was but a boy, the people of Rome set up a statue, because hee had in battaile vanquished an enemie, and saved a citizen.
The like honour to the rest they did to Metellus, for that hee had preserved out of the temple of Vesta being on fire, the image of Pallas.
They erected an image unto Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi, in recompence of a benefit of hers, for that in a great dearth of corne, she served the people at 3 farthings a Modius. The same they did to Trebius the Aedile.
Fabius Maximus made for himselfe a cast or molten image, and erected it just by that of Hercules.
Vnto Brutus, for delivering Rome from the tyrannie of Tarquinius, the Romans erected his image in the mids of the KK. statues.
Domitian would not suffer any image of his to be erected, unlesse it were of molten silver or gold, and of a certaine weight.
The emperour Commodus tooke off the head from the colosse of Nero, and set it upon his owne statue which he had in the Capitoll. This Colossus is to be seene broken as it was, in the houses of Conservatores.
In the said houses of Conservatores, is extant yet the brasen portraiture of a shee wolfe, at whose teats, Romulus and Remus, the first founders of Rome, are to be seene how they hang sucking.
The images of Romulus and Remus remained in the Capitoll, resembling two youthes; the one, standing upon the feet in servile habit and attire: the other sitting like a shepheard or heardman, bending forward with his bodie, plucking a thorne out of the sole of his foot, which ranckled and festered withall.
An infinite number of statues were in the Capitoll, of gods especially, brought from other parts to Rome. For the Romanes robbed the Churches of forrein nations, for to enrich and adorne their owne.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Capitoll cliffe, Tarpeia rocke, the stone of Carmenta, and the gate Stercoraria.
IN old time, they called that place and way whereby men goe up to the Capitoll, Clivus Capitolinus: but where that place was in times past, sundrie opinions there be. Some affirme, that it lay toward that part of the hill which looketh to the Aventine, where now standeth S. Gregories Church in Velabrum: others, betweene the temples of Saturnus and Concordia, neere to the arch of Severus, and at the stalls or standings, called Senatoris stabula. Now this arch of Severus, was raised at the foot of the Capitoll hill, in the verie head and top of Forum Romanum: under which they passed, that in triumph ascended up to the Capitoll. The Capitoll cliffe then, was neere unto the Romane Forum; which by the Censors was paved with flint: who also set up a gallerie from the chappell of Saturne unto the Capitoll temple close to the Senaculum, and the Curia over it. Corn. Tacitus writeth, that in former times there were many avenues and waies up to the Capitoll, and thereupon arose so many and divers opinions concerning the Clivus Capitolinus. In that place, the feast Floralia was in old time celebrated, whereof some tokens remaine at this day to be seene. In it stood Miloes house, which was full of shields and other armour, as Cicero maketh report.
That place was called Tarpey rocke, which standeth over the Forum Romanum: from whence in times past fellonious malefactors found guiltie, were pitched downe headlong, and wherein at this day offenders are punished.
Carmentas stone, regardeth Tyberis, just over-against the Senatours bridge.
The Dung-gate called Stercoraria, stood upon the Capitoll cliffe aforesaid; thither was thrown out all the filth rid out of the temple of Vesta, for to be carried away and soone after to be cast into the Tyberis.


CHAP. IX. Of tables, of brasen columnes or pillars, and of the silver goose.
IN the Capitoll there were two sorts of tables; the one, of pictures, containing the noble acts or battailes, with the siege and assault of cities, exploited by valiant martiall men. For some of them were so desirous of praise and renowme, that they could not be content to behold their owne statues erected in the capitoll, unlesse their acts were described also and depeinted in tables set up in publicke place; and by that meanes left their glorie behind them, recommended likewise to posteritie. Another kind there was of tables, wherein were written the most auncient lawes, to wit, of Romulus, Numa, and the other KK. Likewise the statutes of the later lawgivers: the publicke acts and ordinances; the leagues and covenants with other nations; the sacred rites of divine service, and the auncient records and monuments, which were engraven and cut in brasen tables: of which, some at this day are extant; others by continuance of time, by warre, fire, and carelesse negligence are lost and perished. For the keeping of these, there were certaine persons appointed, that in so serious and important matters, there should be no forgerie and corruption.
Pillars likewise of brasse, were by Domitian set up in the capitoll; the which, Augustus the conqueror of Aegypt, caused (of many brasen beakeheads of ships molten togither) to be made into four huge columnes, and brought them to Rome. Sylla likewise tooke out of Iupiters temple in Athens, certain brasen pillars, brought them to Rome, and there consecrated them to Iupiter in the capitoll.
The portraiture of a goose in silver, was set up within the castle by the Romanes for perpetuall

memorie, because a goose by gaggling gave warning of the enemies comming, to the warders of the castle, and thereby saved the Capitoll. For which cause greese a long time after, were fed and kept in Rome at the cities charges. There are besides, many other antiquities within the Capitoll, cut in tables of brasse and marble both, and namely Epitaplies, which here for brevities sake are left out.


CHAP. X. Of certaine edifices and buildings upon the Capitoll hill, and of other things in generall.
NOw that we have made declaration of the statues, tables, and columnes, worth the noting: something by the way would be said in this place, as touching the auncient houses there.
The court called Calabra Curia, Romulus built in the Capitoll, and covered it with reed: Into this place the king-sacrificer was woont to assemble the Senate and people of Rome, that from him they might learne and know the dayes of solemne games, playes, and sacrifices.
Not farre from the said Curia, was the cottage of Romulus.
And almost in the same place stood the stately porch or gallerie of Metellus and Constantinus. The Librarie also called Majorum, built most artificially upon marble pillars: and besides, the publicke court-yard.
There was an hallowed place likewise upon the Capitoll, from whence they gathered Verbenae, or sacred hearbs, to make guirlands for the faeciall heralds and the Paterpatratus: where with they were crowned when they purposed either to make any accord and peace, or to proclaime warre.
The flint stone also was here found, which they held in their hand when they sware by Iupiter, pronouncing these words, If I made default with my knowledge, then let Dicspiter cast me out of all that I have Saving the cittie and the castle) as I burle from me this stone.
The Capitoll had certaine vaults like cisternes, into which were throwne all things over-worne, or so old, that they were good for nothing. The sixe steeds drawing in one teeme, were there to bee seene, which Cneus Cornelius set up. The twelve gilded-shields likewise, made of that money wherein the Aediles condemned and fined the corne-mudgins that hourded and kept in their corne. The shield also Toward the end of the 25 booke. Martius, set out with the image of Asdruball; and the columne garnished with ship beakeheads of brasse, whereof Livie speaketh, were here to be seene. VVithin the temple of Iupiter Capitolinus there was a short cloake or mantle of purple woollen, to which, if other purple garments were laid, they shewed the colour of ashes in regard of the excellent bright glosse and lustre that it caried. A present this was (by report) given to Aurelianus by a Persian king, who had it from the farthest Indians. The lintell, cheekes and sill of the Capitoll dore, were made all of brasse. The brasen tiles likewise upon the roofe, Q. Catulus gilded all over. The place where Numa tooke his auguries was on the Capitoll; but Tatius used rather the castle cliffe: where also stood somtime the house of Manlius, but afterward, therupon was built the chappell of I^mo Moneta. The bookes also of Stbylla were kept in the temple of Iupiter Capitolinus, by tenne VVardens, in a stone coffer under the ground. Over and besides so many edifices were there, so beautifull was the Capitoll, and the riches thereof so great, so many goodly ornaments and shrines of the gods most artificially wrought, that right worthily of men in old time, it was called the earthly habitation of the gods and of Iupiter himselfe. For during the upright and flourishing state of Rome; so curiously built and richly beautified it was: that as heaven surpasseth the earth, so farre this edifice went beyond all other workes and woonders whatsoever of the world; in so much as it seemed to have been built by the gods: so farre surmounted it all the devise and reach of mans wit. But as excellent as these things sometimes were, now at this day they are to be seene, all naked, forlorne, and desolate.


CHAP. XI. The temples of Concord, and Iupiter Stator: moreover what the Curia is.
BEtweene the Capitoll hill and mount Palatine, there lyeth a valley, whereof wee have spoken before. The temples and buildings whereof, as also the places behind the Capitoll, by order and course we are now to describe. In this valley therefore the temple of Concord deserveth to be visited first: which word, beeing derived (as it were) from the unitie and agreement of heart, maintaineth, augmenteth, and preserveth alone, all things in the world whatsoever.
A temple to this Concord, Camillus vowed, in case hee could reconcile the Commons to the Nobles. VVhen as therfore the people was brought into grace and favour againe with the nobilitie, he built the church of Concord, beginning above the Comitium and so forward unto the Forum. The porches belonging to this temple, are yet to be seene at the foot of the Capitoll. From it, there was an ascent

of an hundred steps up to the chappell of Iuno Moneta. That temple of Concord, fallen in long time to decay, was afterwards by the Senat reedified. Therein many, a time the Senat met and sate in counceli, and crations were made unto the peeple. In this also there was a yault or shroud under the ground, wherein oftentimes theeves, armed men, cutters and hacksters were kept as in a prison, untill the assemblies of the people were dismissed. This house had many statues and images, curiously and cunningly wrought, namely, of Iuno, Apollo, and of Latona, bearing and holding her two babes Apollo and Diana. Likewise of Aesculapius and i. Health. Hygia, the handy-worke of Niceratus. Also of Iupiter, Ceres, and Minerva: likewise of the Dames weeping and adoring the said images; all made by Stenes. Moreover, the images of Mars and Mercurie; the workmanship of Pisicrates. Also of Maefyas-bound, made by Zeuxis the painter. Likewise father Liber and Cassandra, painted by Theodorus. As for the image of Victorie in the porch and entrance of the said temple, it is to be seen how it was smitten with a thunderbolt.
To Iupiter Stator, Romulus in the Sabine warre vowed a temple, that he might stay the flight of the Romanes: whereupon he was called, The upholder of the Romane state. Therefore after victorie obtained, he built a temple at the foot of the Palatine hill, just over-against the church of Concordia, where at this day be most high battlements of walles. In this house also, like as in that other of Concord, the Senate assembled oft. Likewise in other temples. The courts, wherein the Senate gathered together in counsell, were temples all, and therein were there acts made: but in the sacred churches of the gods, neither met the Senat, nor any orations were made to the people. This temple of Stator was burnt to the ground in that fire of Neroes making, and never after reedified.


CHAP. XII. The temple and grove of Vesta: the temple of Faith and of Romulus.
THe temple of Vesta was built by Romulus, betweene the Capitoll and the Palatine hills, not far from the Forum Romanum; where at this day is to be seene, the church of S. Marie of graces. Neere unto it the pallace of Numa was built. The Romane Pontifies, when they would consule of great matters concerning religion, met in the court-yard of Vesta; like as the Senat and people of Rome, debated in counsaile of their weightiest affaires within the temple of Faith. Now this was a most auncient temple built in Palatium by Romulus, or as some will have it, by Numa.
There was a grove also consecrated to Vesta, which reached from the root of the Palatine, as far as to the large street called Nova via. Out of that grove (before Rome was taken by the Gaules) a voice was heard, giving warning, That the citie should be lost, unlesse the walles and gates were repaired.
The temple of Romulus was seated at the foot of mount Palatine, in the mids of that side which regardeth the Capitoll, in that very place where now the church is of S. Theodore. In this said temple there is a most ancient monument, The pourtraiture of the shee woolfe, yeelding her teats unto the founders of the citie, to be sucked.


CHAP. XIII. Lupercal, and the figtree Ruminalis.
THis Lupercal was a cave at the botome of the Palatine hill, overspread and covered with trees; having springs deepe beneath under the rocke. In the most inward and secret place of this cave, there was an altar consecrated to Pan. But as touching the etymologie and derivation of the name, as also of the situation thereof, there goe divers opinions: For as in times past the place was close hidden and unfrequented, so now it is inhabited on every side; in so much as there remaineth no marke and token at all where Lupercal was. How beit the greater part of writers affirme, that it was in that quarter of the citie, where at this day S. Theodors church is seene. For to this place upon a time the Tybre overflowing, made a creeke thither: and hard by it was, where the two infants were cast foorth. In the Lupercal therefore, certaine authors confidently avouch, that Romulus and Remus were laid to perish, and so carried by water to the place called afterwards Ruminalis, were under a fig-tree there, nourished by a shee woolfe. This woolfe haunted and kept in the denne called Lupercal, and from thence ranne to the banke side under the figge-tree Ruminalis, for to suckle the said babes, and so gave the name unto the cave to be called Lupercal, as it were the lurking hole and denne of the woolfe. There be againe that would have Evander to give the name to the same hollow cave: for he, as is before declared, was decended from Arcadia, where the people after most auncient rites and ceremonies, doe right devoutly worship Pan, the god of heardmen.

Vnto whom also a mountaine in Arcadia to him dedicated, was called Lycaeus, for that he keepeth (...), i. wolves from the sheepe, and preserveth the flockes and heards. This Evander therefore comming upon a time into Italie, and resting in these parts, consecrated both this grove and cave to Pan, and according to the manner of his countrey, there honoured him. In the said cave therefore reared was an altar, and a goat thereupon sacrificed unto him, as to the god and preserver of the flockes: and seeing that he chaseth wolves from them, therefore the place where in he was worshipped tooke the name Quasi lupos arceus. Lupercall.
Now the feast Lupercalia was by Romulus and Remus instituted. For they having obtained of Numitor a plot of ground to build them a citie on, in that very place where they had been cast forth; called all their companions to a feast and merrie meeting: where, after they had killed sacrifices, and refreshed themselves with meat, and withall taken their wine liberally to the full, they grew to disport, and in that merie fit clad themselves in the skins of the goats which they had sacrificed, and then fell to hopping and dauncing full jocundly. Hereupon their posteritie, celebrating the memoriall thereof, held a festivall solemnitie called Lupercalia, which retained the name of the place where first they began. Hereof see more in Valerius Maximus, Servius, and Plutarch in the life of Antonius. As for the fig-tree Ruminalis, it was so cleaped of the river Tyber, called at the first Rumon. Some would have it take the name of Romulus. Others of the milke given to the said infants, for that part of the throat which draweth milke, is called Ruma in Latine. This place was over against the house of the two lords, Cosinus and Damianus, on the side of the mount Palatine, opposit against the grand race or shew-place, called Circus Maximus. Romulus and Remus thus laid foorth about Lupercall, and carried by the water to this place, were fostered for a while under the figtree Ruminalis, in the place where the Comitium after was. The tokens of this tree remained unto the time of Augustus Caesar, as Ovid testifieth.


CHAP. XIIII. Of the New way, the streets Ingarius, and Tuscane.
THe street called the New way overagainst the temple of Iupiter Stator, goeth along the valey betweene the Capitoll hill and the Palatine, and reacheth to the Forum Romanum. This, howsoever it be called New, was well known to be most auncient, and is different from that, which Caracalla repaired under his baines.
The street Iugarius, otherwise called Thurarius, leadeth from the gate Carmentalis, along the foot of the Capitoll hill, to the Forum Romanum. In it was the altar of Iuno Iuga, who was thought to make mariages, and to couple folke in matrimonies, and she it was that gave the name to Vicus Iurius.
Vicus Thuscus beginneth at the Forum, and along the foot of the Palatine sheweth the way to Velabrum. The reason of the name is this. The Tuscanes upon a time fighting against the Aricians, were by them overcome; and after many thousands of them slaine in battell, the rest being few in number fled to Rome: who taking delight in the pleasant seat of the citie, and the commodiousnesse of the place, determined there to remain. VVherupon having a plot of foure stadia granted them by the Senat, between the Capitoll and Palatine, they inhabited the same. Hereupon the street was called by them Thuscus Vicus, and many a hundred yeer after retained that name. In it afterwards there kept bawds and such kind of people, whereupon it grew out of credite, and lost also the first name.


CHAP. XV. The Arches of Romulus, the Senaculum, and the dwelling house of Ovid.
THe old arches (which some thinke Romulus erected) continued a long time built of bricke, neither would the Romanes suffer that any man should make them of marble: to the end, that the memoriall of their citie founder, should remaine more firmely in the minds of men. But in continuance of time long after, they decaied and fell downe, in that very place where now is the church of Saint Marie of Grace, and were never afterwards reedified. The Romanes named that place Senaculum, betweene the Capitoll and the Forum, wherein the Senate kept a consistorie for counsell and consultation.
That Ovids mansion house stood under the Capitoll, himselfe witnesseth, even where as now the church is of S. Marie of Consolation.
Thus much of the buildings of the Capitoll and the valley to it. Now followeth the mount Palatine.




THE THIRD BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The divers etymologies of Palatine.
ALbeit the hill Palatine were a long time inhabited before the cittie was built, and namely, first by Valentia the daughter of Italus; then, by Evander, who also therein set up a castle: whome there succeeded after the cittie was founded, KK. and Emperors; insomuch as scarcely any one place of Rome is more renowmed by writing, than this hill: yet the certein reason of the name why it should be so called, and which a man may be bold to follow, can hardly be set downe. Some would have it so called, because the Arcadians wandering with Evander disorderly, and the Palatines out of the Rheatine territorie (called likewise Palatium) came to that mount and it inhabited: others of Palas the great grandfather of Evander-Livie thought, that of Palanteum a citie of Arcadia, it was first called Palantium, and afterward Palatine. There are besides, who of Palatia the wife of Latinus, fetch the originall of the denomination: or of Palath^, the daughter of Hyperboreus, who bare Latinus unto Hercules, and inhabited this mountaine: or of Palantia the daughter of Evander, who there was buried: or of Palas, who was himselfe interred in it. Some there are also, who of the bleating of sheepe, which pastured there in times past, before the hill was by men frequented and peopled, imagine it was so named: or else because flockes were woont there palare, that is, to wander and grase up and downe. And hereupon it is, that Nevius called it Balantium, of Balatus; or Palantium, of Beletus, i. Bleating. palaree. Tremellius calleth it the mount Rumuleus, of Romulus his image, found at the very foot of the said hill. This may suffice for the derivation of the name.


CHAP. II. The temple of Victorie, Ceres, Iuno Sospita, and the mother of the gods: the temple of Libertie and the porch thereof, as also the house of Cassius.
NOw that we have declared the reason of the name of Palatium; we will goe forward to shew the temples and houses of the said mountaine, like as we have done in the description of the Capitoll hill.
VVhen the Romans had performed fortunately many martiall exploits, and oftentimes returned with victorie over their enemies, because they would not bee found unthankfull to the gods, unto whom they were beholden for their happie atchievements, and thereby afterwards misse of the like fortunate successe; they consecrated unto the goddesse Victorie a temple in that part of the Palatine, which looketh toward the hortyards and gardens of Maria Nova, in the verie botome of the descent, hard at the gate Romana. L. Posthumius an Aedile Curule tooke order for the building there of, out of certain mony raised by fines and penalties; and when it was finished, he dedicated it to the goddesse Victoria.
Neere thereto was a chappell, consecrated to virgin Victoria, which M. Porcius Cato vowed.
Besides, in the same place was the temple of Iuno Sospita.
The Arcadians, which with Evander came to the Palatine hill, built a temple also in Palatium to Victorie, but as different from this above-named, as farre more auncient: and to the honor of that goddesse, solemnized yeerely sacrifices.
They built a temple to Ceres also in the Palatine.
In the fatall bookes of Sibylla there was a prophesie found, That the forrein enemie and straunge borne should be chased out of Italie, in case the mother of the gods might be brought to Rome from Pessinus. Now a stone it was, which the inhabitants of that countrey so called. Sent therefore were embassadours into Asia as far as to Pessinus a towne of Phrygia: who brought with them that Great mother of the gods into Italie. Then P. Cornelius caried it from the sea into the Palatine, and bestowed it in the temple of Victorie, until such time as one was built of purpose for her. Afterward, M. Livius and C. Claudius the Censors, tooke order for a temple to be made, to this great mother of the gods, and the same set out with statues, pillars, and pavements of divers stones of great price. And Iunius Brutus dedicated it. The plaies also and games called Megalesia, where of Cicero speaketh, were first instituted at the dedication thereof.
Vnto Libertie, P. Clodius built a temple and a stately gallerie, in part of Cassius his house, neere the temple of Iupiter Stator.


CHAP. III. Of the chappell and altar of The fever. Febris: the temple of the Lares: the chappell of the goddesse Viriplaca, of Faith, and Iupiter Victor.
NOt to those gods only that did good to mankind the Romanes consecrated temples, but dedicated chappels to those also that did them hurt; to the end, that they should do lesse harme, and punish them more gently. For certein it is, that on the hill Palatine there was a temple and altar both, consecrated to the Fever: likewise to Nemesis the goddesse of vengeance; whereof before in the second booke.
Besides, they erected a chappell of the Lares in the Palatine.
In like manner, there was a chappell in the Palatine, consecrated to the goddesse Not much unlike, but somwhat a better saint, than S. Vocumbre of Poules. Viriplaca; into which, if man and wife came togither, although they disagreed and were fallen out before, they returned home againe good friends from thence, and all was well.
After that Aeneas with his sonne Ascanius and daughter Roma came into Italie, they reared a temple to Faith, in Palatine: the which was dedicated notwithstanding in the name of the daughter, and the same was written in the forefront of the temple: and therefore many yeeres after, when Romulus and Remus strove who should give name to the cittie, the Senat and people of Rome reading the name of Aeneas his daughter in the frontispice of the said temple, resolved to name the city after her, Roma.
Q. Fabius in the Sabine warre, vowed a temple to Iupiter conqueror: and afterwards built it on the Palatine hill, and there dedicated it.


CHAP. IIII. The temples of Heliogabalus, Apollo, and the Penates: the house of Orcus; the place of the Palladium or image of Minerva; and the temple of Augustus.
ANtonius Heliogabalus consecrated a god in the mount Palatine, which hee called Heliogabalus, and built a temple in the verie place, where before stood that of Orcus or Pluto. But to win credit and name to this new and counterfeit god with great reverence and worship; he endeavoured to translate into this temple of his, the Scyphum, or rather, typum, i. the figure. sacred cup of that great mother of the gods, the fire of Vesta, the image of Minerva called Palladium, the heavenly scutcheons, and all things else which the Romanes honoured above the rest. The Christian and Iewish religion also he there counterfeited, to the end, that no man in the religious worship of that temple and god, might alledge any pretence why hee should not with good conscience so doe.
Moreover, in the Palatine, there was built a most auncient temple of Apollo. This chaunced to be overthrowne by thunder and lightning; and when the soothsaiers gave out, that the god missed it and required another, Augustus Caesar adjoyned a porch to the ruines thereof, and reedified the temple anew that there stood: wherein himselfe when hee grew aged, many a time sate in counsell with the Senat, and empanelled the decuries of judges. In it likewise were pendant candlesticks, braunched with armes like trees, whereon the approoved poets bestowed their writings. Certaine markes and tokens of this temple are to be seene (although obscurely) neere to the vineyard of Fedra, where the house of Tiberius stood. Vnto him were instituted the Apollinare games, whereof read Cicero.
The temple of the citie-protectours, called Penates, stood in that part of the Palatine which looketh into the North, even on Velia not farre from the Forum. In it were the images of the Trojane gods. In the same are pourtraied two young men sitting togither, and holding a ball in their hand. In like manner, the crooked Augurs staves called Litui, of iron and brasse. Besides, an earthen Trojane vessell of potters worke. Apollo also and Neptune were there to be seene.
VVhen the temple of Vesta was on a light burning fire, the image of Pallas being saved out thereof, was translated into Velia, and gave the name unto the temple of Palaca, now S. Andrewes church, standing in the same place.
Some report, that there was a temple built in Palatium to Augustus Caesar of famous memorie, by his daughter Livia.


CHAP. V. The Palatine houses, and the court of the Salij.
THat Romulus and Remus being shepheards abode sometime in these parts, the sheds and cottages, which long time after were found here, made of slight wood and reed, doe testifie: which as any of them in continuance of time decaied and fell downe, the shepheards repaired with the like matter to their auncient forme, that the perpetuall memoriall of Romulus and Remus

the citie founders, what kind of persons they were, and what manner of houses they woned in, might be delivered to posteritie. In that corner of the Palatine hill, which leadeth into the grand cirque or shew-place, there stood (many ages) the cottage which they called Casa Romuli.
Tullus Hustilius, before he built his court dwelt upon Velia, in that verie place where afterwards the chappell of the Penates stood.
Not farre from thence, even in that part of the Palatine which regardeth the Forum, Catiline (by report) had his house built.
Moreover, betweene M. Scaurus his house and Catilines, there was but a small step over.
Ciceroes house purchased of Crassus, was in the most frequent and conspicuous place of the mount Palatine, above the church of Iup. Stator, neere the Palatium.
Plinie testifieth, how the houses of Crassus the orator, and Viterbius, in the Palatium, were in old time overturned.
One captaine Vanas likewise had an house in the Palatium.
Also Tyberius, where of we have written in the former chapter.
Augustus (borne in the region about Palatium, in a place called Capita bubula, i. the oxe heads; and where after his death, they erected a chappell unto him) dwelt first neere the Romane Forum, above the round staires called Scalae annulariae, in the house sometime of Calvus the oratour. Afterwards he built the stately Palatine at his owne charges and gave it to the city, and himselfe dwelt on the Palatine hill in the small house of Hortensius.
The Guild, or religious court of the Salij, built in the mount Palatine, chaunced to be burnt; and in the ashes thereof, the staffe of Romulus called Lituus was found, without any hurt.
Publicola dwelt in an house standing over the Forum, which was called Subvelia.
That the dwelling house of Tarquinius Priscus was neere unto the temple of Iup. Stator, may soone be prooved out of Livie.


CHAP. VI. Of the top of Velia; the statues in Palatine, and other things in generall.
THe pitch of the hill called Summa Velia, was in that higher part of Palatium, which looketh into the Southeast, whereas now is the temple of Marie the new. Called Velia it was, because in old time before the devise of shearing sheepe, the shepheards were there woont to plucke the wooll from the sheeps backe.
Augustus set up a Librarie of Latine and Greeke bookes in Palatine, and adorned it with the money raised of the most excellent brasse of that huge colossus of Thuscane Apollo. He adjoyned thereto a porch or gallerie, which they called Palatium.
In it was erected by the Senate, a statue unto Numerianus the Emperour, and a singular oratorie. In the same porch, the Romanes also set up a statue unto M. Varo, whiles he lived.
The Auguratorium, which was a place where they used to take auguries, was upon mount Palatin. Apollo Palatinus likewise, the workmanship of Scopas, was Palatiu^. Latona in the same was placed.
Titus the Emperour set up a golden statue in Palatine to Britannicus.
Moreover, the tree which grew out of Romulus his speare, was in the Palatium. For hee, after he had taken his auguries in the mount Aventine, launced his speare from him into the Palatine, which sticking in the earth, budded forth leaves and grew to be a tree.
Likewise the bay tree, which the same day that Augustus was borne, sprung with him and suddainly appeared, was in Palatium. Of this laurell tree, they that afterwards triumphed, were woont to weare their wreathed guirlands.
The Palatine baines, whereof Cicero maketh mention in his oration for Roscius, were in the same Palatium; and of them there remaine yet some tokens, above the Circus max. not far from the vineyard of Fedra.
In the same mountaine also there was a place called Sicilia, and Iupiters parlour.
The most beautifull streets called Antonianae, paved with Lacedaemonian and Porphyret stones, were in Palatium. The streets also of Padus, and Fortuna respiciens, were to be seene in Palatine. And there were the games and pastimes celebrated, which they call Palatual.


CHAP. VII. The Palatium now called the Greater: the court-yard of the Palatium: and the old gate of the very Palatium it selfe.
HOw great a compasse the Palatium tooke up in old time, how gorgeously it was built, how rich, how frequent and full of houses, the huge ruines, the pictures, statues, and most pretious pillars

there found, do easily declare. For no man ever hath left in writing, who first built so great and stately edifices; who afterwards enlarged the same, and in so conspicuous a place erected those houses. By little and little it grew to so great an height, as if all writers should be ignorant of those antiquities: neither was any thing at one time done at once, which seemed worth the memoriall. For, Historiographers are wont to deliver unto posteritie those things only which are rare and worthie of admiration. The mount Palatine at this day is called Palatium majus, and setting aside the Church of Saint Andrew, hath scarse two houses inhabited. The rest beeing either replenished with vines or fit for pasture, yeeldeth grasse and food, for sheepe, caples, and goats. So as it seemeth it may be called Balantium of the bleating that sheep make, rather than Palantium.
This Palatium had also a place therein called Atrium, built in old time and hallowed by Augurie: in it the Senat sate in counsell, because they might not assemble in any place unaugurate or unhallowed. Therein also rammes were sacrificed.
The old gate of the Palatium was neere the Rostra, over-against S. Laurence church in Miranda. Some would have this to be called the gate of Romulus, in old time.


CHAP. VIII. The temples of Ianus, Augustus, and Faustina.
AFter the description of the temples and edifices of Palatium the third part of the citie, now followeth a fourth; namely the Romane Forum. Therein is the most stately temple of Ianus, (for me thinkes wee doe well to begin at Ianus, who is counted the dore and entrance as it were of all things) having four gates. For Ianus himselfe, who was therein worshipped, had foure faces; and from Faliscia a citie in Tuscane forced by the Romans, he was translated to Rome into the Forum, named after Transitorium. His temple was built in that part of the said Forum which looked toward the Romane Forum. Procopius saith, that in his daies it was built in the mids of the Forum overagainst the Capitoll, a little above the place which the Romans called, The three Destinies. Other temples there were besides of Ianus, and namely in the Capitoll neere the theatre of Marcellus, with two fronts all of brasse, and had two brasen dores, which in time of peace were shut; and against warre, were set open.
The temple of Augustus was builded in the Romane Forum. This was begun in the time of Tiberius the Emperour, but left-unperfect. Caligula finished it. Above it, he made a bridge which joyned the Capitoll and Palatine togither.
There remaine yet to be seene certaine monuments and markes of the temple of Faustina. Hadrianus the emperour her husband founded it at the foot of the Palatine hill (where the brasen image of a bull standeth) for her sake, that she might be honoured as a goddesse. The same, his sonne Antonius Heliogabalus afterwards would have to be a temple for himselfe, or Iupiter Syrius, or els the Sunne. At this day it is the Church of S. Laurence in Miranda.


CHAP. IX. The temple of Castor and Pollux, and the Rostra.
NO man doubteth but that the temple of Castor and Pollux was sometime in the Romane Forum before the Rostra, neere to that abovesaid of Faustina. This sacred house A. Posthumius the Dictatour dedicated; and L. Metellus afterwards repaired and beautified it, with the Dalmatian spoiles. In it, as in many other, the Senate used to sit in councell, and therein were publicke orations made to the people. Cacilius Metellus adorned the same with statues, pillars, and excellent painting: where in also hee set up the pourtraiture and resemblance of Flora, a picture of singular beautie. A table besides, which containe the records and monuments, touching the free burgeoisie graunted to the horsemen of Capua. The steps and greeces going up to this temple, Clodius afterwards plucked up, as witnesseth Cicero.
There was a temple or consecrate place called Rostra, at the foot of the hill Palatium, over-against that before-named of Castor and Pollux, whereas now is the little chappell of S. Marie de Inferno. From these Rostra, were the sentences and acts of the Senat, brought and propounded to the people.


CHAP. X. The temple of Caesar, Venus Genetrix, and Mars revenger: and the court of Venus.
CAesar of famous memorie had a temple neere his own Forum, at the broad street called Sacra, behind the temple of Faustina. In it were set up as Saints, Victorie and Castor.
In the same Caesars Forum, there stood a chappell of Venus Genetrix, behind the said temple of Faustina. This, Caesar vowed in the Pharsalian war, and dedicated it. After victorie in the warre against Pompey, Caesar enclosed the temple of the said Venus, within a court-yard and a cloister, which Hadrian afterwards repaired and built new.
Augustus Caesar in the battaile of Philippi, vowed a temple to Mars the avenger, which afterwards hee edified in his owne Forum, wherein were certaine iron pots dedicated to Mars: and two statues, bearing up the tabernacle of Alexander the Great. This is thought to be at this day the church of saint Martina.


CHAP. XI. The temples of Vulcan, Concord, Peace, Romulus, and Venus Cloacina.
THe temple of Vulcan, Romulus founded, above the Comitium and Forum Romanum, at the bottome of the Palatine hill: but Tatius dedicated the temple of Vulcan, as also of the Sunne and Moone, of Saturne, Rhea, Vesta, Diana, and Quirinus. In the temple of Vulcan there was dedicated unto Vulcan, the brasen chariot of Romulus, wherin he rode in triumph a second time. Therein remained also the statue of Cocles there erected. Many a time were orations made to the people in this temple.
In the yard belonging to Vulcans temple, Fulvius, the sonne of a Libertine or enfranchised citizen, 303 yeeres after the building of the Capitoll, vowed the temple of Concord, if he could reconcile the States of Senators and gentlemen to the people. Afterwards hee built it of the amercements and penalties that hee tooke of Vsurers condemned, at the foot of the mount Palatine. Opimius the Consull afterwards repaired it a new. In it, Plinie testifieth that an altar ran blood for two daies.
Livia Drusilla in her open gallerie, erected a chappell of Concord, in regard of the mutuall and loving agreement between her husband and her: which afterwards Tyberius dedicated.
In that place where Drusilla first founded the said chappell of Concord, Vespasian afterwards with wonderfull celeritie and speed, (after the civill warres ended) finished the temple of Peace, begun before by Claudian. A large building this was and foure square, set out with most stately and faire columnes, and of all other temples the richest. In it Vespasian bestowed the holy vessels and pretious ornaments of the temple in Hierusalem, which T. had shewed in triumph. It had also the statue of Ganymedes, and an infinite number of other ornaments wherewith it was decked and beautified. This temple caught a fire, and at once sodainly was consumed whole: and never was it knowne to this day how this fire came; unlesse it were (as some imagine) by reason of an earthquake which happened the same houre, the stones rubbed togither and strucke fire.
An altar of Peace was by Augustus first reared; but in what place, the posteritie knoweth not. The same, Agrippa afterwards enlarged and adorned. Betweene the temple of Peace and Faustina, there is at this day a most auncient temple, and two pillars of the porch to it, which now is dedicated to the two breethren Saint Cosines and Damians. Some thinke it was the temple of Romulus and Remus, the same that Carvilius the Consull, after hee had subdued the Samnites, dedicated, and of the infinite masse of spoiles adorned it.
That the temple of Venus Cloacina stood neer the broad street Sacra, Ovid testifieth. Now the image of this Cloacina was found in a privie or draught, called Maxima, and Tatius consecrated it. And because it was not knowne whose resemblance it was, it tooke the name of the place wherein it was found.


CHAP. XII. The temples of Tellus, Salus, Victoria, the Sunne and Moone, the house of Cassius, and the Armorie.
WHere the temple of Tellus stood, some say it is uncertein; others thinke it was not farre from the Esquailiae, neere the rising of the hill that leadeth to S. Peters church in Vinculis, where as now standeth the temple of Pantaleon. Sempronius vowed it: for whiles he fought a battaile with his enemie, at Asculum the head towne of the Picentines, the earth quaked: and because he would pacifie the goddesse Tellus (i. the earth) which he thought was angrie, he vowed this temple unto her. Built it was in the same plot of void ground, where the house of Spinius Cassius (who sought to be a king) was overthrowne. Neere unto this temple of Tellus, there was an Armorie; where of Cicero also maketh mention in a certaine place. VVithin the said compasse, C. Iunius Bibaculus the Consull, vowed a chappell to the godpesse Salus, in the time of the Samnites warre. The same was by him put forth to building when he was Censor, and dedicated by him Dictatour.
L. Volumnius an Aedile, caused the temple of Victoria neere the Romane Forum to be made, of the penalties and fines taken.
In this place also was the altar of Apollo.
Some would have, that the temples of Concord and Aeculapius, were neere the Amphitheatre, in the place where the gardens be of S. Marie the new.
The temple of Mercurie also was in the Forum.
The temples likewise of Isis and Serapis were in the Bursse called Emporium. And some think, that these were the Chappels of the Sunne and Moone, dedicated by Tatius.


CHAP. XIII. The Forum of Trajanus: the things now therein, or that have been heretofore.
THus much of temples, of holy and religious places, which seemed worth the noting, hath been briefly written. Now from hence forward we will speake of those things, which shall concerne the honour and memoriall of mortall men, and first begin we will with that excellent prince Trajanus.
Forum Trajani was built (with wonderfull Art and industrie of man) by Apollodorus, betweene the Forum of Nerva, the Capitoll hill, and the mount Quirinall. The same workeman built also (at the commaundement of Trajanus) Metodeum and Gymnasium. The roufe of that Forum or Hall was of brasse, within round about in every place the formes and images of horses, and militarie ensigne all guilt. Now were these foresaid images erected there at the cities charges in memoriall of them that had deserved well of the common-weale, or otherwise of some notable act.
The triumphant arch in like manners with many other monuments reared to the praise of Trajanus, adorned this Forum or hall of his.
The porch of this Forum, built upon most mightie and high pillars, and resting upon large chapiters, yeelded so great admiration to the beholders, that they seemed rather the workes of gyants than men. Into this, Alexander Severus in the honour of Trajanus, translated most beautifull statues of singular men.
Trajans horse in like manner stood in the mids, bearing upon high columnes.
In a coine also there is found the image of Trajane, with this inscription: S.P.Q.R. OPTIMO PRINCIPI, THE SENATE AND PEOPLE OF ROME TO THE BEST PRINCE. But hereof Lampridius writeth much.
He likewise is reported, to have adorned the palace, made of sundrie marbles, with pictures and statues within.
In the mids of the Forum, there stood the Columne of Trajane, built with winding stairs. This had round about it the summarie of the acts of Trajane engraven and chased most cunningly; but above all the Dakes warre: within-forth there bee 185 steps up to the top; and it hath 40 little windowes to let in light unto them that shall goe up: 120 foot high it was, or (as Eutopius writeth) 140. In the louver or lanterne thereof were the bones of Trajane kept within a golden ball. This pillar, Trajane himselfe never saw: for whiles he warred against the Parthians, the Senat dedicated it unto him in his absence. But hee in his returne from the Persians, died by the way at Seleucia a cittie in Syria, of a flixe of blood. His dead corps was brought to Rome: and of all the Emperours, hee alone (as Eutropius writeth) was enterred within the citie. The reason why his bones are left in that Columne is this: The manner in old-time was, for princes and noble men to be buried under hills: but there being not mountaines enough whereupon to raise sepulchres in every place, it happened that such steeples and high pillars were set over their dead bodies in steed thereof.


CHAP. XIIII. The Forum, the palace, and porch of Nerva.
NExt to our sight commeth the Forum of Nerva, and it is behind the Church of S. Hachian. In the mids of it there stood a Columne of brasse of an huge bignesse; covered with place of latten or copper, and hath within it, light every way. This Forum was garnished with divers statues and columnes, containing the whole order of all the actes of Nerva. This was afterwards called Forum Transitorium, for that from it there was the way to the Forum of Augustus, and the Romane.
There appeareth as yet some part of the porch or gallerie belonging to that Forum: for being consumed by fire, yet it left certaine obscure tokens, witnessing, that in the same place was the Forum of Nerva.
Part also of the palace of Nerva, built of 4 square stones and pillars, togither with the Church of S. Blase, are yet seene enclosed betweene the Comitium and the tower of Militia.


CHAP. XV. The Romane Forum, the Comitium, the prison Tullianum, and the image of Marforius.
THe Romane Forum, which also is called Latinum, began at the foot of the Capitoll, and reached in length to the Church now of Saint Marie the new, which is in Velia. But at the first,

the circuit and bounds thereof were much narrower. For from the head therof abovenamed; it went no farther than the neerest foot of the mount Palatine. Many a yeere after, Augustus Caesar enlarged it.
The Comitium joined to the Forum, or rather it was a part thereof: for it beginneth at the gate of Palatium, and endeth at the church of S. Marie the new.
At the foot of the Capitoll hill, South-east-ward, Ancus Martius built a prison for malefactors to be laid up in. After him king Tullius adjoined to it that part which is under the ground, and called that dungeon, Tullianum. Made it was of huge and mighty big stones, with narrow long holes, for to receive the shadow as it were and resemblance of a sight. The dungeon within was vaulted with stone, ugly for darkenesse, and loathsome by reason of a strong and s^^king sent. This whole prison was divided into two parts, the upper rowme and the nether. Carcer it was called in Latine a coercendo, because it kept them there enclosed from comming forth. (...).
Iust before this prison there lieth a huge marble-idoll which they call Marforie Some think it was the image of the bakers god, others, of Iupiter surnamed Panatius; of the tumours that beare out, like to loaves of bread. For the Romanes in times past, when they were besieged by the Gauls in the Capitoll, had warning by Iupiter in a dreame, to make bread of all the corne that they had left, and to throw it into the enemies campe. VVhere by the Gaules despairing that the Romanes could possibly be tamed with hunger, brake up the siege. VVhereupon the Romans in perpetuall memoriall of this benefit, erected an altar and a statue to Iupiter Pistor.
This image is thought to be the resemblance of the river Rhenus in Germanie; because it is upon a rocke. But why it should bee called Marforium, I know not, unlesse it bee because it standeth in the Forum of Augustus.


CHAP. XVI. The Secretarie of the people of Rome; the arch of Septimius; the temple of Saturne. Of the Treasurie, and the mint-house where they coined monie.
BEhind the image of Marforius, overagainst the arch of Septimius, is the church of S. Martina: where, as it appeareth by an evidence ingraven in marble, was sometime the place called the Secretarie of the people of Rome.
Right against the said church of S. Martina at the bottome of the rocke Tarpeia, standeth the arch of Septimius, which in both the fronts thereof containeth the deeds of that emperor both by land and sea.
Directly there followeth the temple, somtime of Saturne, now, S. Hadrians church. The said temple was of great antiquitie. Some report L. Largius for the builder therof; others L. Tarquinius: albeit more likely it is that Largius dedicated it. Livie writeth, that when A. Sempronius and M. Minutius were Consuls, Numantius Plancus reedified it. The treasurie of the people of Rome, no writer denieth, but that it was translated out of the Capitoll into this temple. But why men in old time would have the treasure to be within Saturns temple, there be divers opinions. Some say, because in Saturnes daies there was no theft committed: for under him all things were common; no covetous miser nor leawd person laid wait for his neighbour, but all things were administred with righteousnes, faith, and love. Cyprian alleageth this cause, because Saturn was the first that in Italie ordained mony to be coined. Moreover, in this treasure-house were kept the publicke ordinances. Also the bookes called Elephantini, containing the five and thirtie tribes of the people of Rome. Moreover, all the books of the cities accounts: also the ancient writings and records of the old Aerarium and of the citie debts. Furthermore, the standerds and ensignes of war. Over and besides, whatsoever was by the Generals and captains after the conquest of provinces carried in triumph, was thither brought. Lastly, whatsoever was expedient and profitable for the Commonweale to be reserved, as lawes, letters, and other common registers of a citie. The Censors likewise were put to take their oth in the temple of Saturne.
Betweene the church now of S. Hadrian, and that which somtime was the temple of Castor and Pollux, stood in old time the worke-house wherein they coined money.


CHAP. XVII. The golden Miliarium, the bridge of Caligula, the Rostra and the Curia.
MIliarium aureum stood in times past at the head of the Romane Forum, under the temple of Saturne, neere to the arch of Septimius. A pillar it was, so called, wherein all the high waies of Italie were cut and engraven, and there ended, and from which the measures began and went on to every gate of all quarters.
Caligula brought a bridge of marble through the Romane Forum, from the mount Palatine to the

Capitoll. A more stately and curious peece of work there never was throughout all the cittie: for the bridge was sustained with fourscore mightie pillers of most white marble: wherof at this day three are to be seene at the foot of the one hill, and as many at the other, in such manner as they were in times past by Caligula built for the bridge. In the mids of the Forum, over-against S. Hadrians church there standeth a piller, which is verily thought to bee one of them that supported the brasen horse of Domitian gilded all over. At the foot of this horse was the resemblance of Rhene, a river in Germanie; for that Domitian the emperour had triumphed over that province. And this is the image which afterwards they called Marforius.
Of the beakeheads of the Antiate ships, a pulpit was built in the Romane Forum by the Romans at the foot of the mount Palatine, which temple they called Rostra, that therein the acts of the Senate should bee made. Now of this Rostra there were twaine, the new at the bottome of the Palatine as is beforesaid, and the old, neere the Curia in the Comitium. In this Rostra were lawes published, causes pleaded, and Orations made to the people. On the same the manner was also to erect the Statues for most famous and noble men.
In the most conspicuous place of the Forum Romanum, before Rostra, upon a lion of stone was the portrait set of Faustulus the fosterfather of Romulus and Remus. For he, whiles he was desirous to part the fray betweene Romulus and Remus the founders of the cittie, was there slaine, where, afterwards they erected unto him his statue. Behind the Rostra was the sepulchre also of Romulus. Moreover, before the Rostra stood the statue of Hercules, clad in a coat after the Eleans habite, with a grim and sterne countenance. Three statues also of Sibylla in the same place. The manner of the Romanes besides, was to set up the heads of those that were put to death, there to be seene.
Two Curiae or Counsell-honses at Rome there were: one neere the Forum, fast by the temple of Peace named Hostilia; the other in the mount Coelius, whereof we will speake hereafter.


CHAP. XVIII. The lake Curtius, the great sinke or towne ditch, and the Doliola.
THe lake Curtius was in the midst of the Rom. Forum, neer Domitian his horse. This lake tooke that name of M. Curtius, who to save the Commonweale, willingly of his own accord cast himselfe headlong, armed as hee was, together with his horse into a chinke of the ground in the middest of the Romane Forum. Some would have it so called of Metius Curtius a Sabine, who through this lake escaped safe to his owne companie.
The vault or sinke called Cloaca Maxima, was made by the commaundement of Tarquine: for by reason that the hils were digged under, and the citie stood hollow upon arches, it received and carried away all the filth thereof. At the temple of Iup. Stator, devided it was into three conveighances or channels, whereof two of them are now stopped up, the third runneth with most cleere water by the lake Curtius, under the Roman Forum, along the foot of the mount Palatine into Velabrum, and from thence in a sinke made of four square stone, it dischargeth it selfe into Tyber. In old time there were many such vaults, and those for publicke use. But after the citie was woon by the Gaules and burnt, whiles every man made hast to rebuild his house, where hee could meet first with a convenient place; they tooke no heed to the streets as they were before: so as neither the citie was devided as aforetime into quarters, nor yet the sinkes which in times past went under the streets, were marked where they lay: but afterwards were conveighed under private mens houses, whereby it came to passe, that each house almost at this day hath a sinke or privie belonging to it. Hereupon also it is, that this authour, whose epitome or abridgement we write, hath not divided the regions of the cittie, agreeable to the old wrirers. But to the end that those things which he setteth down, might be sooner understood, and better remembred, he hath parted it into those quarters as now it standeth: and when hee sheweth in what part of the citie any place in times past was, he declareth them in those coasts which at this day are known to the inhabitants. But as at first these sinkes were common (as I have said) so there were appointed publicke overseers to looke unto them.
Neere the foresaid great sinke there was a place, which of certaine barrels under the ground was called Doliola. This place was reputed so holy, that a man might not spit thereupon. In it were supposed to have been certaine secret mysteries of Numa. And yet, there be that thinke verily the ashes of the French Senones were there bestowed.


CHAP. XIX. The Comitium, the temple of Venus Genitrix. The statues and images that were in the Comitium and Romane Forum. Caesars statue and pillar.
VVHere the Comitium was, from what place it began, and in what part of the citie it ended, we have shewed before, in the 15 chapter of this book. Called it was Comitiu^, as Plutarch saith

for that Romulus and Tatius were woont to meet togither in this place, to make covenants between them. In which place afterwards, the Senate and people of Rome assembled, when they would decree any thing for the good of the C.VV. and namely, when Consuls, Tribunes Consular, and such magistrates were created, and other affaires concluded, where of authors make mention in all their writings. That place was neere the Senaculuin, at the very foot of the mount Palatine. This Comitium was open above-head for many yeeres: whereupon oftentimes, albeit assemblies were summoned, yet they were empeached holding for them, fearing some tempestuous weather toward. Long time after, when Anniball came into Italie, they set a rouse over it: and afterwards Caesar repaired it againe. In this Comitium the plaies were many times exhibited. In the same (as Livie-reporteth) the bookes of Sibylla were burnt. In like manner many leaud and outrageous acts were committed in the assemblies there, whereof elsewhere we will speake.
In the Comitium stood the statue of Cocles; which being afterwards strucken with fire from heaven, was translated into the court-yard of Vulcan. In the cantons and angles of the Comitium, were the statues likewise of Pythagoras and Alcibiades: Also in the ascent and stairs therof, on the left hand of the Curia, stood the image of (...), togither with his wherstone and rasour.
The image resembling the Mother goddesse, was set up in the Forum. They that worshipped this goddesse were of this opinion, that the stone whereof shee was made, could not possibly be consumed with fire: which they guessed hereby, for that albeit many fires were made, in the night especially at her image, yet it took no hurt therby; and therfore gave they out, that there was such vertue herein, as I have said. And from hence it came, that in all streets almost they began to worship her, and to crect altars and little chappels unto her.
The temple of Venus Genetrix, as is shewed before, was in the Forum. Iust before this temple stood the statue of Caesar, carrying a blazing star upon the head. In like manner a Columne of Caesar made of Numidian marble 20 foot high, there remained. Before the temple of Castor, there was the statue of Q. Martius in horsmans habit; of Tremellius clad in a side gowne; of M. Atticus covered with a vaile.


CHAP. XX. The columne called Mania: the pillar Horatia: the houses of Caesar, Constantine, and Domitian. The temple and court-yard of the said Caesar.
IN that part of the Forum was the columne Moenia, where stood the pallace of Portius. Called Moenia it was, of Moenius the Censor: for hee (when as he sold unto Cato his house, and when Flaccus the other Censor gave order, that the palace aforesaid should there be built) reserved in the sale so much space for himselfe, as a pillar or columne would take up: upon the which he might put out a loft to juttie forth, made of joists and bourds upon them: from which place both he and his posteritie might behold the sport of sword-fencers. And this priviledge hee obtained: whereupon, others also, as many as might bee allowed, were as industrious, and built them columnes in the Forum.
There stood a rock of stone also in the Forum, whereupon the spoiles of the three twinnes Curiatij were hanged.
In like manner, the pillar called Horatia.
The houses of Caesar, Constantine, and Domitian beautified the Forum.
Likewise the court and cloister of Minerva; and the shops [of Bankers] as well old as new.
The dead corps of Caesar was brought out of the Curia into the Forum, and enterred in that place, where afterwards they built unto him an altar and temple.
Likewise in the Forum the manner of the Romanes was, to lay downe their magistracie.


CHAP. XXI. Caesars Forum: the palace of Paulus, and his Librarie.
BEsides the temple of Saturne, or the common treasurie (wherof we have written before in the 16 chapter of this booke) in the Romane Forum toward the Northeast, was Caesars Forum, even in that very place which seemeth lower than the rest, behind the temple of Faustina. There, was the temple of Venus Genitrix, about which, Caesar made a cloister and a Forum, not of wares and marchandise to be sold, but for them that repaired thither for justice in law matters. In this Forum, among other statues (whereof there were many and those most faire and beautifull) he suffered his owne to be made, all armed. The Forum it selfe contained but a small compasse, but it was most excellently set out. The very level of the plot stood him in an hundred millions of Asses and above.
Caesar purchased with 1500 talents, Paulus Aemilius the colleague of C. Marcellus in his Conshulship, to be his friend and to stand with him. Paulus having received this summe of mony, built in the mids

of the Forum neere to the temple of Castor and Pollux, a most excellent and wonderfull pallace, of Phrygian columnes, which afterwards they named, Basilici Pauli.
A Librarie also the same Paulus erected, neere unto his owne Basilici.


CHAP. XXII. The Forum of Augustus: the galleries of Antonius, Faustina, and Livia: Caesars house.
THe Romane Forum, those also of [Iulius] Caesar and Augustus, were (as it is well knowne) neere one to another. That of Augustus, they affirme to have been at the image of Marforius, in the most frequented place of the citie: it was but little in compasse, as the other of Caesars, but excellently well adorned with brave statues and other things. For it had the statues of Castor and Pollux, with the victorie of Alexander the Great: the image also of Corvinus, and of the raven that upon his helmet fought. Also Apollo in yvorie: and besides these, other ensignes and ornaments of vertue and valour.
In this Hall or Forum, publicke justice was administred: and the judges from thence were empanelled: herein they debated in councell, of wars, of triumphes, and other weightie affaires. From hence they used to goe when they tooke journey into their provinces with soveraigne commaund. Hither, they that returned victors, brought the ensigns and tokens of their victorie. This Forum being by time decaied, Hadrian reedified.
This Forum had two porches, wherein were the statues set out and decked in triumphant maner.
Augustus dwelt in the street Sacra, in a house not so large and stately, but marveilously furnished by his neece Livia. And Augustus not able to abide this wastfull superfluitie of riches, pulled it downe and laid it even with the ground: in the void plot and court-yard whereof, was afterwards built the gallerie of Livia; which also was called Claudia. Nero cast it downe, but Domitian built it up againe under the old name.
The goodlie galleries of Antonine and Faustina, adorned with divers and sundry marbles well built in old time, were whereas at this day standeth the church of S. Laurence in Miranda.


CHAP. XXIII. The rafter or beame called Sororium Tigillum: the street Syprius, Sceleratus, and Patrius: the house of M. Antonius.
SOrorium Tigillum was a place hallowed for the expiation and assoiling of Horatius for killing his sister, set up neere the street Carinae, to the honour of Iupiter.
The street Cyprius is neere to the cliffe or rising of the Capitoll, which leadeth to the church of S. Peter in Vinculis, so called of Cyprus. In it dwelt the Sabines first, when they were afranchised and made free-denisons. Surnamed afterwards it was Sceleratus, upon the wicked and devilish act of Tullia, whereof Livie speaketh. Some thinke this was all one with the former: others say it was divers from it.
The street Patritius, was so called, because of the Patritij, who were by K. Tullus commaunded there to dwell. For this was a place raised somwhat higher than others; from whence as from the upper ground, they might easily defend themselves against the sodaine violence of others, if it should be offered.
M. Antonius dwelt in that house, where sometimes stood the temple of Tellus. After Antonie, the church of S. Pantalion was in the same place built.


CHAP. XXIIII. Busta Gallica, and Aequimelium.
BVsta Gallica, was a place in the heart of the citie, where the dead bodies of the Frenchmen that held Rome, were burnt and buried. It was in that part of the citie where at this day standeth the Church of S. Andrew (in Busta Gallica.) Now they call it by an awke name, Portugallo: and it is not far from the Amphitheatre. Varro setteth the Busta Gallica neere the Aequimelium. As for Aequimelium, it was so called, because the house of Melius who sought to be K. was there laid levell with the ground.


CHAP. XXV. The street called Via Sacra: the arch Fabian and Vespasian.
THis street beginneth at the old Curia, in the angle of Palatium neere the arch of [Great] Constantine. Varro supposeth that it began at the Carinae and the chappell of Sterniae. VVhereby a

man may gather, that the Via Sacra sometimes went through the gardens now of S. Marie the new, to the temple of Peace, the Forum of Caesar, and so directly up to the castle of the Capitoll. The name of Sacra it tooke, for that the Augurs when they came from the Capitoll hill, went through it as they tooke their Augurie: or because monethly, they went in procession with sacred reliques along that way: or last of all, in regard that in it there was a league and covenant made betweene Romulus and Tatius. At the head and top of it, Ancus Martius in times past dwelt, neere the chappell of the Lares.
In this street was the famous statue set up of Cloelia.
The arch Fabian likewise, neere the kings pallace, fast by the Basilica of Paulus, was reared by Fabius the Censor, who subdued the Allobroges. In which arch was the scutcheon with his armes, and other tokens of the victorie engraven. Fast by it, Scribonius Libo erected a seat and Tribunall for the Pretour, named Puteal.
In the same street-way, was the marble arch of Vespasian, (the ancientest of all others that are now to be seene) erected by Vespasian after hee had woon Hierusalem. In it were his victories cut and engraven, with the arke of the covenant of one side; and on the other, his triumphs and spoiles; and namely, the golden candlesticke; the seven other lights, the two tables of Moses, the vessels of the temple of Hierusalem; the golden table, weighing one great talent; and many things else, whereof Iosephus writeth.




THE FOVRTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The temple of Ianus and Pietie: of the publicke goale of Rom. Commons.
SEeing that foure parts of the citie are described, the fifth ensueth; which includeth those places that comprehend Tybre, part of the Aventine on the right hand, and the rock Tarpeia on the left: the valley also which lyeth between those very hilles. VVherefore begin wee will at the memorable places, which are next after the theatre of Marcellus, and so runne through the plaine and levell plot of the citie. And with Ianus first, whome men in old time beleeved to bee the verie dore and as it were the entraunce of all things. Vnto Ianus, Numa built a temple at the gate Carmentalis, (afterwards the chappell of Saint Katharine) at the botome of Argiletus, close unto the theatre of Marcellus. This temple had two dores: In time of peace they were shut,

but in warre opened by that Consull, who, as the worthier person was created first. It is found in records, that this temple was shut but onely thrice. First, by Numa himselfe: secondly, by T. Manlius the Consull: and a third time by Augustus, after the battell of Actium. But why in time of warre it stood open, many reasons are given: and this is thought the chiefest, namely, an accident that befell when Romulus warred against the Sabines: for when the Sabines were now possessed of the gate Carmentalis, and about to rush violently into the citie, all on a suddaine unlooked for, there issued forth upon the enemies a plenteous river and streame of hot scalding water out of the temple of Ianus, which stood neere to the gate: whereupon they were driven to flee, and so the citie was saved. From hence it is, that posteritie comming after, open the dores for Ianus that he might be at libertie, when he is called forth as it were, to helpe in time of warre.
Others report, that Tatius and Romulus both, were the founders of that temple: as who, when the covenant was made betwixt them, agreed togither of that two-faced god, as an indifferent and common witnesse to them both of the accord contracted betweene two kings and two nations; and so erected unto him this temple in that very place where now the ruines of S. Katharines church are to be seene.
Moreover there be who affirme, that Cn. Duilius vowed it, and Tiberius built it: but the varietie of these opinions seemeth hereupon to arise; for that it is received and held for certain, that there were many Iani worshipped as gods by the posteritie; whereas they in old time beleeved but one: so as that which is spoken of divers, is falsly supposed, as said of one. VVhich may be seene before, whereas wee wrote of Ianus with foure fronts or faces, whose temple was erected in the Forum. For it is said, that Ianus was the first who erected temples and ordained divine service and ceremonies for the gods; and therefore in sacrifices deserved the first place.
Pourtraied he is with a key and a wand; as who is the porter to keepe the gates, and the guide to direct the waies.
Augustus besides, brought his image out of Aegypt to Rome, and in the hearb-market built a temple in the honour of him.
To Pietie in the said hearb-market, M. Attilius Glabris dedicated a temple in that verie place where at this day standeth the Church of S. Nicholas in the prison: for even there Ap. Claudius the Decemvir by a decree of the Senat, built a prison, for that the common goale (whereof wee have written before) was not sufficient; and called it. The prison for the Commons of Rome: wherein himselfe afterwards being found guiltie, wrought his owne death. In which also many yeeres after, a certaine sillie poore woman of base and obscure parentage [being newly brought a bed] being apprehended for an heinous offence, was condemned to be starved to death. Her daughter, being a milch woman, and delivered lately of a child, made humble request to the goaler, that shee might have leave to goe to her mother: and when hee had made streight search before, whether shee brought with her any food; and saw her have nothing about her, let her in: and so she went and came, many times. At the last, knowne it was that the prisoner within was nourished by the breast-milke of her daughter: whereupon the mother was delivered and set free; and both mother and daughter were allowed their food ever after by vertue of a decree, at the cities charges: and in regard of that kindnesse and affection of the child to the mother, they consecrated this place to the goddesse Pietas. Lavie supposeth, that it was not the mother but the father, that in this manner was by the daughter nourished.


CHAP. II. The hearb-market: the temple of Iuno Matuta, and of Hope: the oratorie or chappell of Numa: the columne called Lactaria: the altar and chappell of Carmenta.
THis place hath the name of Forum Holitorium, for that therein is great store of woorts and pot-hearbs, without the gate Carmentalis, where, in times past was the old market kept: and at this day called it is, the street Montanaria.
VVithin the compasse of the said market place, C. Cornelius the Consull, in the time of the Gaules warre, vowed a temple to Iuno Matuta: which afterward being Censor, hee put out to building, in that very place where afterwards stood the church of S. Andrew surnamed in Mentuza.
The same C. Cornelius built in the Forum Holitorium, the temple of Hope, and the same adorned with divers and sundrie marbles: which afterwards Collatinus consecrated. Many a day after, it was smitten with lightning; and in the end set on fire and burnt.
A columne also there was in the same market place named Lactaria: unto which the sucking babes that were to be nourished with milke, were presented.
The oratorie of Numa, stood in the bottome of Argiletum, neere the theatre of Marcellus.
The altar Carmentalis, consecrated by Evander to his mother Carmenta, stood before the gate Carmentalis.
In the same place also was the chappell of Carmenta built by the matrons of Rome. At the first, shee was called Nicostrata: but for that shee delivered Oracles in verse, shee tooke the name of Carmenta.


CHAP. III. The fish market, and temple of Fortuna Virilis.
THe fish market standeth along the Tybre, neere to the [Forum] Iunium, betweene the Churches of Saint Marie in Porticu and Aegyptiaca, within the gate Carmentalis, not farre from the Forum Boarium, i. the oxe market.
The Church of S. Marie Aegyptiaca is at this day neere the Tybre, and a bridge of the said name. Some goe about to affirme and proove, that this was sometime the temple of Mercie; others, of Fortune and Chastitie; but all in vaine: for those temples were not in this place, but in the oxe market: as for this temple of Fortuna Virilis, whereof we now speak, it was neer Tybre. In it stood the statue of Serv. Tullius made of wood and guilt all over, which in a great skare-fire when all things else were burnt, remained only safe and sound.


CHAP. IIII. The temple of Vesta, the Saline, and the arch of Cocles.
NEere the church of Marie surnamed Aegyptiaca, there remaineth at this day a most auncient temple, now dedicated to S. Stephen, the frame whereof is circular, and the pillars are set round about and beare up the roufe; which being one entire peece of worke, carrieth the whole temple. Consecrated it was in old time to Vesta: and Numa taking that circular platforme, from the temple which was at Alba, made it with a louver in the top, having a hole to give light.
Howbeit of this goddesse her selfe there is no image nor resemblance; for that fire, whereof shee is the goddesse, can have no certeine and permanent forme: As for Vesta, the Latines call her so, because shee is arrayed with divers and sundrie things. Of the Greekes shee is named (...), for that her force and power appertaineth to altars and lierthes where fire is kept. This is not the temple wherein the sacred fire is preserved: but that whereof wee spake before, which Romulus built betweene the Capitoll and Palatium.
Salinae, were the store-houses of the salt which served the citie; and they stood upon that bankeside of Tybre, which from the foresaid temple of Vesta reacheth into the Aventine.
The arch of Horatius Cocles stood at the very foot of the Aventine hill, where the rising thereof beginneth, betweene the mount and the Tybre.


CHAP. V. The Forum Boarium.
HItherto from the beginning of this fourth book, are described those things which on the right hand of Tybre were worth the noting. Now forward we will after our manner, run through all the memorable things which are on the left side of that river: and first as concerning the beast-market.
The beast-market was neere to Velabrum and Ianus, betweene the mount Palatine and the Greeke schoole, close to the temple, now called S. Gregories church. In it there was a most auncient image in brasse of a bull, whereupon some thinke it tooke the name Boarium. Others, for that oxen were there sold: or because they used in old time to sacrifice those kind of beasts there: or else, for that Evander in that place killed an oxe in sacrifice to Hercules, for killing Cacus and recovering again his kine and oxen. In the same place were kept the instruments wherewith the ministers belonging to sacrifices, the sacrificers also themselves, were furnished when they went about their sacrifice. In this market-place was the first sight exhibited of sword-fencers.


CHAP. VI. The temple of Hercules Victor, and the altar called Maxima.
THe round temple of Iupiter Victor was built in the beast-market, neere the Greeke schoole: where sometime Evander reared unto Hercules the altar called Maxima. This temple (as they

say) was so religious and venerable, that neither flie nor dog would enter into it. For Hercules at what time as hee destributed a dole of flesh to his followers and ministers in his sacrifice, praied unto Myiagirus [the god that gathereth flies.] He it is therefore that driveth away all flies from this temple: and at the dore thereof he left his club behind, which so soone as the dogs see, they run away far off: and thus unto the daies wherein Plinie lived, it was free from flies and dogs. At the sacrifice and divine service of this Hercules, neither women nor bondslaves, ne yet freed men that had beene in villenage, might bee present. At the last, this temple was consumed in that fire which Nero the emperour made.
Over and besides, Evander erected unto Hercules a statue, which was called Hercules Triumphant, because so often as there was any triumph in the cittie, it was clad with the mantle, and other habiliments of triumph.
All the time that Evander raigned, Hercules had no more but an altar which they called Maxima: and this Evander reared unto him for killing of Cacus, and restoring his kine and oxen again. Vpon this altar hee sacrificed the tenth part of the fruit of his kine: for Hercules had given out and promised, That they should live an happ^ life, who dedicated unto him the tenth part of their goods. Hereupon commeth the name of Decimae Herculaneae i. Hercules Tithes.


CHAP. VII. The temples of Chastitie, Prosperous Fortune, Matuta, and Fors fortuna: of the place called Vicus Publicus, Velabrum: and the sepulchre also of Acca Laurentia.
NEere to the temple of Hercules, well known it is that a chappell was built by Aemylius to Pudicitia Patritia, i. Gentlewomens chastitie. Now the image that represented this Saint, stood in the beast-market. To the service and sacrifices celebrated unto this goddesse, virgines that were Commoners daughters might not come. And therfore a certain maiden of Commoners degree, reared a chappell also to Pudicitia Plebeia. From the service and sacrifices thereof, the Patritian virgins were likewise debarred. Many other places and temples besides, were consecrated to Pudicitia.
The temples of Prosperous Fortune and of Matuta, Servius Tullius consecrated in the beasts market: And that Fortune hee called Prospera, which was not blind. In that place (they say) an Olive tree sometimes stood, and upon a time when honey dropped and flowed from it, the Soothsayers gave order, that a little cofer or box should be made of the wood therof; wherin those lots were put and laid up, which by the direction of Fortune were either handled or shuffled together by the hands of yong boies: as if such should prove happie, fortunate, and excellent. Servius Tullius ascribed all his acts whatsoever to Fortune, who being borne of a bondwoman, had many times found good by her, and was in the end advaunced to princely dignitie. And hereupon hee dedicated temples to Fortuna Primigenia, Mascola, Convertens, Bene sperans, and Videns, as who would say, she ruled and did all. Likewise, a temple he consecrated to little Fortune, signifying thereby, that nothing can happen unto us, bee it never so small, but we must attribute it, as comming from the gods.
A temple to Matuta, Camillus vowed in the Veientian warre and dedicated it; which long before that time Servius Tullius had erected. To Matuta and Fortuna Primigenia the Romanes did sacrifice upon one and the selfe same day: and likewise in one and the same day both their chappels were burned and consumed with fire together. Carvilius the Consull caused a temple to bee made unto Fors Fortuna, or [Fortis Fortuna] neere unto that of Matuta, of the money raised out of the spoile gotten from the Tuscanes.
The street called Vicus Publicus, began at the Forum Boarium, and went from thence unto the Aventine, as farre as to the temple of Iuno. In this street neere the said Forum was the chappell of Velabrum, in that very place where now standeth the church of Saint Gregorie in Velabrum, so called.
Aventine hill was sometime seperated from the other mountaines by the Tyber betweene: for before that Tarquinius Priscus turned the channell of Tyber, it brake out many times, and having found a frith or creeke, it beat upon the foot of the Aventine. And therefore of necessitie, whosoever would goe to the Aventine, was to make a fare, that is to say, by paying his quadrant, ferrie over thether in a whirrey. Hereupon that place is at this day called Velabrum, a vehendo, i. ferrying over, where sometimes the Tyber had wrought out a frith.
Antias hath left in writing, that the sepulchre of Acca Laurentia was in Velabrum.



CHAP. VIII. Vertumnus and his temple; Ianus with foure faces; the house of Africanus; the court or pallace Sempronia, and the wooll shops.
MEn in old time called Vertumnus, not only the god of buying selling, and of fruits; but also him that ruled mens minds, so named a Vertendo, for that oftentimes he turned and chaunged at his will and pleasure the purposes and thoughts of men another way far divers. His temple and image they erected in the Tuscane street, neere to the altars of Ops and Ceres. The festivall daies of this god, celebrated in the month October, are called Vertumnalia. Some there bee that would have Vertumnus and Ianus with foure faces to be all one; upon this reason, for that they affirme the temple of Ianus aforesaid to bee in Velabrum, whereas they built that of Vertumnus. But now that temple, where of we have before spoken, upon foure pillars beareth up one roufe, and hath foure gates besides, and in each forefront twelve little windowes, which signifie the foure quarters of the yeere and the twelve months. In old time they put Ianus before, in al sacrifices, and gave him that name ab cundo, i. going, and hereupon the entries and dores of houses be called Ianuae.
Neere the image of Vertumnus, Pub. Affricanus had an house, which Sempronius afterwards bought together with the wooll shops, and built the pallace which they call Sempronia, neere the temple of S. Gregorie in Velabrum.


CHAP. IX. Argiletus: the house of Cornelius: Aequimelium: the chappell of Surquedrie or slouth.
THe Argiletus beginneth at the bottome of the Tuscane street, and endeth at the Theatre of Marcellus. But Fabius Pictor saith, it began at the head of the said Tuscane street, under Coeholus, betweene it and the great Listes, and so reacheth to the Aventine. The name it taketh of a kind of clay or lome, where of there is plentie in that place: or els of one Argus, who being entertained as a guest by Evander, laid a-wait for his life, intending after hee had murdered him, to be king and reigne himselfe. But the friends and companie about Evander discovered his traines, and so hee was by them slaine. Vnto him therefore Evander reared a tombe even there, and consecrated the place.
Now Imus Argiletus is just by the Theatre of Marcellus. In this street were divers shops of artisanes or artificers, and especially of stationers or booksellers, and those they co^monly called the Argiletane shops.
Cornelius Domitianus is said to have dwelt in Velabrum.
Aequimelium is betweene Velabrum and the Capitoll, neere to the staplers wooll shops. The name arose hereupon, for that Sp. Melius a Romane cittizen who aspired to bee king, sometime there dwelt: who being detected of that crime, was killed, his goods confiscate, and his house laid levell with the ground, and the plot where it stood, by the Romanes was made a void yard.
The temple of Murtiae, goddesse of Idlenesse, was under the Aventine, upon the ascent of the hill called Clivus Publicus, in that part whereas folke goe up to the church of Saint Prisca. Hereupon the mount Aventine was sometime called Murtius.
Moreover, some there be that in this place would have the Asylum to stand: but wee have shewed before that the Asylum was first built by Romulus upon the Capitol. But in processe of time, after that so great riches and wealth was gathered and laid up there in the Capitoll, and that otherwhiles the Senat used there to meet and sit in counsell; the Romans thought it not with the safest for them that theeves, fellons, and other leaud infamous persons of all sorts, should come for refuge thither, and there abide: and therefore they supposed it better for their securitie to translate this priviledged sanctuarie to some other place. VVhereupon not there alone, but in many other parts afterward there began sanctuaries to be set up, not at Rome only, but also in other quarters of the world.


CHAP. X. Circus what it is, why it was so called, and for what cause ordained.
THe place where games and exercises of disport were performed, was called the Cirque: so named for that scaffolds were built in circuit round about to behold the pastimes; and within that compasse the said solemnities were exhibited: also for that the pompe was carried in shew, and the horses ran about the goles there. Built it was round, but longwise like an arch or bow, having in the circuit about it steps one above another, with apt seats for the beholders, that one should not hinder the prospect of another: in the mids were two marks or goles distant alike one from the other. Also the barriers or carceres, so called, because the horses stood there pent and kept in untill the magistrat gave the signall to begin the course.
Now these solemnities of games and plaies, are feastivals in the honour of their gods: for ordained they were first and still are observed and kept, either for their birth-daies and nativities, or dedications of temples. And at the first verily were hunting and baiting of beasts, which they called (Munera) to the honor of Saturne. But the stage plaies were due to Liber: the Circensian games to Neptune and Ceres. Thus these pastimes were assigned, some to these gods, and others to those; and in honour and memoriall of them yeerely solemnised. As for the games Circenses, they were so called, because when they were performed, they had the banke of the river of one side, and swords set to flanke the other. But of these games, plaies, and solemne sights, Sisinius hath written at large.


CHAP. XI.The great shew-place called Circus Maximus.
TArquinius Priscus instituted first this large circuit for running of races, and laid the foundation thereof betweene the two mounts Aventine and Palatine. But Caesar was hee that enlarged it, and made it more magnificent and stately. For being (as it was) three furlongs and an halfe in length, and foure acres broad; it is thought that it was Caesar and not Tarquine, who set it out to that largenesse: and this soundeth like to a truth, considering that in Tarquines daies the citie was not so populous, neither given so much to these shewes and sights, as in the time of Caesar, and therefore the place required not so great a compasse of ground. Now this Cirque for three parts thereof, to wit, the two sides and one of the ends, had a ditch digged ten foot deepe, and as many broad: behind that ditch were galleries built, three stories high; and these had seats made beneath with stone, and above of timber: al which galleries had one and the same bases, for they closed together round like a globe. Able they were to receive a hundred and fiftie thousand men. See more hereof in Dionysius, Plinie, Livie, and others who have written of the Romane edifices. This Cirque, Augustus adorned and beautified afterwards: for hee made the barriers of marble, and guilded the goales, and many other ornaments hee set it out withall. Lastly, when it was decaied and fallen down, Trajane reedified it, made it more ample, and trimmed it up. Yea, and after him, Heliogabalus set thereto besides most faire and goodly Columnes, and garnished them with gold, and paved the very floore with Chrysocolla. But as touching the beautie of this Cirque, Nazarius writeth much. For, by report, so elegant it was, that men resorted to it, not so much to behold the exercises and maistries there, as the pleasant and defectable beautie of the place. Maximus therefore it was called, either because consecrated it was to Vortumnus the greatest of the gods, or for the excellencie and sumptuousnesse of the games: or else because in comparison of other Cirques, to wit, Flaminius, and the other called Intimus, i. the inmost, this was the biggest. For Plinie hath left in writing, that it lay out in length three furlongs, and one in breadth, so as it would well serve for two hundred and sixtie thousand men to sit within it.


CHAP. XII.The temples and altars which we read to have been in the Circus Maximus, or about it.
COnsus is reported to bee the god of Counsell, either for that hee concealeth mens counsels, or openeth them unto men. This god had an altar in the great shew-place covered over: which betokeneth, that counsell ought to be close and couvert. For which cause, this altar as we read, was by the old Romans to him consecrated. For they, at what time as they consulted about the ravishing of the Sabine maidens, fearing least they should have been detected before the time, dedicated this altar to this god, and erected the portraiture and image of him thereon. VVhich altar verily, either by some injurie of the times, or through mens neglect of the gods, continued so forlet, as in the end it was altogether unknowne where it stood. At length found it was againe, and at all other times remained covered, but in the time of horse-runnings, and then it was uncovered and set open. To this god was the feast also instituted, called Consualia. And those disports and pastimes which they devised for the ravishment of the Sabine virgins, were celebrated at this altar by certaine priests belonging to that god.
In like maner Neptune, surnamed the Chevalier, had a temple in this Circus Max. which in the yeer of our Lord 1526 was found behind the temple of S. Anastasia, at the foot of the mount Palatine, in the very foundations of the Circus: for such markes and tokens were there to be seene, that by good evidences it appeared that this was the very temple of Neptune. For the honour of this Neptune, the games Circenses, were by men in old time solemnized.
Also to Genius the guide and director of secret plots, they erected an altar in the great Cirque. Over and besides these, this Cirque contained three other altars: one to the Great gods; a second to the Penates; and a third to those gods of heaven and earth, from whom all things arise and have their beginning. These gods abovesaid, the Romanes called Genij, Penates, Presidents, and keepers of the citie.
Liber, Libera, Ceres, and Proserpina, had their temples about this place called Circus Max. which Posthumius when hee warred against the Latines, vowed: and the same man upon his returne with happie victorie, built and dedicated them accordingly.
To conclude, in the same compasse were the temples of the Sunne, and of Flora.
Moreover, a temple there stood neere this Circus, unto Venus: which Q. Fabius Gurges the Consull, caused to be made of the money raised upon the fines of certaine wives that were condemned for playing false with their husbands.
Lucinus dedicated a temple to Iuventus without the great cirque, not farre from that place.
In like sort, Mercurie had a temple neere this Circus Max.
In Plinies daies there was seene in the Cirque Max the image of Fortuna Scia.


CHAP. XIII. The Naumachie of the great Cirque.
NAumachie is a place so called (...), i. for that in it they used to skirmish with ships. For there were places digged deepe like ponds, where were represented some shews of navall fight, for the exercise of the Romane youth, that they might know how to charge and annoy the enemie at sea also. And these kind of sports were exhibited and practised not in the Cirques onely, but also in the Amphitheaters.


CHAP. XIIII. The two Obelisks of the Cirque Max.
THe Obeliske (as Marcellinus testifieth) was a very huge and rough stone rising like a spire or broch, by little and little to a mightie height: and that it might resemble a raine or sunne-beame, it groweth smaller and smaller in fashion of a steeple, with foure sides or edges, and in the top it is very narrow, and there made plaine and smoth right artificially. In most of them are engraven and cut certaine Hieroglyphicke notes, and namely such as testified either the founder thereof, or else other memorable matters. Of these figures and characters, the same Marcellinus speaketh in this wise: Moreover the infinite varietie of formes and characters, called Hieroglyphicks which all about we see engraven, the auncient authoritie of the first learning did set forth and marke so. Thus much saith he. Now they drew and portraied therein divers and sundrie formes and shapes of living beasts and birds, and oftentimes devised new and strange resemblances, whereby they reserved and kept for their posteritie whatsoever was memorable and worth remembrance. This manner continued not in Aegypt onely, but also in other parts of the world, untill such time as letters were found: and then this was given over. At the first one letter emplied a whole word, and one word stood for a whole sentence. But hereof yee shall find much in authors that have written of these characters. Moreover, as Plinie witnesseth, these Obelisks were made of the stone Simithes. Them they erected and consecrated to the gods, and principally to the Sunne: and therefore in hewing and cutting them, they resembled the sunne-beames, as wee said before. The first that ever devised these Obelisks, was king Methres. At Rome were none of these Obelisks wrought and cut out, but brought thither from other parts, and so for beautifull shew and to wonder at were erected. Therefore in the Cirque aforesaid, called Maximus, two Obelisks were seene, one standing upright aloft, fourescore foot high: the other lying along in the Naumachie; it carried in length a hundred and thirtie foot and eight ynches, besides the base or footstall, which Augustus translated to Rome out of Hicropolis, a cittie of Aegypt: but when he would have set it up on end, it fell downe and brake in twain. This was hewen out of the quarrey, by king Samnefreteus, in whose reigne Pythagoras was in Aegypt.


CHAP. XV. The arch of Sertinius in the Cirque. The place of the Tuberoes in the Cirque. The stewes, the house of Pompey, and the fountaine of Iuturna.
SErtinius having made conquest of Spaine, brought great store of money into the citie chamber: and of the spoiles taken from enemies, hee reared two arches; the one in the beast-marker, called Forum boarium; the other in the great shew-place, named Circus maximus. Vpon these arches he set golden images, and other ornaments to beautifie them.
The house and familie of the Helij was none of the welthiest, but yet of great credit and estimation with the Romans. Among whome there was so great concord and unitie, that 16 of them at one time dwelt and agreed well togither in one and the same house. For their singular prowesse and worthie

acts, they were allowed by the Senat and people of Rome a scaffold by themselves in all the shew places and Theatres, to behold all sights and maistries of activitie.
About the Circus Maximus stood the stewes and brothel-houses, where sometimes harlots and naughtic packs kept, such as made profession of whoredome. But this place was afterwards laid even with the ground, and is now a void place.
The house of Pompeius was neere the Circus Maximus, and therin was the statue of Hercules erected.
The fountaine or well of the nimph Iuturna, is yet (as some thinke) to be seen, boiling up in the Velabrum neere the common sinke or vault called Maxima.


CHAP. XVI. The Septizonium of Severus.
THere should follow by course after the great Cirque, the sixt part of the cittie, namely, the mount Coelius. But because wee meet with the Septizonium of Severus, and the arch of Constantine (before wee come to Coelius) betweene it and the mount Palatine, some thing would first bee spoken of them, especially being so excellent building as they are. The Septizonium therefore is a mightie mount or terrace raised from the plaine ground foure square, compassed about with seven circles, that is to say, courses or rewes of pillers one above another, yeelding as it were as many porches or galleries: and in this order they are disposed, that the higher the pillers stand, the lesser and shorter they be. In the mids hereof, foure wals arise, conteining within them certaine holow places like cabinets. In the top thereof were bestowed and laid the ashes of kings and emperours deceased. Iulius Capitolinus nameth this mount Septodium, for the Greekes call places much frequented, wherunto many waies lead, Heptodia of (...), i. seven, and (...), i. a way. Plinie calleth it Septisolium, of seven losts or solars. For in every course thereof the columnes meet togither in the head with marbles transomes. Other beams there be besides, reaching within forth from them to the mount it selfe, so as every such course yeelded a stage like a gallerie or walking place. Two of these Septizonia we read there were at Rome, to wit, the one of Titus in the street called Via nova, of right great antiquitie, not farre from this of Severus: of which at this day there is to be seene no shew or token at all. The other of Severus, whereof there remaine still, overagainst S. Gregories church three Zones or girdles (as it were) of curious worke; for the beautie and statelinesse of the pillars worth the seeing, and pleasant to behold. Reared it was in the broad street called Appia, and built by Severus himselfe. That which now is left thereof, leaneth out so, as it seemeth ever and anone readie to fall.


CHAP. XVII. The triumphant arch of Constantine the emperour.
THese triumphant arches were erected for them onely, who having subdued whole provinces or conquered forraine nations, and obtained brave and fortunate victories, seemed worthie of triumph, and thereupon they were called Triumphant arches. Vpon these arches for the perpetuall and everlasting memoriall of acts atchieved, were cut and engraven the portraitures of the very places where the warre was performed; the resemblances of fabrickes and raunged battels, if the service was on land; and of ships, if it were at sea. Howbeit, untill the time of the emperors, no man raised any arches, and in Plinies daies they began first to be built: so as, that of Titus is of all others most auncient. For before their age, only statues and trophees were set up. But in processe of time following, many of these arches were raised: among which, that of Constantine is to be seen above the rest, at the corner of the mount Palatine, neere the Theatre, beautified with triumphall ornaments, and remaineth at this day in a manner sound and whole without any hurt. This arch Constantine erected for himselfe, upon the victorie which he obtained over Maxentius at the bridge Milvius.


CHAP. XVIII. Coelius the mount, and Coeliolus.
THe mount Coelius in old time was named Querquetulanus, for the number of okes there growing: but afterwards it was so called of one Coelius Vibennus, a duke of the Tuscane nation, unto who^ the Romans graunted a place in that mountaine to inhabit. For when as the Tuscane people, by reason of their multitude, and the strong fenced places which they held, were suspected, co^manded they were to remove into a street which of themselves was named Thuscus. But such as were without suspition, kept the hill Coeliolus or Coelicolus, i. the little Coelius; a place where sometime the goddesse Diana was worshipped: and at this day there standeth the church consecrated to S. Evangelista the virgine. This mountaine afterwards by Tiberius was named Augustus.



CHAP. XIX. The temples of Faunus, Venus, and Cupid: the court Hostilia: the forraine campe: the house of the Lateranes: the pallace of Constantine, and Casorianus: the horseman statue of L. Verius.
VPon the ridge or side of the mount Coelius there standeth a round church, now patronised by S. Stephen, but hallowed and consecrated in times past to Faunus. Faunus hee was called, (...), i. for that hee foretold things to come, by voice and not by signes. The Albanes in old time inhabited that part of the hill, where at this day the church stands of S. Marie Dominicke.
In the hill Coelius stood sometimes the temples of Venus and Cupid, not farre from the gate Naevia, where now is the church of the holy crosse in Hierusalem.
The court Hostilia was in two places of Rome, the one in the common Forum, hard by the temple of Peace, where K. Hostilius first dwelt, the other in that place, where afterwards the church of Saint Iohn and Saint Paule was built.
A place there was in the mount Coelius called Castra Peregrina, toward the Northeast and the Esquiliae, where at this time the church of the foure crowned Saints, is frequented.
The house of the Lateranes also was built upon the same mount, at the pallace or stately hall of the Lateranes.
The pallace of Flavius Constantinus, neere the house of the Lateranes, stood between the gates Caelimontana and Gabiusa.
The pallace of Caesorianus was built at the gate Naevia, and the church of S. Holy-crosse in Hierusalem.
In the street called Lateranensis, stood the statue on horseback of L. Verius. Some say it was made for M. Aurelius Antonius, others, for Septimius Severus.


CHAP. XX. Of the Amphitheatres, and first of that of Statilius Taurus.
NOw it followeth to speake of the Amphitheatre of Statilius Taurus, but before we write thereof, it would bee breefely shewed what an Amphitheatre is. Now this word Amphitheatrum commeth (...), i. of looking round about: for two prospects joined in one, make the forme of an hemisphere or halfe circle. Some thinke, that Titus devised the Amphitheatre first, but some avow and prove, that C. Caesar built the first that ever was in Mars field: but by the authoritie of Suetonius it is proved, that Statilius reared one Amphitheatre before Titus.
In these Amphitheatres were prises and rewards propounded to them that would fight with beasts. Condemned persons likewise yeelded there to the eies of men a horrible and fearefull sight to behold, for thither were those prisoners brought by the Lictours, within that enclosure to wrestle and maintaine conflict with wild beasts.
Moreover, the emperours before they tooke their journey to any war or expedition, exhibited unto the people in these Amphitheatres shewes of sword-fencers at the sharpe for life and death, to the end, that the souldiours should be acquainted with fight, and learne not to be affraid of weapons, of wounds, no nor of bloud shed, nor to draw backe and avoid the perils of warre to come, for the noveltie and strangenesse thereof. A great part of Statilius his Amphitheatrum, is yet to bee seene neere the wals, at S. Crosses church in Hierusalem. And at the same time hee built it, when Augustus Caesar encouraged and exhorted the cittizens of Rome, every man according to his abilitie to beautifie and adorne the citie.


CHAP. XXI. The water conduits why they were devised, by what meanes waters were conveighed into the citie, to what purpose, by whom first, and how many.
THe citie of Rome in the beginning, as hath beene said in the first booke, was but narrow of compasse, and contained within small bounds: and the people for commoditie and store of water, setled upon the river Tyber. But as the citie daily more and more encreased, necessarie it was that some should build them houses and habitation in one place, some in another, farther from the river: whereupon distressed it was for want of water, which was to be fetched so farre off, and that with great paine and labour: besides, those places which had no current of running waters to wash away the filth, and carie it into Tyber, became (by the noisome aire which was infected with their lothsome and stinking smels) unholsome, and subject many times to the pestilence. Prince Nerva therefore

(the emperour) undertook to redresse and remedie this mischiefe (and others after him by his example) and devised by the wit and subtile invention of men, conduit pipes, to bring water into those parts of the citie which otherwise had none. And this verily they did two waies, the one by arched worke, when by digging certain rills or riverets, the water was carried levell above ground, forced by certain weights, ballases, and counterpeises: the other by vaults under the ground, bringing water into the cittie by secret under-waies, through pipes, spouts, and rockes. By which means it came to passe, that in the citie every where, such store there was of water, that each house almost had a well in it. But especially at the bottome and foot of the hill Quirinalis, and all the side thereof, in the street Patricius, Suburra, the Latine way, the Aventine, the Iewes street, and in many other places: so as in this our age full it is of such waterworkes under the ground. Now were these waters conveighed from divers places, and some conduits especially, such as were devised by arches, were higher or lower than other. In the beginning and all the former times, there were (by report) five heights or depths: The highest of all was new Anio; next, the waters Claudiae; in the third place the water Iulia; Tepula in the fourth; then Martia, and after it old Anio, the levell or current whereof, Virgo followeth and Appia, and the lowest of all others, Alsietina, which serves that quarter of the citie beyond Tyber, and other low places built upon the plaine. These waters were first brought into certaine great conduit-heads, and from thence they were by a certaine measure distributed by the conduit officer, and so ran into places appointed. Now that great conduit-head was called Castellum, which receiveth first the common water, and afterwards sendeth it out into divers and sundry parts: and the keeper or officer that overseeth it, is named Castellarius. There were besides levell or above ground, certaine cisternes or receptacles of water, which kept water to serve curriers, fullers, and other such artificers for their necessarie use. Over these waters were appointed certaine wardens and keepers, and a set number of labourers and workemen to see thereto. Finally, a greevous punishment was to bee inflicted upon them that either marred and hurt the conduit-heads, or derived and conveighed water to other places than the lawes and publicke ordinances, or the Censors or Aediles permitted; or tooke more water than at the first was allowed them. Appius Claudius (by report) was the first man that brought water into the citie by arched worke. But of the Romane waters, of the conduits, and other matters ordained thereabout, of the manner of conveighance, the instruments, measures, and weights thereto belonging, read Frontinus, who of these things hath written truly and at large. Also have recourse to Sext. Ruffus, who of the same argument hath made a good treatise. In the time of Frontinus there were but nine waters and no more brought into the citie, namely, Appia, old Anio, Martia, Tepula, Iulia, Virgo, Alsietana, called also Augusta, Claudia, and new Anio. Ruffus reckoneth ten more, whereby it appeareth, that he wrote long after Frontinus.


CHAP. XXII. The conduit or conveighance of Aqua Claudia.
CAligula began two conduits, but left them unfinished when he died, Claudius the emperour of famous memorie, tooke them in hand againe, and in most magnificent manner made an end. To the one of them, namely which beginning at the sources or springs called Caeruleius and Curtius, was drawne to the citie, he gave the name Aqua Claudia: the other, for difference fake of the two conduits of Anio, he called his own, or the new Anio; and distinct it was from that which is named old Anio. The water Claudia therefore was brought from the gate Naevia, along the side of the mount Coelius into the Aventine. A part also thereof Caracalla derived into the Capitoll hill.


CHAP. XXIII. Of those things which now in mount Coelius are not knowne where they stood.
BRutus the Consull having expelled Tarquine, built a temple to the goddesse Carna in mount Coelius, to which goddesse also, upon the accomplishment of his praier and vow, hee offered sacrifice. They in old time supposed that she had power over the vitall members of the bodie, and to her tuition they committed those parts, and that shee should preserve them safe, they did sacrifice upon her altars, and presented oblations.
Agrippina likewise began to build a temple to Claudius Caesar, which after her death Vespasian finished, and Nero utterly destroied to the very foundation: this also was erected in the same hill.
Mamurra Formianus, maister of Caesars Carpenters in Fraunce, was the first Romane that adorned and set out his house which hee had in Coelius hill, with marble rough-cast. Moreover, the house of Claudius Centimales stood upon the said hill. Also the house of the Tetritici, who were two of the thirtie tyrants. Likewise the house of Iunius Senatour, wherein, when as all other edifices and buildings upon that mountaine were consumed with fire, the image of Tyberius remained unhurt. There also

it is said of Titus Claudius Clyptus, the maker of hymnes. In this hill was the great Macellum, the cave or denne of Cyclops, the Spoliarium, and the armorie.


CHAP. XXIIII.The waies Appia, and Nova. The temples of Isis, Vertue, Honour, Quirinus or Mars, and the river Almo.
NOw follow those places which are worth the remembrance upon the hill Coelius toward the Aventine. And therefore the way or street called Appia we meet with first, which taking the beginning from the arch of Constantine, reacheth as far as Brundusium: and because afterwards it was paved and repaired by Cavacalla, it tooke the name of Nova, i. the new causey. But that which properly is called Nova, beginneth at the gate of Palatine, and along the foot of the Palatine hill, over the great Cirque called Maximus, stretcheth out as farre as to the lowest fish-poole, where now standeth the church of S. Sixtus. Many other streets there were, called Nova. Take heed therfore that in their names you be not deceived, and least yee thinke that to be spoken of one, which oftentimes was ment of many.
Betweene the church of Sixtus, the Fish-pooles, and the ruines of the Antonian baines, there was the church of Isis Antenodorica, built by Antonius Bassianus.
The temple of Honor and Vertue, not farre from the street Appia, was vowed by the father of Marcus Marcellus at Clastidium in Gaule, and seventeene yeers after, dedicated by his sonne Marcellus.
Two temples there were of Mars, one called the temple of Quirinus within the cittie, neere to the gate of that name, the other upon the way Appia without the citie.
The river Almo runneth along the way Appia, under the foot of the Aventine into the Tyber. It beginneth ten miles from the citie in the territorie Marinum; which commonly afterwards they called the river of Appius. In this river the goddesse named the mother of the gods, was every yeere wont to be washed by her priests called Galli.


CHAP. XXV Of bathes and baines in generall.
THermae properly hath the signification from a Greeke word, (...), which betokeneth hot. But wee use to call those places which either having hote waters, or without them are heat with a stuph, appointed either to wash and bath, or to sweat, by the Greeke name Thermae. That the Romans used in old to bath and wash themselves oftener, than we now adaies; is testified by many and divers authorities of writers: and for sundrie causes they were wont so to doe [as yet the manner is amongst us] namely to scoure away sweat, or to wash dust off, in like sort for health and pleasure: wherby it came to passe, that every man, if he were but of mean wealth, had in manner a privat bath or hot house by himselfe: but the same were devised and contrived after diverse and sundry sorts. For many publick baths there were ordained for the co^mon people to use at their pleasure. Serv. Orata invented first and made the pendant or hanging baths. But after that roiot and superfluitie abounded in excesse, the bathing houses were built with wonderfull cost and magnificence, so as they seemed to keepe no meane nor measure: as appeareth by the very reliques and ruines therof at this day. And those places where they built these baines and hote houses, they called Thermae; which contained within them divers places, and an infinit number of roumes, bearing sundrie names, and serving to as many uses. For some were appointed to heat water (and those were round built) from whence hote water was let into the baines, not to them only that were on the ground beneath, but also to those which were pendant and hanging aloft: which water after they had done washing, being foule and good for nothing, was conveighed by certaine pipes and spouts into sinkes. They had other roumes also called Apodyteria, wherein they that were to goe into the bath, put off their cloths and laid them by. In the same places were court-yards, having about them most spatious porches or cloisters, built with arched and embowed roufes most stately; wherein were marble pillers, garnished with divers and sundry colours. In like manner pavements of stone, and walls seeled and hung with marble tables. Also close walking galleries, groves, and swimming places, all for the pleasure and contentment of the people, where they might refresh and sollace themselves. These delights so drew and allured mens minds, as that they would wash oftentimes in one day, yea, and in these bains the princes were wont to sup and bath with other persons whosoever, as it fell out. They had besides private bathes to themselves most sumptuously built, and gorgiously set out. And namely Antoninus Cavacalla, at his owne charges edified certaine baths, which by his name were called Thermae Antoninae. The huge ruines therof are yet to bee seene: some of the pillers still stand, others are throwne down. Some say, they were begun only by Antoninus, but finished and adorned by Severus. They stood about the foot of the Aventine, neer the streetway leading to Ardea, where now is the church of S. Balbina. Vnder these baths ther stood a most goodly palace, built by the same Antoninus, but at this day there is scarce any example or shew thereof.




THE FIFTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. The aetymologie of the mount Aventine.
THe Aventine is of the Romane hils the fourth in order. The compasse and forme whereof, because wee have alreadie described in the first booke, needlesse here it is to repeat. But it remaineth to declare, how it came so called, what temples of the gods, and what other edifices be therein. The Aventine therfore, some think, tooke the name of birds which were wont to flie unto this hill, there to nestle : others, of aAventinus. king of the Albanes, slaine and buried there. There bee againe who suppose, that the Sabines, who being by the Romans enfranchised citizens, there settled and made abode, gave the name to this hill, of Avantes, a river in their province. Varro affirmeth that it was so called of a ferriage: For as it hath been said a little before, this mount was divided from the rest, and from the citie by certaine lakes and the Tyber, whereupon, they that would goe to it, used to ferrie over in small punts or whirries. Some guesse, that it came to have that name of resort unto it, for that the Latines used in great frequencie to repaire unto the holie temple of Diana there. Remurius also it was named of Remus who chose a place in the top thereof to sit, for to take the flight of birds for Augurie, and in the end was there enterred: Romulus therfore commaunded that it should not be inhabited, because hee would have had it wholly consecrated to his brother. This hill, Ancus Martius afterward compassed with a wall, and granted leave to as many as would, there to dwel: howsoever there be some that thinke it stood void untill the time of Claudius the emperour of happie memorie, as being an ominous place and unfortunat, by reason of foule birds that haunted it, and therefore not to bee received within the walls. But the truth is, when the Romanes grew populous, they joined this mountaine also to the rest of the citie.


CHAP. II.
The temples of Diana, Dea bona, Hercules Victor, queene Iuno, Moneta, Luna, Victorie, Minerva, and Libertie. The altar of Iupiter Elicius.
IN the top of mount Aventine toward the Tyber, there standeth the church of S. Sabina, that very place where aforetime was the holy chappell of Diana. The feast and holiday of bondslaves was wont to bee kept at Rome the thirteenth day of August, for upon that day, Servius Tullius, whose mother was a bond-woman, consecrated a temple to Diana in Aventine, and ordained it to be a feastivall day for bondservants, as who were patronised by Diana. Some think that this chappell was built by K. Ancus of that mony which the citizens conferred and contributed, who lately had been translated thither from Politorium. This temple was common unto all the Latines, whereupon oftentimes they resorted thereunto.
Very neere unto that place stood the church of Saint Marie, called Aventina. But in times past the place was consecrated to the goddesse Bona, i. good. For Claudia a vestall virgine or Nun, built a chappell pell unto her in the honour of Fatua,or rather daughter. sister of Faunus, a most chast maid.
Vpon the same banke and brow of the hill, where at this day S. Alexius church standeth, was sometime time the temple of Hercules Conquerour. And neere unto it, another of Iuno Regina, built by Camillus with the pillage gotten in Veij. In the ruinate place of Decius the emperours baines, there was a temple also of Hercules, where the Christians afterwards consecrated a church to Saint Prisca.
On the side of the Aventine hill, stood the chappell likewise of the Moone, as Ovid dooth witnesse.
Thus much of those buildings in the Aventine, which had a certain place thereupon in our knowledge: the rest following were doubtlesse in the Aventine, but in what part there of they stood, it is unknowne after so long time, and namely the temple of Victorie built by the Arcadians, and in honor of whom they offer sacrifice yeerely. Minerva and Iuno had their temples there in the same hill, by the testimonie of approoved authours. To Libertie a temple was built and dedicated by the father of Tib. Gracchus, with the money taken for fines and forfeitures. The cloister belonging to that temple, was by Aelius Patus and Cornelius Cethegus Censors, repaired and enlarged, and last of all by Pollio also re-edified. Now this Saint Libertie the Romanes honored above all others, and in defence and maintenance thereof, they ever shewed themselves most resolute and constant.
Vpon the same hill, Numa reared the altar of Iupiter Elicius, so called ab eliciendo, i. of fetching out secrets and hidden mysteries.
In like manner there stood an old altar of Murcea in that hill. Now they named Venus Murcea, of the Myrtle tree consecrated unto her: or as some interprete, because Venus, immoderate and excessive, maketh a man to be Murcus or Murcidus, i. sluggish, slothfull, idle, and good for nothing.
The temple of Iuno Moneta was likewise built and dedicated upon that hill.
Camillus in the same mount consecrated a chappell to dame Matuta.
The wood or grove also called Laurentum or Laurentina, consecrated unto Iupiter, was there: in which, emperor Valentinian [the second] son of Constantine, and Galla Placidia was slain, as Plinie witnesseth.


CHAP. III.
Cacus, and his hole or cave.
C Acus, by report of the poets, was the son of Vulcane, whom they beleeved in old time to breath out of his mouth fire and smoke. This Cacus infelted the places neere unto him with robbing and spoiling. But more probable it is, that he was a most leaud and the evish servant of Evander, and therefore the Arcadians called him (...), i. naught. A cave he haunted, as by very good conjectures is certainely gathered, in Aventine toward Tyber, overagainst the church of S. Marie Aventine, whereas the river runneth neerest to the hill, and whereas there hangeth over, a vast and huge craggie rocke, as fit a place as might be, to make a starting hole and cave for such an one, and neere it is to the gate Trigemina. Him when Hercules had killed and sacrificed, he reared an altar unto Iupiter Inventor, neere to the said cave or denne.


CHAP. IIII.
The Armilustrium, and some other things in generall.
ARmilustrium was a place where soldiors shewed themselves and their armour, and where they used to muster; where also in their armes they sacrificed and did service to their gods, with resounding lowd trumpets. Some would have it to be in the Aventine, others in the Cirque Maximus: but that matters not much. Hither the souldiors used to repair when they were returned from warre, and here they laid up their harnish and weapons. For armour of their owne and in their privat custodie the Romanes had not, to use in the warres: but delivered all up to be kept safe either in the Armilustrium, or the tower and castle upon the rocke Tarpcia.
In Aventine, neere the temple of Iuno Regina, were the Scalae Gemoniae, that is to say, a steep place with a downefall; where wicked malefactours, drawne with a crooke, were most miserably executed and killed.
There stood sometime upon this hill, neere the temple of Diana, the house of Phyllis.
A part of this mountaine was called Remuria; which Remus chose to dwell in: and being there by his brother Romulus committed to earth, he gave it his name.
The Senate and people of Rome built in this mountaine, to the honor of Decius the emperour, the bathes called Decianae, and others also neere them, named Varianae. Moreover, the baines of Trajane were in this place, where now the vineyard of Frauncis Albertinus is.
The caves of Faunus and Picus also, were in the Aventine, as fables report. Italus likewise dwelt in the Aventine, as M. Cato recordeth.
The temples and edifices of this hill all in generall, were (by report) burnt in the daies of Tyberius, sometime emperour.


CHAP. V.
The sheard hill, and other things within that compasse.
THe plaine and levell ground betweene Aventine, Tyber, and the citie wall, hath foure sides, but uneven; in which there riseth a little hill, commonly called Testaceus. The whole compasse hereof will hardly bee measured with two thousand pases; the height is about 160 foot. It resembleth in shew the forme of a gourd; and the one side of it which regardeth the Tyber, is broader than the other. Neere to this hill, was the glassemakers street (and the potters) also the carpenters habitation. And no man doubteth, but hereupon arose and grew the mount called Testaceus. For in old time, at Rome and elsewhere, as also in some places now adaies, much use there was commonly of earthen vessels made by potters: which even by this may bee certainely collected, for that in Numaes daies, there were foure colledges or societies of potters: and these made of clay, not only vessels, but also the images of the gods, and ornaments to beautifie and set out their temples: pillars and wals were by potters worke seeled in the outside, nay, the very dead bodies were bestowed in cophins of baked clay. Since

then, in so great store of earthen vessels and potters worke, much of necessitie must needs be broken, which if they had been cast abroad in the corne field and pasture grounds, would have made all barren and unfruitfull; againe, if they had been throwne into the water, would in time have choked up the channell of the current, and forced the river to swell and overflow the bankes: Numa therefore commaunded this kind of workmen to dwell in one place, and gave order to sling all that was good for nothing, as filth, rifferaffe, and broken sheards, into one place: wherupon, in processe of time arose a mount which they called Testaceus. Among these potters there was a place hallowed to Venus Myrtea, as we find in some records.


CHAP. VI.
The Pyramides: the sepulchre of C. Ceslius, and the garners of the people of Rome.
THe Pyramides were huge towers foure square, rising up in height, sharpe like to a flambe, whereof they have the name (...), i. of fire. But Stephanus supposeth they were so called, (...), i. of wheat, because into that place where they were erected, wheat was brought out of all Aegypt, which made a great dearth of corne. These at the beginning were reared by the kings of Aegypt, thereby to spend and consume their superfluous wealth and substance, whereof they had no use; for feare least if they had gathered good, and heaped up a deale of gold, silver, and other riches, they should therby have given occasion unto some for to lie in await to take their lives away: also, that the common people should not live in idlenesse. Afterwards, at Rome likewise they bestowed their money thereupon, for to make the world wonder, and to shew their vaine-glorie. There is yet one of them to bee seene, standing upright at the gate Hostiensis, enclosed within a wall. And commonly it is said, that it was the monument or sepulchre of C. Cestius, one of the seven Septemvirs, called Epulones. But Blondus would seeme to prove, that it was the place for burial of the whole colledge and societie of those Septemvirs Epulones. Now were they called Epulones, who had the power to ordaine and make feasts and solemne bankets to the gods.
It is writte^, that there were 140 garners of the people of R. between the mount Testaceus and Tybre.
In the same compasse of ground neere Tyber, was the lake or poole Hylerna.
Some also affirme that there stood sometime in that quarter a little towne called Capena.


CHAP. VII.
The sweating steeple, and the image of Iupiter.
BY course, the Esquiliae should next follow: but because it lieth between the way Labicana on the Southeast side, and the valley (which for the breath of 400 foot encloseth that way) on the VVest; wee will rehearse what memorable things soever there bee in the Labicane way and the valey aforesaid, before we come to the mount Esquiliae. In our returne therfore to the triumphall arch of Constantine, whereof we spake before, we will as we go, discourse of the rest. Neer then unto this arch, there appeareth the halfe rundle or circumference, of an old steeple made of bricke, which Victor calleth the sweating steeple: for that the report goeth, how sometime there gushed water out of it; whereby the common people standing to behold the games and plaies in the next seaffolds of the Theatre untill they were a thirst, quenched their drought.
In the top hereof stood the brasen image of Iupiter, because their auncestours in old time were wont when they made solemne leagues to use the image of Iupiter. But for that it was a trouble either to carie with them or to send for the said image, especially if they were to contract and establish any accords in farre remote countries, therefore in steed of the complete image they took the seepter only; which might betoken Iupiter the K. of the gods, as wel as if he had been there present fall and whole.


CHAP. VIII.
The Amphitheatre of Titus Vespasianus. The temples of Fortune and Quies.
BEtween the two hils Coelius and Esquilioe was there an Amphitheatre. This, Vespasian built first, and afterward Titus his sonne dedicated and beautified it with the baines, built neere unto it with right great celeritie and speed. This Amphitheatre was commonly called Colosseum, of Neroes Colossus, which was set up in the porch of Neroes house. In the same place of the Theatre were the pooles beforetime of Nero, whereof we will speake hereafter in this very book. This Amphitheatrum they called also Arena, i. the Sand-floore, because the ground was spread over and laid with sand, that the wrestlers might fall softer and take lesse hurt, also that the bloud should be drunk up, to the end that the sword-fencers in combate might not bee afraid upon the sight thereof, and so with lesse cheerefulnesse and courage set upon their concurrent: and last of all, that the champions, whose bodies were annointed with oyle, being bestrewed with the sand, might with more case take hold one of another. The whole Theatre and place it selfe within, (which during those daies of the games was covered over with tent cloth) would receive eightie thousand men. But here of see more in Plinie, Pomponius Latus, and other writers of the Romane acts.
Fulrius Flaccus built unto Fortune (fast by this Amphitheatre) so goodly a temple, as for state and magnificence there was hardly another in all Rome comparable unto it. Besides it, there were many other chappels at Rome consecrated to Fortune.
Likewise a chappell of Quietnesse and rest, was built in the broad street Labicana.


CHAP. IX.
Of Esquiliae.
THe mount Esquiliae, as well by Vairo as others, is devided into many parts, and each part therof tooke name of those captaines who in times past before the cittie of Rome was built, there inhabited. For one was called Cispius, another Oppius, and a third, Septius. But hereof Vairo writeth at large. The posteritie following chaunged those names, as we shall hereafter heare. Some thinke that Esquiliae tooke the name of Excubiae, i. watch and ward. For when Romulus had no very great trust in Tatius, he used to have a standing watch by night, for feare hee should bee secretly forlaied and killed, or els turned out of his kingdome. Others suppose it was so named of foulers, who there used to cast forth chasse and such refuse of light corne, to beguile and catch the poore birds.
The side of the hill toward the broad way Labicana, which now lieth between the churches of the fortie martyrs, of S. Clement, S. Peter in Vinculis, and S. Martin, was called by the name of Carinae, as Livie seemeth to testifie. From that part therefore, because it was first inhabited, we shall doe well to begin our treatise.


CHAP. X.
The Carinae, the old Curia and the new.
THese Carinae, according to their modell and forme were houses like to keeles of ships, standing within the temple of Tellus. Their ruines are yet to be seene neere the church of S. Peter in Vinculis, i. in bonds.
Neere to that place was the old Curia built by Romulus: but the new was erected neere to Compitum Fabricium, i. the Quarrefour or crosse way of Fabricius.


CHAP. XI.
The baines of Titus and Philip: the statue of Laocoon: the palace of Vespasian: the houses of B^lbinus and Pompey.
THere remaine yet to be seene the tokens and prints (as it were) of Titus the emperours baines, not farre from the church of S. Martin in the hils: for there bee great cisternes to receive water, which at this day be called Septem Salae, according to the number of those cisternes: and so far reached the house of Nero, called Au^ea, i. golden.
Not farre from thence, in the yeere of our Lord 1506, one Foelix a citizen of Rome, chaunced to find in his vineyard the statue of Laocoon, made by those excellent workemen, Agesander, Polydorus and Athenodorus, Rhodians, who with wonderfull cunning portraied and cut most artificially in one entire stone, Laocoon himselfe, his children, and the admirable winding and foldings of the serpents about them. And now at this day it is to be seene at the Vaticane, in the palace of Vespasian, neere the said baines of Titus. See more of this you may in Plinie. As for the storie it selfe, most learnedly and lively it is set out by Virgill, and there to be read. Behind these baines of Titus, betweene East and North, the ruines of others besides, are thought verily to be those of Philip the emperour.
Above the baines of Titus, some set Hadrians baines; for that this place is yet called Hadrianelus.
By the testimonie of Lampridius it appeareth that Balbinus his house was in Carinae. There also was Pompeies house, in which Lenaus his freed-servant taught grammer.


CHAP. XII.
The cliffe Virbius, the house of Servius Tullius, the golden one of Nero, and that of Virgil. Mecaenas his tower and hortyards: the temples of Fortune and Felicitie.
THat part of the Esquiliae which overlooketh the church of Saint Laurence in Fontana, is named Clivus Virbius: there also is the grove Fagutalis, wherein stood the mansion house of Servius Tullius.
Neroes house, called Golden, tooke up all that space, which from that quarter wherein now Saint Gregories church standeth, lay betweene Constantines arch, the Colosseum, the Carinae, Esquiliae, and Mecaenas hortyards. His house before was in his owne fire where with he burnt the citie, consumed also: and when he reedified it anew, hee called it Aurea. The spatious largenesse whereof was such, that it had about it, three porches of a mile compasse apeece. It contained also a poole like another sea: walled it was about, and resembled a very citie. There were to it belonging, holts and hamlets countrey-like, vineyards, pastures, woods, and beasts both tame and wild, of all sorts. The house and the porches were double guilded all over, and set out with pretious stones. And in one word there was nothing wanting, that might serve for pleasure or prodigall riot.
In the entrie of this house there stood an huge image giant like, called a Colossus, 120 foot high. After Neroes death, dedicated it was to the Sunne, and then changed the name. Now men thinke it was called Colossus, after his name who was the first deviser of all such statues.
VVithin the same house, Nero included also the chappell of Fortune. This goddesse being made of the stone Phengites, when all the dores were shut, gave light to the whole house within; such raies of radiant brightnesse casteth this kind of stone from it. This goddesse, Servius Tullus first consecrated, and of Segetes, i. standing corne, called her Seia.
At the baines of Diocletian, there is a street-way leading up to S. Antonies church in Esquiliae, where stood sometime a most noble towne of Mecaenas, within his owne hortyards: for those most pleasant hortyards were in the plaine of Esquiliae. Here-within was Priapus worshipped: upon which ill favoured idoll, Virgil hath plaied much in verse.
Neere the hortyards of Mecanas stood the said Virgils house.
The temple of Felicitie, which tooke up a part of that plot where Neroes Gold-house should stand, was by him burnt.
Above those gardens or hortyards of Mecanas, was raised a wonderfull peece of worke, called Aggeres Tarquinij Superbi, i. Tarquinius bulwarkes.


CHAP. XIII.
The pallace of Sisiminus: the plaine and market place of Esquiliae: the grove Querquetulanus: also that of Iuno Lacinia, and of Mars: the chappell and altar of ill fortune.
THe pallace of Sisiminus in Esquiliae, stood (as they say) where the church of Saint Marie the greater now is.
The plaine or field Esquilius, neere the tower of Mecaenas (called Intermontes) i. among the hills, is betweene the foresaid bulwarkes and the citie wall. This plot of ground was in times past called Foculus; because dead bodies were therin burnt. But when the stinking steeme thereof was noisome to the citie, the citizens and Augustus Caesar by a generall consent, gave the said field unto Mecaenas, where he made his goodly hortyards and most daintie gardens. Of which, Cicero with other, speaketh much.
In like mauner, the market place Esquilinum, was in the same hill.
That side of the Esquiliae which looketh toward the grove Querquetulanus, had in it the grove of Iuno Lacinia.
In the same Esquiliae, was the chappell and altar of Ill fortune.
In the way which goeth to the gate Interaggeres, even in the verie bulwarks or rampiers of Tarquinus, stood the arch of Gordian made of marble, garnished also and set out with ornaments of triumph. Of the ruines thereof, was S. Gregories church in Damasus built.


CHAP. XIIII.
The cliffe Suburranus: the arch of Galienus: the shambles or flesh market of Livia, or as some would have it, Livianum: the Praenestine way, and the Trophees of Marius.
AT the top or upper end of Suburra, was the Clivus Suburranus, so called of Suburra, yeelding an easie ascent from thence up into the Esquiliae.
Anon you meet with the triumphall arch of Galien the emperour (where now standeth the church of S. Vitus) making a goodly shew of the Tiburtine stone, whereof it was made. Neere unto it was the shambles or market place called Marcellum Livia^, or Livianum. This, as some think, tooke the name of one Macellus; who being a notorious thiefe, and practising much to steale in the cittie, was in the end apprehended, and by the Censors condemned: and his house being seized as confiscate to the citie, was converted to a place wherein they sold meat and all other victuals; and so it kept still the name (as is said) of Macellum. Some are of opinion, that the said house was pulled

downe, and another built in the ruines thereof, which reteined the name still of the former.
From hence beginneth the port-way Praenestina, and leadeth to the gate Esquilina.
In this way you shall meet on the right hand with a huge bank of brick, halfe ruinat; upon which were erected two Trophees of marble; that is to say, certain posts [like Quintins] standing upright with spoiles of enemies hanging thereupon; and they resembled men that were taken prisoners. It is said, that these Trophees were set up by Marius in his triumph for the Cimbrian warre: which when Sylla had cast downe and overthrowne, C. Caesar (afterwards Dictator) erected againe. The place of the inhabitants thereabout, is at this day called Cimbrum. As touching Trophees, looke to read more in Plutarch, Valerius Max. and others.


CHAP. XV.
The house of the Aelij: the chappell Marianum: the region or quarter called Tabernola: the baines and dwelling house of Gordian: the palace of Caius and Lucius: also the pallace Licinianum.
THe house of the Aelij stood in that place, where now be the monuments Mariana and the chappell of that name.
The plaine part of the Esquiliae, betweene it and the mount Caelius, and the Basilica Lateranensis, is at this day called Merulana, for Mariana; and in old time, the region of Tabernola.
Neere the Church of S. Eusebius in the way Praenestina, was built the baines and habitation of Gordianus. The ruines of those hot-houses are yet to be seene, whereby a man may soone give an estimate, how faire, how stately, and large they were at first.
Betweene the gates Esquilina and Naevia, not farre from the walles, there be to be seene certaine notable ruines: this they commonly call, the baines of Galutius. But in that place stood in old time, that beautifull and famous pallace which Caesar erected under the name of Caius and Lucius his nephewes. Hard by the church of S. Balbina, whereas now is the Beare called Pileatus, stood sometime the pallace Licinianum.


CHAP. XVI.
The water Martia or Trajana: and the temple of Isis.
THe current of the water Martia, passing by the gate Trajana through the plaine of Esquiliae, went as farre as to the baines of Diocletian, unto the hills next adjoyning. This in old time was called Aufera. It ariseth out of the spring Piconia in the mountains of the Peligni, and passeth by the Martians country and the lake Fucinus, and so runneth to Rome; the coldest and most holesome of all other waters that run into Rome. This water, Ancus Martius began first to bring into the citie: afterward, Q. Martius surnamed Rex, tooke it in hand; and a long time after, Agrippa repaired the conduit thereof. Of it, read more in Plinie and Frontinus.
The temple of Isis, is by P. Victor placed in the quarter Esquilina.


CHAP. XVII.
Of Suburra: the house of Caesar and Lalia; and the street Patricius.
SVburra is a street of all other most frequented: it beginneth at the Forum Romanum, and goeth on forward directly by the Forum Nervae, up to the hanging or rising of the hill called Clivus Suburranus, whereof wee have written before in this booke; and it endeth where the way Praenestina beginneth. Called it was Suburra, either for that it sustained and bare up the Carinae and the wall under it: or because it lay under the old citie; or as Varro thinketh, of the burrough or street Succusanus. In this street Suburra, was the house of Caesar, so long as he contented himselfe with a mean estate.
In it were sometimes certaine stewes and brothell-houses, as Martial writeth.
The street Patritius windeth crooked from the hill Viminalis, and endeth at the bains of Diocletian. Of it, more hath been said in the former booke.
The house of Laelia likewise was in the same street, as Martial witnesseth.


CHAP. XVIII.
Suburra in the plaine; and the temple of Sylvanus.
THe mount Viminalis on the VVest side of it, hath part of the Quirinalis opposite against it: and the vale lying betweene, was named Suburra the plaine.
In the same valley in times past, were the ten Tabernae; so called of the number.
The pit also of Saint Proba was in the same hill; which Proba her selfe made neere to the Church of S. Maries in the field.
At the foot in manner of the hill Viminalis, over-against S. Agathaes church, there stood the temple of Sylvanus, as appeareth by many good tokens.


CHAP. XIX.
Of the hill Viminalis: the pallace of Decius: the laver of Agrippina: the baines of Olympias and Novatus: the dwelling houses of Q. Catulus, Crassus, and C. Aquilius.
V Arro reckoneth the hill Viminalis among the Esquiliae. Viminalis it was cleped, of Iupiter Vimineus, whose altars were in that hill: or else of plentie of osiers there growing.
In the highest rising and ascent of that hill, there stood in old time, (where now is the church of S. Laurence in Panis-perna) the pallace of Decius the Emperour, as may be shewed by the ruines thereof.
Not farre from the same place, toward the church of S. Vitalis, were the lavers or washing places of Agrippina mother to Nero.
The baines of Olympias were situate toward Suburra; the tokens whereof are now found in the brow of the hill.
Likewise the baines of Novatus, were built upon the hill Viminalis, where the church of S. Prudence standeth.
The hill Viminalis, had also three goodly houses of most noble personages, to wit, of M. Crassus, Quintus Catulus, and Caius Aquilius: the markes whereof are evident to be seene in the side of the said hill.
Vpon the same hill in times past, a certaine festivall sacrifice was solemnized, which the dwellers and inhabitants there, call Fagutall.


CHAP. XX.
The baines of Diocletianus: the Librarie Vlpia: the plaine Viminalis: the gate Interaggeres: and the vale Quirinalis.
THe baines of Diocletian are to be seene all ruinate on the side of the hill Viminalis: and by their ruines, a man may easily gather how stately and magnificent they were somtime. These were begun by Diocletian and Maximian Herculanus: in the building whereof 40000 Christians were held to worke many yeeres togither in most slavish manner.
These were afterwards finished and dedicated by Constantine and Maximian, new emperours. Of the vaine and superfluous expences which the Romanes laid out upon Baines, read Seneca, who depainteth out their wastfulnesse most excellently.
In the same baines was the Librarie Vlpia, which by Hadrian, or (as some thinke) by Traiane, was thither translated; wherein were the linnen records, and those huge volumes called the Elephantine bookes: in which the acts of the Emperours, and all the sanctions and ordinances of Senate, were, as Pollio witnesseth.
Behind these baines, from above the rampier or bulwarke of Tarquinius Superbus, was the plaine field Viminalis, which spreadeth out as farre as to the citie wall. There is seene as yet the gate Interaggeres shut; albeit it seemeth more probable and like to a truth, that it stood in the plaine Esquilinus.
In that verie place there was a pit or well of spring running water, which the neighbours dwelling thereby, called the pit of the Vivarium, or the parke pit, within which parke they kept enclosed divers and sundrie kinds of wild beasts. The harbours and dennes of these wild beasts are yet to be seene: whereupon it commeth, that those places or parkes which are set out and appointed for feeding of Deere, we use to call Vivaria.
The space betweene Diocletians bathes and Constantines arch, is named the vale Quirinalis: in which they say, that Romulus met with Proculus.
In the same was the sacred chappell of Fortuna Publica.



CHAP. XXI. The means Caballus: the etymologie of Quirinalis: the tower Militiarum: the baines of Paulus: the chappell of Neptune: the baines of Constantine. the house and street of the Cornelij.
THe hill which at this day they name Caballus, was in old time called Quirinalis, as by many signes and reasons may be prooved; so as no man skilfull in the Romane storie, need to doubt thereof.
This Quirinall hill, the sixt in order of the mountaines of Rome, (as Varro testifieth) taketh that name of the temple of Quirinus: after others, of the Quirites, who comming with Tatius from Cures, there pitched their tents and lodged. This mountaine is shaped long, for it comprehendeth that little hill which is betweene the gate Collina and Collatina. Vpon it standeth the Obeliske of the Moone, engraven with Aegyptian hierogly phick characters. In breadth, from the North Southward, it reacheth to a tower, now called Comitium.
In the pitch and top of the hill, above the Forum of Trajanus, you shall see the tower called Militiarum; where, in old time the souldiors of Trajane kept their standing guard, and gave the tower that name.
On the sameridge were the baines of Paulus built: which place at this day by a corrupt name, is called Bagnana-Poli.
In the descent and hanging of the Quirinall hill toward Suburra, stood sometime the chappell of Neptune, which appeareth by the pictures and other reliques there found.
From hence toward the North, were the hot-houses of Constantine, as the ruines of the place doe testifie.
The house of the Cornelij was built in the street so called, and at this day the name it keepeth still. But more hereof elsewhere.


CHAP. XXII.
The temples of Saturne, the Sunne, and Bacchus: Quirinus his temple and porch: the old Capitoll: the chappels of Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerva: the house of Pomponius Atticus.
IN the Cornelian street (whereof a little before wee made mention) were two gyant-like images, called Colossi, resembling two old men, naked, and holding Cornucopiae in their hand. It is commonly received, that these were the statues of Saturne and Mars; for that certain it is how their temples stood hard by: and many evidences there are, besides the verie ruines thereof, which testifie so much.
Over-against the hot-houses of Constantine, upon the very brow of the hill, there standeth to be seene one halfe of a marble tower, which the people dwelling therby, call * Mesa. This, men thinke, was the tower of the Sunne, by the ornaments there reared and set up by Aurelian: for this Emperor worshipped the Sunne above all other gods; and therefore you shall see stamped in his come this inscription; SOLI INVICTO, TO THE INVINCIBLE SUNNE. His mother also, a priest of the Sunne, thereupon reared a temple unto the Sunne.
In the side of the hill neere the foresaid bathes, are two horses seene standing; the handy-worke of Praxiteles and Phidias. These were (by report) Tivid^^^ the kings, and translated to Rome.
That part of the Quirinalis which boundeth upon Vallis Martia, was called the mount and temple of Clatra and Apollo.
Not farre from thence, behind this hill, there is another rising and ascent; where, by antique letters it is evident, that the old Capitoll stood, togither with the chappell of Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerva.
Over-against these places, enclining toward the right hand, where now standeth the church of Saint Vestalis, Pomponius Atticus dwelt in an house which came to him by inheritance from his grandsire, and was called Pamphiliana. They write, that this was a most sweete and pleasant seat, by reason of a wood neere unto it.
In the same place was built afterwards the temple of Quirinus, kept alwaies shut, to signifie that it was an unknowne secret; whether Romulus were enterred and lay in the earth, or were translated into the number of the gods in heaven.
There was a porch or walking place there of that name; where folke used commonly to meet, to dispatch businesses and contract espousals.



CHAP. XXIII. The path way or causey called Alta; the house of Sabinus: the street and statue of Mamurrus: the court and gardens of Salust, and the field or plaine Sceleratus.
THe high causey reaching from the bathes of Constantine to the gate Viminalis along the side of Quirinalis, was paved with four esquare stone.
Vpon that causey, at a place called the Pomgranat, Flavius Sabinus had an house, wherein by report Domitian was borne.
It is avouched that in old time ther was a street of Mamurrus: and that his statue there stood, where now is S. Susans church.
Not far from that church, was the court of Salust, and his most neat and fine hortyards, where the field called Sceleratus lay, and reached neere the gate Collina. Of those hort-yards, as also of the hamlet Tiburtina, there yet continue some markes and remnants in the bottome of the valley, betweene the very hill and the way which bringeth to the gate Salaria. On that little hill is seene the very house of Salust, which the people there inhabiting call Salustrium. Of this matter, see more in Cicero and others.
Beyond the hort-yards of Salust, neere the gate Collina, there is an high place like a mount: where in times past the vestal votarie Nuns, such as were condemned for incontinencie and incest, were buried quicke; and thereupon all the plaine about it was called Sceleratus, together with the way that leadeth thereto.


CHAP. XXIIII. The temples of Salus, of Dius, Fidius, of Fortuna Primeginia, of Honor, Hercules, and Quirinus: also the Senate house of women.
THe mount Quirinalis had very many temples and chappels, although the certaine place where they stood is not so well knowne at this day, namely, one of Apis. That of Salus was painted by Fabius Pictor, and burnt in the time of Claudius. By Iunius Bubulcus Dictator when he triumphed over the Aequians, it was vowed: by him (Censor) put out to making, and in his second Dictatourship dedicated.
Deus Trinominis Sabinorum.Sanctus, Dius, and Fidius, were the Sabines gods, which, when they left their native countrey and home, with all their other houshold gods, they carried with them into mount Quirinalis. This god (forsooth) was in words and name three, in deed and truth but one, as they said. These three therfore had one temple built them upon this hil, and were called by one name Sanctus. The opinion received of which godhead, was such, that an oth was thought to carie a great power of sanctitie and holines, whereby a man in that threefold name and one D^itie, avowed and sware thus, Me-Dius-Fidius.
Domitianus a Pretour or lord cheefe justice within the citie of Rome, built a temple upon that hill, to Fortuna Primigenia.
Besides, in that mount were the temples of Honor and Hercules.
Likewise the counsell house of women was in the mount Quirinalis, at which in former times the wives and dames of the citie met yeerely upon certaine solemne set daies.
Moreover it is recorded that the feast Agonalia was celebrated in Quirinalis.


CHAP. XXV. The court or Forum Archimonium: the pillar Tiburtina: the house of Martial: the Cirque of Floralia: the temple of Flora: the shops of Minium, and the common ascent called Clivus Publicus.
BEtweene the hill Hortulorum (where of yee may read before in the first booke and the chapter next following) and Quirinalis, there is a valley fouresquare, but lying out somewhat in length. In that part thereof which lieth under the mount of Clatra and Apollo, was the court called Archimonium. For the very church of S. Nicholas, which at this day standeth upon that place, is named De Archimonijs.
Not far from it there is another place, to wit, Pila Tiburtina: There stood the house of Martiall, as hee himselfe witnesseth.
Next to it followeth the round Cirque (Floralium) where yeerly to the honor of the goddesse Flora,

the feastivall Floralia is celebrated. Now this Flora was a famous courtizan or strumpet at Rome, who having by her whorish trade gathered a mightie deale of goods together, in her last will made the people of Rome her heire, with this condition, That every yeer they should celebrate the memoriall of her birth day. But the Senate thinking this a ridiculous mockerie, to honour and dignifie so filthie a thing with such a remembrance, they devised a goddesse of floures forsooth, called Flora, and her upon those holydaies they seemed to please and content, that shee would be good to the growth of trees and corne, and that they might doe well in their flouring and blouming time. To this goddesse, wee read that a temple likewise was consecrated. Anon you meet with the workehouses where they make Minium, i. Vermilion. Neere unto which was the Clivus Publicus.


CHAP. XXVI The hill Hortulorum, the temple of the Sun, and the sepulchre of Nero.
THis little hill (Hortulorum) containeth but a few things worth the writing. Among which is the house of Pincius a Senatour, who gave the name both to a gate and a mountaine, which in these daies are called, Mount Pincius, and gate Pinciana.
The reliques and markes of his house are seene in that very place, neere the old wall. And about the same walls we meet with an huge building in forme of an hemisphere or halfe circle, which men imagine, was the temple of the Sunne.
Vpon the same hill over-against the tombe of Marcellus in the very port way Flaminia, fast by the monument of Domitian, stood Neroes sepulchre also.
Now this hill Hortulorum tooke the name of certain hortyards and gardens under it, which in old time, by reason they were continually so well watered, were most fruitfull. Downe this hill, all they were wont (in times past) to descend into Campus Martius, who meant to sue and stand for any magistracie.



THE SIXTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I Of the flat plot of the citie, and the Theatre in generall.
THat it may bee understood more certainely, in what place of the plaine and levell part of the citie every thing stood, let there bee a streight and right line drawne from the Capitoll, through Pantheon to Tybre, neere the church of Saint Roch. So shall the cittie bee in manner devided into two equall parts. The one shall lie from the front and side of the Tyber, the other from the Forum of Trajanus to the gate Flumentana, along the foot of the two hils Quirinalis and Hortulorum.
Begin we will therefore at the Theatre of Marcellus, and recount the places in order, as hitherto we have done. As for Theatrum, a Greek word it is, and in Latine may be aptly translated Visorium. The first Theatres were appointed among the Athenians, and those in regard of husbandmen, who on feastivall daies visited the temples of the gods: afterwards, at Rome they began to bee taken up. The first, and that the greatest of all others, was built of timber by M. Scaurus: for, the concavitie within would receive fourescore thousand men. After it, were Theatres made to turne about and shew their front one while this way, another while that. But as touching Theatres, see more in Cassiodorus and Vitruvius, who have written plenteously thereof, and namely by whome they were first ordained, and in what manner built.


CHAP. II. The Theatre of Marcellus and the Librarie: the gallerie and court of Octavia.
AVgustus built many things under the name of others, as wee find it written by authours in many sundry. And among the rest was the Theatre of Marcellus his nephew or cousin by his sister Octavia.

A part hereof is yet to bee seene betweene the Capitoll and Tyber, where now standeth the pallace of the Sabelli. It was able to containe eightie thousand men. See more thereof in Asconius.
Hard by the very same Theatre was the gallerie of Octavia, reared by the said Augustus for his sister Octavias sake. Therein were certaine curious peeces of worke wrought by Praxiteles, and namely the ravishing of Proserpina. The portraiture of Bacchus and Satyrus. Also Apollo, Diana, and the nine muses, the workmanship of Timarchides. VVithin this gallerie or walking place, Plinie saith there stood a chappell of Iuno, and the image of the said goddesse. Fast by the said gallerie stood the court or pallaee of Octavia, and in it Cupid portraied with lightening in his hand. It tooke up in times past as great a space, as at this day the churches of S. Nicholas in Carcere, and S. Marie in Porticu.
After the death of Marcellus, Octavia his mother set up a librarie neere his Theatre. Now the first that ever ordained, That bookes of all learning should bee in some publicke places bestowed for to bee read of all that would come; was at Athens Pisistratus the tyrant, and at Rome Asinius Pollio.


CHAP. III. The Cirque or shew place Flaminius, and the temple of Apollo.
THat this Cirque Flaminius stood in that place where at this day the darke store houses and sellars be, hard by S. Katharins church, the markes yet remaining testifie. Flaminius it was called, either because it was built about the plaine called Campus Flaminius, or else by Flaminius the Consull, who was slaine at the battell of the lake Thrasymenus. In it were the plaies and games exhibited, which they call Apollinares: and therein the horse-runnings were performed. To it the Senate used oftentimes to come downe from the Capitoll to sit in counsell. Neptune also had a chappell there.
Apolloes temple was in that very place, as it evidently appeareth, where now S. Maries church is under the Capitoll, betweene the liearbe-market and the Cirque Flaminius, neere to the gate Carmentalis.


CHAP. IIII. The temples of Vulcane, Mars, Bellona, Hercules, and Iupiter Stator: the columne or pillar Bellica: the altar of Neptune: the galleri^ Corinthia: and the colosse of Mars.
WIthin the Cirque Flaminius stood most famous temples of the gods, to wit, of Vulcane, Mars, and Bellona, to wit that which was toward the gate Carmentalis. Before the said gate there stood a marble pillar, which the Romanes called Bellica, for it shewed when warre was to be made. The Romanes in old time used and retained this manner in proclaiming warre: The publicke beadle, or one of the heraults called Faecials, launced a speare with some other ensignes of warre, into that land upon which they meant to levie armes. But when after many conquests they had enlarged their empire and dominion, and that they were oftentimes to give defiance to nations farre remote and distant, because they should not need to fling a speare or javeline, as I said before, into that land, they did but sticke one in the pillar abovenamed, on that side which regardeth that part whether they were to make their expedition.
To Hercules the Great, protectour and keeper of the cirque Flaminius, they built a temple in the same place: for his statue was there erected in the very entrance thereof, on that side where now standeth the church of S. Lucie in the darke Apothecae.
M. Fulvius built another temple of the allowance that hee had of the Censours stocke, to Hercules Musarum: for hee had heard in Greece how Hercules was Musagetes, i. the leader and companion of the Muses. The same Fulvius translated the images of all the Muses out of the towne Ambracia to Rome, and consecrated them under the protection and safegard of that most potent and mightie deitie, to the end that they might have mutuall helpe one of the other: namely, the quietnesse of Muses by the defence of Hercules; and the valour of Hercules, by the sweet voice of the Muses. This church much decaied and disfigured by time, Martius Philippus, Augustus his father in law, i. his mothers husband, repaired.
In the same Cirque they would have the temple of Iupiter Stator to stand.
There also (as they gather by certain presumptions) was the altar of Neptune, which in old time ran bloud.
Octavius reared a porch or gallerie, built and born up with brasen pillers, and therupon named Corinthia. This stood betweene the Cirque and S. Nicholas church, and was also called Chalcaria, i. brasen or copper.
The Colosse or stately image of Mars, at the cirque Flaminius, was in the temple of Brutus Callaicus.



CHAP. V. The porch or gallerie of Mercurie: the Theatre of Octavius: his house, cloister, and gallerie: and the temple of Venus Victresse.
BEtweene the Cirque Flaminius and the Tyber, in the very entrie of the church of S. Angell in Piscina, there is a porch or gallerie, consecrated sometime to Mercurie, or as some would have it, to Iuno. This being consumed with fire, L. Septimius Severus reedified. But the porch which standeth in the Iewes street called Ceura, they say was builded by the emperor Severus.
Betweene the gallerie of Marcellus and the mount reared by Hadrian, Pompey was the first that built a Theatre to continue. For all others before were taken down when the games and shews were once done and past: and when need required, new were set up. A great part of this Theatre when Pompey had finished, comes Caligula and made an end of the rest. Afterward, Theodorick king of the Ostragoths reedified it. This also received eightie thousand men.
Neere unto this Theatrum there was a court or stately hall called Atrium, the same which at this day they name Satrium; also the house of Pompey, and a porch before it. These edifices of Pompey, at what time as Philip exhibited the stage-plaies, were consumed with fire. Neere to the same Theatre, the emperour Claudius of famous memorie, reared an arch of marble for memoriall of Tiberius Caesar.
In the foresaid Theatre (men say) was the temple of Venus the Victresse.


CHAP. VI. The baines Agrippinae: Pantheon, and the porch thereof: also the temple of good speed.
FRom the arch of Pompey as you goe, northward, you shall meet with the bathes Agrippinae, the markes whereof are seen in that place which now of the inhabitants there, is called Cyambella. Now, Agrippinae they were named of Agrippa who built them: See Plinie hereof in his Discourses of Nature.
Neere unto the foresaid baines, there is a temple of greatest antiquitie, and among other old temples of the citie, the noblest of al the rest, which at this day remaineth in maner whole and sound. Because it was dedicated almost to all the gods, they thought good to name it Pantheon. Inform it was like the world, representing a sphere or globe. At this day they call it S. Maries the round. Of this temple Plinie and others have made mention, unto whom I referre the readers. In the very porch and entrie of this temple, were the statues of Augustus and Agrippa. The images also of Mars and Venus. At the lappet of Venus care, there hung as a pendant that most costly and pretious pearle of Cleopatra. Likewise there stood the image of Minerva, the handieworke of Phidias. Moreover, Hercules; at whose statue the Carthaginians in old time used yeerely to sacrifice mankind. They ascended up into this temple as into the rest, by many steps: for men in times past used to reare their temples on high, and made but one way to goe into them. A porch to this temple Agrippa joined: a peece of worke worth all admiration, which of some was called Prothyron. For this word Porticus, betokeneth nothing els but an ornament or porch, (...), i. before the dore. Hereof also have authours written much. This temple first Hadrian the emperour of happie memorie, and afterwards Antonius Pius, reedified.
Certaine reliques and remnants foure angled and somewhat long, of Good-speeds temple, are evidently seene in the streets of Minerva and S. Eustachius. This god was long ago worshipped, that all things might fall out happily in the end. Portraied hee was in habite of a poore man, holding in his right hand a charger, and in his left an eare of corne.


CHAP. VII. The baines of Nero and Alexander: the Cirque named Agon.
BEhind S. Eustachius church, betweene Pantheon and Lombards street, the remnants are seene of the baines and vaults of Nero.
Neere unto these, Alexander built others new (by conveighance of water into them, which they call Alexandrina) and those very faire and delectable: VVherof Lampridius hath written much.
Neere unto them (some thinke) were the bathes of Hadrian: and they would have them to stand in that very place, where now is S. Aloisius church.
In the plaine part of the cittie there appeare most evident tokens of a long and spatious Cirque, which they call at this day Agon. It took that name, either of the games Agonalia instituted by king

Numa in the honour of Ianus, which in that shew-place are represented, the ninth day of Ianuarie: or because all manner of such shewes and disports, called by the Greeks, Agones, were wont there to be exhibited. Some would have it to be built by Nero or Alexander, upon this reason, that other ornaments of theirs were to be shewed there. For the manner of their princes and Emperors was, ordinarily to bestow their monuments and memorials in one place.


CHAP. IX. The temple of Neptune: Terentus: the altar of Dis or Pluto: the marish Caprea.
ON the strond of Tybre, where now S. Blases Church standeth, somtimes Neptunes temple stood. The same was rebuilt by Hadrian. Therein were the painted tables hung, which represented the shipwrackes.
Terentus is a place in Mars field, so called, for that in it the altar of Dis was hidden: or because the water of the Tybre running thereby, eat away and wore the bankes of that side: or lastly, by occasion of Evander, who arrived with a fleet in that place, and there abode. There also in time of the Albane warre, they hid the altar of Proserpina under the ground, that they onely might have knowledge thereof, where it was.
In the same Mars field (some thinke) was the fenne or marish Caprea, where Romulus in a tempest which sodainly arose, was taken away. Of which matter Livie writeth.


CHAP. X. The house Corvina: the broad way or gate: and the temple of Isis.
THe second part of the flat citie, reacheth along the foot of Quirinalis, from the Forum of Trajanus to the gate Flaminia. In which part neere the Capitoll, was the house Corvina, built by that name and familie; and to this day keepeth still the old name; for commonly called it is Macellum Corvorum.
From that house unto the barres or railes in Mars field, extendeth the way Lata, retaining yet the antique name: and there standeth the church, named S. Maries in the broad way.
In the same way, stood sometime by report, the temple of Isis neere the railes above-said, where now is the church of S. Marcellus. Now this Isis was a goddesse of the Aegyptians. Shee was honoured and worshipped also at Rome, togither with Osiris surnamed Serapis: of whome the publicke plaies in the quarter Flaminia, Iseum-Serapeum bare the name. It happened in the temple of Isis that incest was committed; whereupon the Emperour Tyberius caused the priests of that temple to be crucified, and the place it selfe to be demolished. Other temples of this goddesse there were at Rome: for Caracalla translated all her sacred rites and ceremonies to Rome, and daily with exceeding great reverence observed the same.


CHAP. XI. The arch of Camillus: the temple of Minerva: and the swine market.
AS a man goeth downe from the broad-gate aforesaid toward the Pantheon, he shall see a most auncient arch. Some thinke (but untruly) that erected it was for Camillus: for many a faire day after his time, these arches were in no request and use: and therefore it belonged to some other L. Generall. Betweene this arch and Pantheon, Cn. Pompeius built a temple to Minerva, wherein he comprised in a compendious summe, the memoriall of all his acts and exploits. Other ensignes also in the honor of the citie of Rome, he there set up, and those he garnished and adorned. VVherof read Plinie.
At the foot of the mount Quirinalis, in the hortyards of the Columnenses, neere the ascent and rising of the hill which leadeth now into the mount Caballus, there was sometime the market-place Sunrium, so called of selling swine there. For Varro witnesseth, that in old time they had certaine set and appointed places for the selling of severall things, and thereof the markets tooke the name. Thus of oxen, the market Boarium; of fish, Piscarium; of swine, Suarium; of woorts or hearbs, Holitorium, was called. and.


CHAP. XII. Of the field called Martius, or Tyberinus.
FOrasmuch as in the former booke it hath been sufficiently declared as touching Mars field where it lay, it shall be needlesse to make any repetition thereof in this place: but why it was called

Martius, would be here in briefe considered. Named so it was, because it was consecrated to Mars: for when the Tarquines were expelled out of their kingdom, what ground soever or standing corne they were possessed of, they divided amongst those citizens who were not landed at al, reserving only this field Martius: which because it was consecrated to Mars, that in it their games and plaies should be solemnized and the youth exercised, they thought that the fruit also there growing should likewise be counted sacred and accursed, and so deemed it unlawfull that any distribution thereof should be made, but threw it all into the Tybre, whereof arose the yland called Tyberina; of which wee will speake in the last booke. In this field therefore (besides the native beautie of the place and the delectable sight of the medowes) were erected the ornaments and statues of brave and renowmed persons: yea out of the very Capitoll (when the place began to be pestered and over-streight by reason of so many ornaments which thither were daily brought) many of them were from thence translated into Campus Martius. This field was called of men in old time, Tyberinus; like as Tybre also was named Martius.


CHAP. XIII. The porch, the Temple, Columne, and Pallace of Antoninus Pius: the railes or enclosure, called Ovilia.
BEtweene the Sciarra and Pantheon streets, neere to Saint Stephens Church in Trullio, there sheweth a stately porch, which most men suppose was that of Antoninus Pius, for that his temple standeth so neere. The Columne also of Antoninus is not farre off. This hee raised of an exceeding height with winding and turning staires, like that of Trajanus, whereof wee have spoken before. Between this Columne and the porch or gallerie, the said emperour had (by report) a goodly pallace. Betweene the said Columne and the water Virgo, they say, the railes or enclosure within Mars field stood, called Septa. Now this place was enclosed within woodden railes, and strongly fensed with posts on every side, wherein the people of Rome when at the creation and election of magistrates they were to passe their voices, were kept close: and for the resemblance of sheepe pennes, Ovilia of some they were called. By Livie they are set down, neere the waies Fornicata and Flaminia.


CHAP. XIIII. The hill Citatorum: the Villa Publica, temple of Neptune, and the bridge in Mars field.
BEtweene Antonines Columne and S. Laurences church in Lucina, there is raised a mount, called now Citorius, for Citatorum; not that it was a mount in deed, but because the people of Rome when in the chusing of magistrates they were to give their voices, as they were cited went thither as it were into some hill. Some say it was called Acceptorum, of taking the peoples suffrages: others, Septorum, for the vicinite of those Septa beforesaid. This little mount, there be that would have to rise and encrease by the ruins of some porch or stately gallerie: or els, of the common Hostelrie, called Villa Publica. For there was in time past a place called Villa Publica, a large building in manner of a court or hall; wherein were received and enterteined all embassadours of enemies, who might not be allowed either to enter into the citie, or to goe into the publicke lodging or Hospitall called Graecostasis.
Neere to the Septa, M. Agrippa (as Denis writeth) built a goodly temple with a most beautifull porch to it, in the honour of Neptune.
At this foresaid hillocke called Citatorum, and the Columne of Antonius, there was a bridge fast by the Septa, whereupon they that were cited when they had given their voices, passed by and went their wai^s: and so were severed from the rest that were to give their suffrages, because they should not be entermingled amongst them, nor be able to shew unto them, on whose side they had passed their voices.


CHAP. XV. The water Virgo: the lake and chappell of Iuturna, as also that of Pietie.
THe water Virgo, which reteineth still the pleasant sweetnes to the tast in drinking, and keepeth yet the old name, beginneth to gather to an head neere the bridge Salarius; and being carried in a most deepe gutter, entreth into the citie at the gate Collina, and so is raised to the hill Hortulorum: where, by arched worke it is conveighed through Mars field, and yeeldeth all the way to the inhabitants, water for their use; and endeth at the length in the hortyards of Lucullus.
Moreover in Mars field, there was (as men say) a fountaine and well or cisterne of Iuturna, sister of K. Turnus, yeelding most holesome water. This water-Nymph, they avouch (and that right well) to

have been called Iuturna, a juvando, i. of helping; because shee was thought to helpe the sicke. The very place is at this day by a corrupt word, named Lotreglio.
In the same Mars field, it is recorded, that in times past stood the temple of Pietie, even whereas now the church of S. Savior is.


CHAP. XVI. The arch of Domitian: the obeliske of Mars field: the Amphitheatre of Claudius the Emperour.
THe triumphant arch, so dismembred (as it were) and berest of all the ornaments, standing betweene the churches of S. Sylvestre and Laurence in Lucium, and taketh up a peece of the way or street Flaminia, is attributed unto Domitian the Emperour. And hereupon (besides other presumptions) they appropriate it to him, for that this emperour reared many such arches in every place.
The Obeliske also there is in this Mars field, which Augustus transported from Hieropolis a citie in Aegypt, to Rome. Besides, the native ensigns and wonderfull hieroglyphick inscriptions which it brought with it of the owne, therein to be seene, Augustus adjoyned other ornaments no lesse admirable. But hereof it is better to read Plinie.
Claudius the emperour, built neere the Septa in Mars field an Amphitheatre, which he decked and adorned with faire statues and most beautifull columnes.


CHAP. XVII. The vale Martia: the pallace: the porch of Augustus: the Naumachie of Domitian: and the temple of the familie Flavia.
THe vale Martia taketh the name of Campus Martius: it lyeth betweene Tybre and the hill Hortulorum: within which, in a place lower than all the rest about it, appeare the Naumachies of Domitian; where, in old time he exhibited shewes of navall fights. In which place before-time likely it is, that Augustus had his Naumachie; which being cleansed and scoured by Domitian, reteined afterwards his name. Read Suetonius.
Neere to this Naumachie, was the temple (as it is thought) of the kinred Flavia.
In this place, Iulius Capitolinus prooveth, that the porch and pallace of Augustus was built.


CHAP. XVIII. The Mausoleum of Augustus; and the two obeliskes neere it: also the tombe or sepulchre of Marcellus.
IN the vale Martia, betweene the way Flaminia and the banke of Tybre, hard by S. Roches church, Augustus made a Mausoleum, to serve for a sepulchre as well to himselfe and all the Emperours, as also for his whole house and name. This building is like unto a turret standing at the gate called Populi, which sheweth it selfe spoiled now of all the ornaments that set it out. Men would have it to be the sepulchre of Marcellus. And Augustus named this sepulchre of his, Mausoleum, for the resemblance it had of that of Mausolus K. of Caria, which Artemisia his wife built for him. Read Cassiodore, Strabo, and others thereof.
Close unto the Mausoleum of Augustus, were two obeliskes, as the ruinate remnants thereof doe testifie.


CHAP. XIX. The way Flaminia: the Trophees of Marius; and other goodly ornaments of the field Martius in generall.
CNeus Flaminius the collegue of M. Lepidus, having vanquished the Ligurians, paved the causey or street Flaminia. This way led from Placence, through Narnia, Fuligneum, Nuceria, Callium, to Fortunes temple, to Pisaurum, and so forward to Ariminum. See Livie and Suetonius.
Betweene the Mausoleum of Augustus, and the hill called Hortulorum, were the Trophees of Marius over Iugurtha. Trophees, as Varro witnesseth, were so called of (...) a Greeke word, which signifieth, flight; for that the manner was, to hang up the spoiles and disrobings of enemies put to flight and slaine, upon trunkes and posts.
In Mars field, were the sepulchres of Sylla, Hirtius, and Pansa, of Iulia, Britannicus, Drusus, the Emperour Claudius, and other right hardie and valiant knights, beside infinite ornaments more, whereof we have written before in this booke.




THE SEVENTH BOOKE.

CHAP. I. Of the river Tybre.
IT should follow by due course and order, to treat of Ianiculum and all that quarter of the citie on the other side of Tybre: but because these parts are separate from the rest of the citie by the river Tybre betweene; thereof also it is meete to say somewhat briefly. And first verily the reason of that name would be shewed. Some thinke therefore, that the river was called Tyberis, (...). For the Sicilians when as in old time they had overcome the Or as some say, the As^^niens. Carthaginians in battaile, and taken a number of them prisoners, enjoyned them, for the better fortification of their owne citie, to cast a trench about it, and to let water thereinto: and this ditch in reproch of their enemies, they called (...). And the same men upon a time afterwards, when as they encamped neere Rome, gave this verie name unto this river also, whereas before it was called Albula. Some thinke it was named so of Tyberis a king of the Tuscans, slaine upon the banks thereof. Varro is of opinion, that it tooke the name of Tyberius, a neighbour prince of the Vejentians. In holy writings we read it Tyberinus. In vulgar speech they call it Tyberis: in poetrie, Tybris. In old time it was tearmed Rumon, as it were, gnawing and eating the bankes thereof. Also at one side of the citie it was cleped Terentus, as a man would say, wearing the bankes. It springeth from the Apennine, above Arnus. At the first it is but small and shallow, but before it entreth into Rome, it (having received 40 other rivers) is encreased to such bignesse, that ships of burden and the greatest hulkes, may come up in it as farre as Rome. This river divideth Tuscan from Vmbria, the Sabines country and the Latines, entreth at the North part of the citie, and so passeth through it Southward, betweene the gates Hostiensis and Portuensis, leaving Ianiculum on the right hand and the citie on the left, and so neere unto Hostia is discharged into one maine broad Streame, and falleth into the Tyrrhene sea. Vpon the bankes thereof, as if they were consecrate to some divine power, it was not lawfull to set up any building. Certaine warders and keepers there were appointed, for the channell and the bankes. But of this river, Plinie and others have left much in writing.


CHAP. II. Of the bridges built upon Tybre.
THe Tybre, as is above-said, beeing so deepe as that it is navigable, and beareth the greatest ships, hath no fourd in any place that can be waded through; and therefore necessarie it was to make bridges over it, and so to joyne that part on the farther side of Tybre, to the rest of the citie. Hercules, after he had killed Geryon, built a bridge, where afterwards stood that which they called Sublicius. Also before the foundation of the citie, there was a bridge over Tybre, called Sacer; upon which they sacrificed men to Saturne by throwing them downe into the river. But when Hercules afterward had put downe that manner of sacrificing, he gave order, that mens images made of reeds and bulrushes (which they called Argeos) should be cast downe instead of them. But after the citie was built, there were other bridges made to the number of eight; to wit, Milvius, Aelius, Vaticanus, Ianiculensis, Cestius, Fabricius, Palatinus, and Sublicius. And all these, save the Sublician onely, Totilas overthrew.


CHAP. III. The bridge Milvius.
THe bridge Milvius, which men now call Molvius, standeth upon the way Flaminia, a mile and more from the cittie. Built it was in the troublesome times of Sylla, by Scaurus when hee was Censor. Many a time they say it was cast downe, and as often set up againe.



CHAP. IIII.The bridge Aelius, now S. Angel, the Vaticane or Triumphall, the Ianiculensis or Aurelianus.
THe bridge at this day called S. Angell, in times past Aelius, tooke that name of Aelius Hadrianus, for he built that bridge, and neere unto it a sepulchre, which they call Moles Hadriani.
Beneath this there is another which giveth passage into the mount Vaticane and the plain thereof, and thereupon they named it Vaticanus; also Triumphalis, for that over it they went up in triumph to the Capitoll, to give thankes to Iupiter and rejoice. The piles are yet to bee seene in Tyber, overagainst the spittle or hospitall of S. Spirit. The third bare the name Ianiculensis of Ianiculum neere unto it, and Aurelianus of the port-way Aurelia, or the gate so called. Antonius Pius paved it over with marble, and being demolished in the civile wars, was called the broken bridge. Afterwards Pope Xystus the fourth reedified it, and gave unto it his owne name.


CHAP. V. The bridges Fabricius and Cestius.
BEneath the bridge Aurelius one furlong, over-against the Theatre of Marcellus, in the very middest of the channell of Tyber, there appeareth a shelfe or Island, this was united to the citie by the bridge Tarpeius, so called first of the rocke Tarpeia neere unto it, afterwards Fabricius, of L. Fabricius, who by the bridge conjoined the cittie and Island together. The same at this day is called the bridge of foure heads, taking the name of foure marble images with foure faces apeece, standing at the entrie of the bridge, but that bridge which closeth the said Island with the parts beyond Tyber, was called Esquilinus or Cestius in times past, but now S. Bartholmewes bridge.


CHAP. VI. Of the Island Tyberina.
OF this Islands beginning, wee have treated before in the description of Mars field, Livie and Dionysius also set downe this storie at large. It resembleth the forme of a biremo gally, and where it is broadest, it is not above a dart shoot over, in length it containeth about two stadia or a quarter of a mile. This was in times past called Lycaonia, and was hallowed to the honour of Aesculapius, whose image from out of Epidaurus was thither brought. Of Aesculapius and his temple, read Plinie.
A temple also of Iupiter standeth in it, dedicated by C. Servilius the Duumvir, which had been vowed by L. Furius sixe yeeres before in the Gaules warre.
In the same Island were sicke folke presented unto Aesculapius (in the field.) And neere unto the temple of the said god, was a lazar-house, for that this god was the inventer and maintainer of Physicke.
In it also stood the chappell of Faunus, neere to the very river: but scarcely remaine there any tokens thereof. This Faunus (as men say) was reported to have beene the first that consecrated chappels and temples to the gods, and for this cause, all such places consecrated to the gods, were called Fana. By the testimonie of Cornelius Tacitus and Suetonius, the statue of the emperour Iulius stood there.


CHAP. VII. The Senatours bridge called also Palatine, and that which is named Sublicius.
BEneath the abovenamed Island, as it were a darts cast off, was the seventh bridge, called Senatorum pons, of the Senatours: also Palatinus, of the mount Palatine neere adjoining: and at this day named it is the bridge of S. Marie in Aegypt, by reason of S. Maries church neere by.
Now followeth the last bridge Sublicius, and which also is counted the most auncient of all others. This was first made of tymber by Ancus Martius, at the very foot of the Aventine mount: framed onely with a floure of plankes without any yron spikes and nailes or props to shoare against it, so as in time of warre and trouble it might bee taken in peeces one from another. Now

Sublicius it was called a Sublicis, i. great strong posts. But afterwards Aemilius Lepidus made it of stone, and called it by his owne name Aemilius. Some say it was paved with marble stone, and thereupon named the marble bridge. Vpon it in old time fat beggers craving almes of the passengers by. From it also leud and wicked malefactors, were throwne downe headlong into Tyber. This bridge as well as others, was often demolished, and built up againe by one or other.


CHAP. VIII.
Of that side of the citie which is beyond Tyber. The citie and temple of the Ravenates and Fors Fortuna: the bathes of Severus: the hortyards of Caesar: The water Alsietina, and the medowes of Mutius.
THe region beyond Tyber in old time had the name of Ianiculum, the hil which overlooketh and commaundeth the greatest part thereof. VVe find it also called of men in those dais, the citie of the Ravenates, who with a fleet having aided the Romanes, were permitted to dwell in the Ianiculum, for feare least at any time that mountaine and hold should bee seized and kept by the enemies. Now for as much as this quarter was inhabited by ^ase people, such as followed vile occupations, there were in it but few things worthie of any remembrance. Severus therein built certain baines: Caesar made Hort-yards, and prepared also a faire poole called the Naumachie for ship-fight there. Also the temple of Fors fortuna, was (in Tib. Caesars daies) dedicated in that quarter.
The water called Alsietina, was derived out of the poole Alsietinus, by the high way or causey Claudia into the foresaid Naumachie, and served all those parts. This water was also called by some Augusta. See Frontinus, who hath written much of the Romane waters.
Mutius, who willingly had exposed and offered himselfe to die for the love of his countrey, was for that good service endowed by the people of Rome with land on the other side of Tyber. The place at this day is yet called Prata Mutia. Neere unto the Arsenall and ship-dockes on that side of Tyber, were the plaies and games of Fishermen in times past celebrated.


CHAP. IX.
The sepulchre of Numa, and Cacilius the Poet. The Tribunall of Aurelius, the Ianiculum, and the hort-yards of Marcellus.
THat the sepulchre of king Numa was under the hill Ianiculus, a chist of his, with his bookes long time after digged up there, doe sufficiently proove. See Livie, Solinus, and others.
The Tribunall Aurelia, and the Arsenall was on that side of the Tyber, as appeareth by those authors.
The hill Ianiculus tooke the name of Ianus who there dwelt, and therein was afterwards buried. Hee also built a towne or citie there, as they say, so called. This Ianiculus was also called Antipolis, as Rome Saturnia.
Commonly also it is received, that Caecilius the poet was under the same hill Ianiculus buried. Martiall the poet, as himselfe witnesseth in his first book, had most pleasant and delectable hort-yards in the same Ianiculus.


CHAP. X.
The hill and field Vaticane, the temple of Apollo and Mars, the Naumachie, the cirque, hort-yards, and Obelisk of Caesar.
THe mount Vaticane and the plain thereto, were without the cittie, in the parts beyond the Tyber, and in that very place, where at this day is the church of S. Peter, and the Popes pallace: Called it was Vaticanus, of the god Vaticanus, by whose instinct and inspiration it was beleeved in old time that prophesies were delivered. And this god they called Vaticanus, for that in his power was the beginning of mans voice, for as much as infants, so soone as ever they come into the world, presently pronounce and utter the first syllable of this gods name, i.Va, from hence commeth vagite in Latine.
The temple of Apollo was in Vaticane, in that very place, as men think, whereon at this day is S. Petronels or Parnels church, also another of Mars, where standeth S. Maries in Febribus, upon the portway called somtime Triumphalis. Gellius writeth, that Iulius Paulus the poet had hort-yards in the Vaticane.
The vale Vaticane is there also to bee seene, wherin Nero enclosed a compasse of ground like a ring

for to ride and breake horses in. The conventic^es also and wine-tavernes there he adorned. Moreover, Nero had Hort-yards in that place, which hee set foorth for divers and sundrie punishments and tortures of Christians. Al this space thus enclosed, he called the Cirque. Also the pooles made for ship fight, called Naumachia were there, and the Obeliske (...) is yet to bee seene standing upright.


CHAP. XI.
The way or (...) Triumphalis, the water Sabbatina, the sepulchre of Scipio.
OF the Triumphall way, there hath been some mention made before. Called so it was, for that the solemne pompe of triumph. Vsed to (...) that way up into the Capitoll. This as well as others was paved with flint stone. It went on still to the back porch of S. Celsus, toward the plaine field of (...) thence to S. Georges church in Velabrum. In the pontific^l (...) there be many antiquities found, brought thither from other places: and namely the portraiture and counterfeit of Nilus, also of all sorts of (...).


CHAP. XII.
The mount of Hadrianus, and the meddowes called Quintia.
AElius Hadrianus reared a huge and mightie mount for his owne sepulchre neere the bridge Aelius, (...) ashes, and afterwards the relickes of all the (...). This is at this day the fort of the Popes. The same also is called the tower of Crescentius, because one Crescentius, a factious captaine, held it a long time. See more in (...).
The meddowes (...) in the plaine (...), tooke the name of Quinti^^ Ci^cinnatus. Read P^^nie hereof. Now they be called Aprar^ (...).


CHAP. XIII.
Of those things which either have beene, or remaine now w^thout the gate Flumentana.
THe first thing presented to our sight when we are out of the gate Flumentana is the port-way or causey Flaminia: which, as wee have before shewed, was by C^. Flaminius brought along as farre as Arininum. VVithin the citie he payed it with flint or peble without hee laid it with gravell. And in that order be all the port-waies laid about Rome. Vpon this way Augustus made foure bridges, whereof at this day there remaine scarcely any tokens. Neere unto this causey Caesar had a ferme or mannor house, which he called ad Gallinas. The reason of that name Levie sheweth. To the way Flaminia, another named Claudia joined, upon which were the Hortyards of Ovid.
The way AEmylia, made and paved by Lepidus the colleague of Flaminius, leadeth from Ariminum as farre as to Bononia. Now, two causeies there were of that name, the one which met with Flaminia: the other which Scaurus laid and made, which went through Pisae and Luna to the Sabatij. In like maner there was a way called Tyberina and Cassia, without the gate now called Viridaria, which passed along by Sutrium, Vetrella, and Viterbium into the way Vulsinensis.
Certaine places there be in the way Flaminia somewhat hollow and flat like saddles, called therfore Clitellae.
VVithout the gate Collatina there is a causey of the same name.



CHAP. XIIII.
^
THe port-way from the gate Collina is called Salaria, because of the Sabines at it brought salt into the citie. Thereupon stood the bridge. Salaritis. And it reacheth to Numentana. In it was the temple of Venuis Erycina, vowed by, Fabius the Dictatour, and dedicated by L. Portius. There, stood the image of Venus ^ temple of Honor, and an altar in it. Finally the monument or tombe of Licinius the barber of Augustus. ^


CHAP. XV.
^
^ and lamentable mones, is reported to have had a temple without this gate. In like, ^(...) (...). to Nemesis and such other. Vpon this way (...) ^ Neros freedman, in which Nero killed himselfe. VVithout the gate Interaggeres, was a tower or castle called Custodiae, where the souldiours of Dioclesian, kept a corps de gaurd. There also is a parke called Vivarium (now Vivariolum) to be seen (...) wild beasts were kept, more pleasure and delight, than prosite and use.


CHAP. XVI.
^
FRom the gate Tiburtina, there goeth a way of the same name, leading to the citie Tybur. Vpon it there is the bridge (...), commonly called (...) Alexander the emperours mother, who repaired it. A place there is by (...) called (...), of ^multitude of pits there. Also the bridge Lucanus, without the said gate, standeth over the river Anio. And without the same gate, the two riverets called Anio the old and the new doe gather a current, and run to Rome.
VVithout the gate Esquilina, are the waies Labicana and Praenestina. In this way the water Appia hath his head and beginneth, which by Appius Claudius was brought into the citie.
The water Virgo likewise, which in times past was shewed by a maid to the souldiours, is that way, and from thence is conveighed to the citie.
But of Romane waters see Frontinus, who describeth right excellently, the source and beginning, the conveighance and carriage, the end also and use of every one of them.
At the end of the way Cael^montana, begnineth anaother called Campana, which (...) Latina. Betweene the gates Caelimontana and Latina, standeth the gate (...). From which there went a way sometime called Gabina, leading to Gabi (but it (...) soorie into Praenestina) for that the Gabians dwell upon it.


CHAP. XVII.
^
THe gate Latina gave both name and beginning to the (...) Latina; which through Levicanum, now called Val-montone, and Latium reacheth to Campaine. In it there stood in old time, the temple of VVoments fortune, and the image of the same goddesse. Of this writeth Valerius Max. In the said way the water Tepula gathereth to an head and current. From the gate Appia, beginneth a causey of that name, paved by Ap. Claudius as far as to Capua, wherof look in Strabo.
At the gate Capena, was the temple of Mars the warriour, or Gradivus; and therein the scutcheon of Mars. Hard by the same temple was the stone Manalis brought into the cittie of Rome in time of a great drought, and presently there arose a showre of raine; whereupon it was called Manalis. In the way Capena, stood the oratorie or chappell of Deabona: and neere to it, they say, that Clodius and Papirius were slaine. Neere to the gate Capena, was the altar of Apollo, the sacred grove of Honour;Two miles without the gate. and the temples of Hope and Minerva. Likewise of Tempest, built by Marcellus. Moreover, another of Ridiculum: because Anniball having there encamped, was enforced to depart from thence mocked and scorned. Vpon the way Appia was the bridge Valentinus, built by the Emperour Valens, and thereupon, neere the hill Massica, standeth the towne Sinuessa.
This way had certaine notable sepulchres, namely of Collatinus, the Scipios, the Servilij, Metelli, Tullij, of Eunius, Pompeius, the Horatij, and others. And in that part is to be seene the plaine, whereupon the Horatij fought that famous combat to the utterance. In it also there is a water and well-spring, consectated to Mercurie. To it upon a time when the people of Rome ran, every man dipped therein his braunch of laurell, and therewith besprinckled them that were next, with an invocation to Mercurie; that as many as had this aspersion and sprinkling, might be assoiled of their sinnes, and of perjurie especially. The grove also of Egeria was without this gate. The way Laurentina fell into Appia: wherein S. Sebastian (by report) suffered; even in the very place where they used to solemnise the feast Terminalia, to the god of Meeres and Bounds Terminus.


CHAP. XVIII. Of those things that be without the gate Hostiensis, and others in generall.
FRom the gate Hostiensis beginneth the way Hostiensis, which leadeth to Hostia, built by Ancus. This was called in old time, the gate of the three twinnes breethren, or Trigeminorum: and without it, Livie setteth the Bursse or merchants hall, Emporium.
In that part of the citie on the other side of the water, were three gates, Portnensis, Aurelia, and Fontinalis. At Portuensis, beginneth a way of that name, and leadeth to the port towne Ostia: where there was a temple of Portunus, the god of havens: and where in the feast Portunalia was celebrated to the honour of that god.
From the gate Aurelia, the way also Aurelia taketh beginning; which along the sea coasts of Thuscia, leadeth to Pisae. The same was called Trajana of Trajanus who repaired it: wherein were the hort-yards of Galba the Emperour; and there also was his sepulchre.
[At the gate Fontinalis, was the feast Fontinalia celebrated at Rome, namely to the goddesse of Fountaines, as saiih Sext. Pompeius.]




TO THE READER.
FOr as much as Titus Livius is prolixe and full of varietie: and howsoever otherwise willing enough to speake our language, yet most loth to for beare and forget certaine Romane words, vvherwith so long time he hath bene acquainted: also for that novv and then hee saith one thing in his English tongue, and in his French and Italian another; vvhereby hee may bee thought either to trip, or to have forgotten himselfe, and the fault imputed to his teacher: In these regards (mee thought) I owed thus much for their sake that converse with English Livie, as to satisfie them in that behalfe. A twofold Index therefore I have digested: the one directing and leading readily to the most material and principall matters conteined in the whole bodie of the Historie: the other, expounding those things that may seeme at first straunge to the most: and withall, shewing here and there the reason of the foresaid disagreement, hoping that as use will make them more familiar in those straunge phrases: so deeper and farther conference with him in his primitive Latine (the onely touchstone of his true speech) shall excuse and acquit mee of iust blame, who have endevoured that he might deliver his mind in English, if not so eloquently by many degrees, yet as truly, as in Latine.

